A discourse showing , that the spirit of parliaments , with a council in the intervals , is not to be trusted for a settlement : lest it introduce monarchy , and persecution for conscience . By James Harrington . 

London : printed by j. c. for Henry Fletcher , at the three gilt cups near the West-end of Paul's . 1659.  

A discourse , &c.  

The present case considered , i need say no more , then , if there be no bar , a parliament May consist wholly , or in the greater part , of Presbyterians or royalists ; and if there be a bar , it is no government by parliaments , but by the bar that is upon them ; which must be of greater danger . But the house of Commons , as hath been hitherto usual in England , consisted of about four hundred deputies of the persons , for the most part gentlemen , and old stagers , elected again and again unto the same employment , without vacation ; this is that which being sweet in the stomach of divers , is the old love for which they detest new forms . Such an assembly , for the number and nature of their elections , is somewhat too low and too large to come up unto the true interest of a King , and too high and too narrow to descend wholly unto the true interest of the persons ; they have anciently provided diligently that they Might hawk and hunt without impediment of the King , and of the lower sort , to whom it was almost capital to spoil their game : and though this May seem but a jesting instance , yet have the rest of their laws , for their pitch , been much of the middle way , or of the like genius , while they were under a nobility ; but since , through the natural decay of that order , they came to a greater height , it hath been to endure no check . Wherefore , as it hath been found under a King , that such an assembly will endure no King , through the check they apprehend from him : so it will be found that under a commonwealth they will be addicted unto the introduction of monarchy , through the check they apprehend from the persons . 

Certain it is , that an alteration of government going no farther than the institution of parliaments , and a council in the intervals , can come to no more than that , so often as the council shall be changed for a King , or the King for a council , so often the commonwealth ( If this deserve any such name ) must be changed into monarchy , and the monarchy into a commonwealth ; which changes May be made with such ease and suddenness , that every night it May be a cast of a dye , what the government shall be the next morning . Where the alteration ( I say ) of the government is no greater than from a King's chair , to a narrow bench of counselors ; there goeth no more to make a single person , then throwing down the bench , and setting up the chair ; nor to make a commonwealth ( Such an one as it is ) then throwing down the chair , and setttng up the bench . But for the farther discovery of such causes , as in so strange and unheard-of innovation May give frequent or continual mutations , if this posture of things be upheld ( As i cannot see how otherwise it should stand ) by an army , let us consider three things . 

First , what is incident unto such an army . 

Secondly , what is incident unto such a council . 

And thirdly , what is incident unto such a parliament . 

It is incident unto such an army , let the body thereof be never so popularly affected , to be under a monarchical administration , or to be top-heavy in their great officers , which will have power , whether they will or no , to oversway both the army and the government ; as in the setting up of the late single person : again , if the body of the army mutiny against the government , neither their great officers , nor any thing else in the parliament or council , can withstand them ; as in the pulling down of the latter single person : whence it is evident that such an army can be no foundation of any settlement . 

A council in the intervals , though it should rule well , will yet have a tendency toward preservation or prolongation of itself ; and if it rule ill , will be obnoxious unto parliaments : for which cause , what help for themselves shall be in their power , is to be presumed , will be in their will : and they have the same power which the King had , or which is all one , are in as effectual a posture to obstruct or elude the meeting of parliaments ; therefore it will be in their will to do it : and if they will this , they reduce the government into oligarchy , then into faction , and last of all , into confusion . 

The persons this while must unavoidably perceive this council to consist of too few to be fellows , and of too many to be Masters : for which cause , being all broken into faction , some for a commonwealth , and some for monarchy , parliaments coming by gusts , whether with or against the will of the council , will either be torn with like faction among themselves , or pull down the council as no government , and endeavour some settlement . Now if a monarchy ( As most likely , because most obvious ) be set up , it can be no settlement , because it is quite contrary unto the balance of the nation ; and so they mend nothing , but make greater confusion : and a commonwealth or democracy consisteth of such orders & such novelties in this land , as will never be light upon by an assembly , nor credited by such as are unexperienced in the art : so that this nation going thus far about , will come but unto that very point , where it now stands at gaze , or to far greater confusion ; for which there is no remedy , save only that they who are in power would lay aside all prejudice unto pretended novelties and innovations , or rather , not give themselves unto such novelties as tend unto confusion , ( For such have been the late changes ) but consider such antiquities as have been , and must be the rule and reason of a wise proceeding in that , which by the providence of God never was before , and yet is now come to be the truth of their case . 

But if what hath been hitherto shown , be the certain consequence of parliaments with a council in the intervals , as that it will be no settlement , but a state now setting up , then pulling down Kings , or single persons ; it is apparent that what introduceth monarchy , introduceth suppression of civil liberty , and in that , of liberty of conscience . Wherefore certain it is , that the spirit of a parliament with a council in the intervals , is not to be trusted , lest it introduce monarchy and suppression of liberty ; and in that , of the liberty of conscience : nor the spirit of any form whatsoever , but that only of a democracy or free state , which is the same that through novelties introduced by God himself , is only practicable as a settlement in the present case of this distracted nation . 

The true form of a democracy or free state consisteth especially in this , that as to law-giving , the wisdom of the nation propose , and the interest of the nation resolve . If this be possible in England , then is it impossible , that there should be in England greater security unto liberty , whether civil or of conscience , which but for a new distinction is the same . Now that it is possible and easily practicable to frame such standing assemblies in England , whereof the one shall contain the wisdom , the other the interest of the whole nation , hath been long since evinced . 

But men that go upon picking up arguments against an house out of the rubbish , and distinguish not between the persons under the ruins of the old government , and what they must needs be when raised into the proper structure of a new frame , will say , that the persons have a general aversion from being built up into any new form at all . So hath the rubbish , and yet it May have good stones and beams in it . They will say , that there is a general disaffection , nay hatred , throughout the counties , unto the government ; and that more now , then in the time of the late usurper . Which i easily believe , because the change of a person , with what loss soever , is yet a less change than the change of a government : the former is a change from a thing that was known , to another that is known ; but the later must be a change from a thing that hath been known in this nation , to a thing that was never known in this nation . A man that walketh , treadeth with almost equal boldness his next step , if he see it , though it be in the dirt : but let it be never so fair , if he see it not , he stands stock-still . This is the present state of the persons , and this effect in the persons is especially occasioned by their natural distrust of such novelties as they cannot penetrate or discover what they are . Nor is it an ill pulse , the case considered , in which it signifies no other than their constancy and dear affection unto their old laws and ways , how unfit soever they be now become . Wherefore , so soon as you have fitted them better , none of this will be against you , but all for you . It is certain , that a persons under proper orders , is the least effeminate , and most manly government in the world . But such an one as hath no experience or knowledge in these , hath a frowardness , that is altogether childish : what they find uneasy , they tear off , and throw away ; as in the late war : but no sooner find the nakedness unto which by like means they are brought , then being unable to clothe themselves , they fall into an unmanly penitence , and betake themselves unto picking up of their old trappings . If there be not men at the head of them , who by introduction of a proper form , can clothe their nakedness , and reduce their passion unto temper , there is nothing to be expected , but darkness , desolation and horror . 

now if you be saints , do good unto them that hate you , and would persecute you . now cast your bread upon the waters , and after many days , nay after a few days , you shall find it . 

That the persons of this land have an aversion from novelties or innovations , that they are incapable of discourse or reasoning upon government , that they do not understand the true form of a free and equal commonwealth , is no impediment unto them , nor excuse unto wise and honest men , why they should not be embarked . 

As the soul of man being by the wisdom of God embarked in flesh , doth all the functions of the body , not that she understandeth it , but that she can work no otherwise ; so the body of a persons , by the wisdom of one man , ( If there be any such man , as having such power , can be so honest ) or of a few men ( If there be any so few , as having such power , can agree in such a matter ) embarked in the true form of a government , do all the functions of the same , not that they understand it ; for how much understood they the late monarchy , when it was in the greatest vigour ? but that through the necessity of the form , except it come to be insufficient ( As through the late decay of the church and the nobility ) they can work no otherwise then according unto the nature of it . 

If the form thus introduced be that of a free and equal commonwealth , the persons not being able to work otherwise then according unto the nature of it , can never introduce monarchy , nor persecution for conscience , because either of these is contrary and destructive unto the nature of the form . 

That the former is so , i need not prove ; and that the latter is so , is obvious : for without invading civil liberty , there is no invasion of the liberty of conscience ; and by invading civil liberty , this form is dissolved . But some will say , thrust the persons into innovations unto which they have so great aversion ? before they can be brought to understand them , and against their consent ? what a violation of freedom ! what a difficulty ! what an injustice ! 

But taking all this together ; what less can be said to whatever the parliament shall next introduce ? Or if you take them apart . 

As to aversion , i have already spoken ; it is not any malice in the persons , but their nature in this case , which being through mere want of acquaintance with such things as they can no wise understand but by trial , is not to be rectified but by the introduction of such a form as they finding far more worthy of their holding , will by changing of the hand , but improve their more deserved constancy . 

As to the difficulty of introducing a new form , of obtaining the people's consent , and the violation that in failure of the same May be made upon liberty , i say , that elections , at divers times , have already been divers ; that in this there hath been no violation of liberty , nor difficulty in obtaining the people's consent : and such elections as will necessarily introduce  form of a new commonwealth , have no such difference in them from the former , that they should not be as easily consented unto , and performed by the persons ; and this done by ordaining the cause , they have ordained the effect , and so introduced the new form by common and universal consent . 

Lastly , if it be just that the persons should have their liberty , they will soon find by this change , that they both have it , and know how to hold it : which a persons once finding , were never willing to part with : and in this consisteth the strongest security against monarchy , and for liberty of conscience . 

To conclude : this to our present commonwealths-men , is dictated by universal experience , and written by the best politians , as their certain doom . 

If they introduce a well-ordered commonwealth , they shall be safe while they live , and famous when they are dead ; and if they introduce not a well-ordered commonwealth , they shall be unsafe while they live , and infamous when they are dead . 

July 21. 1659.  

Certain maxims calculated unto the present state of England . 

Where nothing is to be obtained by reasoning , there every thing is referred to event ; and so are these maxims . 

1.  where there is no public endowment of a ministry , there can be no national religion . 

2.  where there is no national religion , there can neither be any government , nor any liberty of conscience . 

3.  without invasion there May be tumult , but can be no civil war in England . 

4.  without a civil war , there can be no monarchy in England . 

5.  where there is no situation like that of Venice , there can be no lasting oligarchy . 

6.  a commonwealth upon intervals is against nature . 

7.  parliaments upon intervals set up Kings or tyrants . 

8.  parliaments when they are salariated , will sit in harvest . 

9  Caput reipublicae est nosse rempublicam . when the orders of any one commonwealth that is or hath been , are rightly understood by such as have the power , England will be a commonwealth . 

10.  if the narrowest commonwealth require at least twice the root of the largest monarchy , and the English monarchy were founded upon two assemblies containing six or seven hundred ; then a commonwealth in England , must be founded upon assemblies consisting of about thirteen hundred at the least . 

11.  if justice be the common interest , and the common interest be justice , then private or partial interest , opposed unto the common , must be injustice . 

12.  if the laws of the persons must needs go upon the common interest , and the laws of the oligarchy must needs go upon partial or private interest , opposed to the common , than the laws of the persons must be just , and the laws of the oligarchy must be unjust . 

13.  evilmen , that can do no other than make just laws , are safer than good men , that must either make unjust laws , or ruin themselves . 

Finis . 







