A letter unto Mr. Stubs in answer to his Oceana weighed , &c.  

Sir , to begin with the best piece of your work : your quotations in the title page spoilt with ill application , i shall first set right . You see that all councils , all things are upon the Rota , upon the wheel : from that Rota only which i suppose you mean ; what came forth , came forth unfoiled , and as it went in . We do not by this trial despair ▪ but with a little fence , the right institution of such a society May come to compare with Picadilly , playhouses , or horse-matches , but if these be yet preferred , than indeed 

— Amphora caepit 
Institui , currente Rota , cur urcens exit ? 


thus applied there May be sense in this quotation : so for your other , had it been affixed unto your former book , and applied to yourself , or those unto whom you wrote journey work for oligarchy , it Might have been well said as in Asinar : 

— Nunc enim hic est 
Negotiosus interdius : videlicet Polon est 
Leges ut conscribat , quibus se populus non teneat gerrae . 
Qui sese parere apparent huius legibus , profecto 
Nunquam bonae frugi stint . 
Thus taken you know it is true : and so your title page being in part rectified , i come 

To your preface . 

Mr. Harrington says , that without a national religion there can be no liberty of conscience . And you answer , that in Athens and Room there were national religions ; therefore in Athens and Room there was no liberty of conscience ; which is so much the more absurd in that you cite Petit : for confirmation of your consequence , who affirms the contrary , and that by undeniable authorities , as May be seen in the second , third , and fourth pages of his discourse upon the Attic laws , the sum whereof amounts unto thus much , that albeit there were in Athens laws for the national religion , yet it by law was in the Areopagites also to give liberty unto any other way of worship , which liberty so given was law , and became a man's right , whether it were to a public or private way of worship in which manner it is affirmed & proved by the same petit , that into Athens , besides the national religion of that country , were introduced the religions of almost every other country . The same he affirmeth of Rome , where notwithstanding the national religion therein established by Romulus , it is vulgarly known that scarce any country was subdued by them whose religion they did not insert into their own . 

And where is your truth , who say , that Mr. Harrington entertains us with discourse of Paul's trial at Athens . where doth he say that Paul was tried there ? or what saith he of Paul's preaching there , other than is affirmed by other pens , as that particularly of Grotius ? but out of this you fall merrily , as thus : once upon a time there was a man called William Thomas , therefore William and Thomas must for evermore be one and the same man . 

This is your way of disputing , which you carry on in like manner , for example thus . 

Every man is to be taxed for that estate whereof he is not owner . 

Now Oceana is an estate whereof Mr. Harrington is not owner . 

Therefore Oceana is an estate for which we are to tax Mr. Harington . 

If the minor be denied , as that Oceana is an estate whereof Mr. Harington is not owner , your discourse implies this or the like proof of it . 

Where any one man and no other is the constant defender of one and the same estate or propriety , that one and the same estate or propriety is not his but some others . 

But Mr. Harington and no other is the constant defender of Oceana . 

Therefore Oceana is no estate or propriety of Mr. Harringtons , but of some other . Now if it please you 

To the body of your work . 

Sir , to a man who pretends not to understand a language , it is no shame not to understand that language : but it is a shame to a man , and a scholar who pretends to sense , not to understand sense . If i shall make it plain that in this point you come short , i shall have vindicated the Greek of your authors from your ignorant application of the same , without troubling the reader with any more languages than his mother tongue . You , in pretending to have found Oceana light , weigh only Sparta , nor that truly . 

First , because the senate of Sparta was instituted by Lycurgus , you argue , that it was not instituted eligible by the persons ; whereas all authors , particularly Aristotle , lib. 4. cap. 9 affirm , that the magistracies in Sparta were all chosen by the persons , as that of senator ; or chosen , and also born by the persons , as that of ephori . 

For the mistakes you lay unto Mr. Harrington in the Greek , as , that the tribes in Lacedaemon were pre-existent to the oracle , what maketh that to the purpose ? And that the word obae doth not signify lineages , you will hardly persuade , seeing aymiot , thought to be as good an interpreter of the Greek as Mr.  stuls , in rendering the oracle , hath these words , Aprez que tu auras divisé le peuple en ligniees . but i will not trouble the reader with foreign languages ; things indisputable shall hereafter be brought for interpretation of the words you dispute at a dear rate , giving so much Greek for two pence as you have made not worth an half penny . Mr. Harrington states the commonwealth of Sparta , thus , 

Lycurgus instituted a senate eligible by the persons for life , with right to debate and propose , and a popular assembly with power to resolve . To which he adds the place in Plutarch . Lycurgus having thus tempered the form of this commonwealth : it seemed nevertheless to them who came after , that the small number of thirty persons ( and for life ) whereof this senate consisted , was the cause of greater force and authority in the fame than was convenient ; for which cause to hold in this same senate , they ( the persons ) gave them the senate , ( as Plato saith ) the curb , which was the power and authority of the ephori , magistrates create about ▪ one hundred and thirty years after the death of Lycurgus , in the time of King Theopompus , who to his wife reproaching him in disdain , that he must thus basely leave his kingdom less unto his successors , than he had received of his predecessors ; made answer , that he should leave it greater , in regard that it would be more firm and durable . 

Hereby it is apparent , when the senate upon these advantages of fewness , and for life , began to propose perversely unto the persons , than the persons began to add , diminish , pervert and evert what the senate proposed , that is , they began ( As in like cases is inavoidable ) to debate . And the persons thus taking upon them to debate , Polydorus and Theopompus being Kings , endeavoured to add unto the fundamental law , that if the persons did not determine well , than the senators and the Kings should stop the procedure . hereupon , for the defence of their fundamental laws , the persons erected the court of the ephori , consisting of annual magistrates chosen by and out of themselves , and with power to question any of their Kings or senators upon their lives , that should go about to pervert those laws . Thus by this patch of the ephori , came that flaw in Sparta ( Wherewith Mr. Harrington for that reason proposing otherwise , is not concerned ) to be amended . And this is the account he gives of that commonwealth , which you , perverting the whole story , go about to weigh otherwise . 

1.  Inferring that the persons were guilty of those miscarriages , which it is plain proceeded from the senate , and were rectified by the persons , in the institution of that curb upon the senate ( As is plainly shown by Plutarch ) in the institution of the ephori . 

2.  You infer from you know not what , that the senate had a negative vote , and yet confess that the persons had no right to debate . Whereas to leave words or canting , ( For your Greek , as you use it , amounts to no more ) and come as i said to the undeniable testimony of things or of sense . If the popular assembly had no right to debate , how should the senate have a negative ? Or if the popular assembly had right to the result only , than who but themselves could have the negative ? contra rationem nemo sobrius , contra experientiam nemo sanus . for that which you allege out of Demosthenes , as that he calleth the senate of Sparta Lords of the persons , it can ( Considering the nature of this commonwealth , which Isocrates to the Areopagites affirms to be popular ) be no otherwise understood , then as they who have the like function , i mean of debating and proposing unto the parliament in Scotland , are called Lords of the articles . Lord in this sense as you ( In great letters setting a mark upon your ignorance , and not interpreting your text ) would imply , doth not signify sovereign , for neither are the Lords of the articles sovereign , nor doth Demosthenes affirm that of the senate of Sparta . but where the proposers are few , and for life , as in Lacedaemon ; and as the greater nobility or officers in Scotland , they May in some sense be called Lords of the persons , though not they , but the persons have the result . 

To conclude , Mr. Harrington hath long since showed that among the Greeks , the words oligarchy and democracy were understood in such manner , that where the popular assembly had the result only , there the commonwealth was sometimes called oligarchy , especially if the proposing counsel consisted of few , and for life , as in Sparta ; and where the persons had not only the result but debate also , that was called democracy , as in Athens . hence that an oligarchist in your sense , or one that hath endeavoured to make helots and gibeonites , or servants of such as are now his Lords and Masters , is no idiot , there is no consequence , even for what hath happened in our days . quid verba audio , cum facta videam ? &c.  

March 6. 1659.  

Finis . 

London , printed for j. s. 1660.  







