Sir Politique uncased , or , a sober answer to a juggling pamphlet , entitled , a letter intercepted printed for the use and benefit of the ingenuous reader : in which the two different forms of monarchy , and popular government , are briefly controverted . 

The commonwealth party are advised not to buy this . 

By n. d. gent.  

Salus populi suprema lex esto . 


By d. n. gent.  

London , printed in the year 1660.  

A plain answer to a juggling pamphlet , entitled , a letter intercepted , &c.  

I have heard of one that has made himself a cuckold , — that has picked his own pocket , — and 't is possible , a man May design upon himself , and intercept his own letters . the miscarriage , i confess , is a little odd ; where the courted party , — the contriver , — and the intercepter , are all one , and the same person . ( The plot is borrowed from the story of Narcissus ; ) but by what enemy both to the author , and reader , this discourse is made public , were an inquiry fit for authority , than a private hand . since so it is , let 's make the best of a bad market : what the composer has sold cheap , — we have bought dear , and both must lose by the bargain . without further prologue — here 's Sir Politique himself , and we 'll take the measure of the man from his title-page . 

a letter intercepted , — printed for the use and benefit of the ingenuous reader — in which the two different forms of monarchy , and popular government , are briefly controverted . — ( The commonwealth party are advised not to buy this , by n. d. gent. ) 

ex ungue leonem . The voice is Jacob's , but the hands are Esau's . popular arguments are of late become such a drug , the author dares not own his inclination , for fear the pamphlet should not off : but rather chooses , under the colour of a philosophical debate , to advance a seditious design ; and instead of delivering a sober opinion , to excite a turbulent faction . This will appear in it 's due place ; but in the front , 't was not so proper to disclose himself . the title is but a more formal kind of bo-peep , — a cozenage of the reader into a two ▪ penny expense , upon a thing not worth three ▪ ha'-pences . 

In the next page , you 'll find him more composed , and magisterial . he compliments himself , — kisses his own fair hand , — promises us an honest , plain , rational discourse , not clogged with maxims , or examples ; — and then he falls to work upon the question : — 

whether monarchy , or the popular form of government , be in reason , more safe , and profitable for the persons ? ] 

he proceeds thence , to distinguish monarchy , into absolute , and mixed or regulated . ( Tho' , by his favour , mixed , implies a contradiction . ) 

the absolute ( he says ) is absolutely unlawful ; and disconsonant both to the laws of God , and nature , &c. ] 

If either one , or the other : how comes it then , that God himself , styles Nabuchadnezzar ( the King of Babylon ) his servant : upon the most express , and severe penalties imaginable , commanding an obedience to him ? What means the prophet David when he says , — the Lord keep me from doing that thing unto my Master , the Lord's anointed ? That tyrant's life , which pursued his , was then at his mercy ; and a fanatic counsel , at his elbow , advising him , to improve the providential opportunity of taking it away ; ( But our commonwealth's-men are wiser , possibly , and honester , than David . ) this Might suffice ; but he goes on , and so shall i , to bear him company . — 

It is against the moral law , ( he tells us ) for me to dispose of my own life ; since that law , which commands me , not to kill ; does certainly require me ▪ not to kill myself ; and the law of nature and nations , does warrant any man to kill , rather than to be killed . But he , that willingly and of choice , lives under a monarchy absolute , must , and doth submit all that he hath , life not excepted , to be at the will of the monarch , &c. ] 

What pains this worthy gentleman takes , to prove himself as good a statesman , as he is a casuist ▪ is not my life as well exposed to any government ? since wheresoever you place the rule , the last appeal lies there ; and there 's the power of life , and death , by the agreement of all nations . again , an absolute monarch must be wicked , to destroy a loyal subject : and if a limited , will be so impious too , there 's no relief , but flight . The right of self preservation , which our author intimates ; concerns but individuals , at liberty ; — Grotius his dissociatam multitudinem . There every man is everybody's enemy : but when we come to find , that very end of safety , better secured by social compact ; and by reducing all these several , and disagreeing particulars , under the regiment of some certain laws ; directing to the common benefit of all : in this case ; we part with our original right , for the obtaining of a nobler good ; — society , and order , without which , there 's no peace . i Might here mind our prevaricating author , of a morality which he forgets , and that 's obedience , rebellion is a blacker crime , than murder ; for it is that , and more ; but i would first convince him , that killing is not always murder , and that in many cases , a man must rather choose to be killed , than kill . the law strikes with the sword of justice ; and sure it is not murder , by a legal process , to destroy a malefactor . 't were that at least in me , to kill the judge , to prevent his condemning me . ( But i suppose , our author speaks his interest , rather than his opinion . ) in fine , i cannot justify the commission of a sin , to save my life . to draw my sword against my Prince , although to save my self , in me , is treason : but if i lose my life , by not opposing him , 't is he alone that 's criminal , i am innocent . nor does the choice alter the case one jot . If i May obey an absolute monarch , i am as free to choose one , where i am at liberty to choose the form i would be governed by . It is the ruler's part , not to command amiss , and 't is the subject's duty to obey ; ( modo nihil imperet , naturali juri , aut divinis praeceptis contrarium ) and at the worst ; refuse , without resisting . 

nay , but our author tells us ; — a free persons , that have it in their choice and power ( As Englund now ) to do otherwise , and shall submit their lives to the will , and dispose of an absolute monarch , are most evidently thereby , in danger of becoming guilty of self-murder . ] 

Go thy ways n. d. for a profound head piece ! — they are in more danger of self-murder , in submitting to a limited monarch : that is , of hanging themselves , if the King should come . Was there ever a more exorbitant tyrant than Cromwell ? our freemen were content enough with him . Come ; — out with it , our modeller would speak , if he had a spoon , but the man is modest ; I 'll do 't for him . 't is this , he would be at . 

that we are now at liberty to choose our government ; and that the King would play the tyrant , should he return . if his own head does not sit sure , he May thank himself . I would fain learn , from whence we date our freedom . who has absolved us , of our oaths , and duties of allegiance ? Did we not swear to the late King , and to his heirs ? and can a government be altered , but by consent of all the parties to it ? this is too much said , upon a subject not properly my business . I 'll proceed , and wait upon him to his next inquiry ; and that 's concerning regulated monarchy ; but so embroiled , 't is infinitely harder to understand , than to confute . of regulated monarchies , ours here in England is beholden to him , he likes that best , and gives his reason , thus . — the excellency of that monarchy , was , that the monarch without his counsel could do no considerable thing . ] 

By his fair leave , the excellency of the government , he would have said : for 't is the imperfection of the monarchy . but why was ? Is it not , de jure , still the same ? 

he prosecutes this train of errors , yet with more ; all things were to be done in conjunction with his counsel ; either that grand one , his parliament , consisting of nobles , and Commons ; or his lesser counsel , consisting of nobles chiefly , &c. ] 

Our author , i perceive , is willing to confound counsel , and authority : whereas , to represent , is one thing ; 't is another thing to judge . it is the counsell's duty to propose , and advise , according to their reason , but still it is the monarch's part to act according to his own : without that freedom , the Prince is bound to act in many cases against his conscience ; and his assistants are become his governors . not to insist upon the gentleman's mistake , in asserting all things to be done in conjunction with his counsel . this is too evident , to need a refutation . He spends his two next pages , in dilating upon the desire of absolute power in the monarch ; and the reserves , or acquisitions of the persons ; where he dashes the King's prerogative , and the privileges of parliament , the one against the other . whereas the King hath some prerogatives without a parliament , but the parliament hath not so much as any being , without the King : ( He being an essential of it . ) 

To pass over his false-fires , i shall come now to his main strength : and thus it runs — 

the monarch cannot rationally be thought to have other business , or study , than to confirm , and establish the monarchy to himself . 

to this : first , he 's entitled to the government : ( that , pro concesso ) next ; he 's entrusted , in order to the public welfare , to uphold it ; and that , not only in the form , but to himself : 't were to betray his trust , should he do less . 

As to the appetite of rule , which ( As our popular champion will have it ) transports the monarch , into a dangerous elevation above the persons ▪ — that restless impotency , is much more hazardous , in any other government , than in that of monarchy . for , the monarch's upper most already : and rationally , ambition seeks rather to raise itself above all others , than when 't is at that height , still to exceed itself . 't is but a glorious envy , which aspires till it be highest , and there determines . 

As there is less temptation from without , so must the inclination , be much calmer . Greatness is native , and familiar to the monarch : or ; in case any eagerness of spirit should enstame him ; it spends self upon his neighbours liberties , rather than upon his peoples : and 't is extent of empire abroad , not enlargement of prerogative at home ▪ he covets . 

This is not to exempt the person of a Prince , from the frailties of a man ▪ he May be vicious . but that too with less mischief to the public than to himself . he has no private aims , but what proceed from principles nearer allied to kindness , then to malice . 

Now , to examine the likely incidences to popular government , and to proceed upon his postulatum , that in all men there 's an in bred appetency of power . that granted , what can we expect from persons of mean fortunes , and extraction , ( invested with a title to dominion ) but bondage , and oppression ? the short is , there are many men , — earnestly intent upon the same end ; spurred on by keen and craving desires , to make themselves rich , great ; and these design to raise their fortunes , and reputations upon the public stock of blood and treasure . at last , when they have skrewed themselves up to that pitch of power , by force , and craft , where divine providence , by birth , had placed the single person : — when after a sharp , long , and chargeable contest , they have brought us within view but of the counterfeit of what we quietly enjoyed before : ready to seize the sum of their own wishes ; and the dear-purchased fruit of all their labours : — they find that point , which supports sovereignty , too narrow for them all ; — too large for any one of them ; — and , as they climbed together , so they fall ; — crushed by those hands , and principles that raised them . we need not look far back for instances , what has obstructed our long-looked-for settlement , but competitors for a personal rule ; even among the salus-populi-men themselves ? 't is nobler at the worst , to yield ourselves a prey to a single lion , than to a herd of wolves : and that 's the difference , upon experiment , betwixt the tyranny of one , and of a hundred ? ( — old Oliver , and the rump . ) methinks 't is a strange confidence , to argue for a cause , confuted by the loss of so many lives and million . for these twelve years' last past , we have been slaves to tyrants ; divided , in design to supplant one another , but still united , to destroy the nation , under the gay amusement of a free-state . but i grow tedious . 

the next thing i take notice of , is very remarkable , ( i. e. ) our author 's in the right — he says that from the sovereignty , there lies no appeal . but than he follows ; that where a persons will be ruled by a King , they must give that King absolute power to govern . ] 

No need of that sure neither , — the sovereignty is in the King , tho' in a limited monarchy : which , so attempered ; as that the persons May not rule in any case , nor the King , ( Singly by himself ) in all ; secures all interests . i must fix one note here , before i pass . 

although our author tells us , that absolute monarchy is unlawful ; and regulated , dangerous : nevertheless , he rather advices the former , than the latter ; — that , which he terms disconsonant to the laws of God , than the other , which he pronounces only dangerous , as related to the civil good , and utility of the persons . 

This is the method of the whole party ; they decry , first , the form itself , as being too tyrannical ; yet they condemn , the limited of insufficience , as to the exercise of government ; and the absolute , of exorbitancy , as to the end of it . one has too much liberty , the other , too little . what is 't they offer in exchange ? A free-state ; — of a model , ten times more arbitrary , and pernicious . when they have spent their powder upon the government ; ( For 't is but powder ) their shot is still directed to the person . Hinc ille lacrymae . how have they courted the general , ( Whose honesty , is as invincible as his courage ) to accept of what these paper-kites so much disclaim against ? Our grave , philosophising Monsieur , he makes one too , and tells us , — that providence hath cast the lot upon the people's side , and the monarch has lost ; if the persons will exclude him . — 

Alas good man ! the congregation 's holy , every one of them — precious beagles ! to ascribe that to providence , which they owe to perjury , and sacrilege . where 's your prescription ? where 's your title ? inform the persons , by what power they are absolved from all their ties of conscience , honour , thankfulness , and piety . Show them the laws their fathers purchased with their bloods . Preach to them out of magna charta . there 's the foundation of the people's freedoms . but Sir i ask you pardon ; the king 's a wolf you say , and all th' abjuring saints are lambs , i warrant ye . But by your leave once more ; you are absolutely of opinion then , not to admit the King by any manner of means ? — indeed you should do well , not to anticipate the parliament , it spoils the project , to play the tyrant , while you argue for the persons . pray let the King come in , if the next parliament pleases . — 

I must be now a little serious ; for your next paragraph has a spice of conscience••• ( The word i mean ) you would persuade the world , that if the King comes in ; 't is neither faith , nor honour , nor humanity , nor all together , can tie up his revenge . ( none so bold as blind Bayard ; does it hit you or not ? ) It would become you now to tell the persons , where e'er he broke his faith ; nay , I 'll content myself , if you 'll show me , where ever your fanatics kept an oath , or promise , if they Might gain ( The least ) by breaking of it . The conversation of the person you inveigh against , is beyond all exception , honourable : and 't is in vain to misenform , against an evident and contrary assurance . many of those very men that sought against him , will witness for him : both for his courage , and his clemency . his prudence , and his piety , are manifest , in this : that in despite of all distresses , and temptations , he stands firm , to his temper , and to his conscience . a better friend , there lives not ; nor a better nature . and this is he , at last , our guilty pamphleter bestows his gall upon . I am no stickler for prerogative ; my patience , will hold out till the next session : but to see majesty invaded by a private hand , — the persons poisoned , by the same instruments that destroyed the Prince , — all i can say , is , we 're tame fools , to suffer it . but though his passion May be troublesome , our author gives us some diversion in his argument , and ( Kinder still ) he proves best company at last . kingly government , if not absolute , ( He says ) is lame ; if absolute , — destructive to the persons . very good : help the defect , ( If that be all ) of the one : or at least , do not impose upon us , in another shape , the possible mischiefs of the other — pray what 's the difference , as to our security ; the supreme authority under a popular form , or the same power under a monarchic ? you 'll have your popular assembly , the judge unquestionable of all expediences , and dangers : why not a single person as well ? you say , he May abuse that power ; and i say ▪ so May they . for instance , suppose they judge it fit to change the very form , what hinders them ? or if they rather choose , to entail the government upon their own families , and to perpetuate themselves , what remedy ? it any , they 're not absolute : if none , we 're worse here , than before . the King cannot betray the people's trust ; these May . 

what signifies your telling us , that the King absolute , is not bound to the laws he shall make ? and , by and by , — that contrary to the monarchy , this , ( Meaning democracy ) makes not any one law , to which every individual person in the assembly , is not subject ? ( the whole assembly indeed , as it is the sovereign power , is unquestionable , you say . ) 't is not the persons , but the power , we 're to consider , conjunctim , they 're as little subject as the single tyrant ; and possibly , they 'll ne'er disjoin , they that can make what laws they please , will doubtless make this one of the number , — that their own members shall be only tryable by their peers : and by that device , they make themselves both parties and judges . 

To grant more than is needful ; — be it — that in a state of quiet , and universal liberty , such a form Might be admitted , as our contriver thrusts upon us ; but to attempt to force a government , that excludes nineteen parts of twenty of the persons , from the exercise of it ; and this , upon a nation pre-engaged by oath , and ( By a sad experience ) interessed against it . — how practicable , or how prudent , such a proposal May appear to others , i cannot say : to me , it wears the face of a design , promoted by a factious , guilty party , to sacrifice the nation , to their private interests , and despairs . 

and yet such is the charity of our author , he reckons all the miscarriages of these late years in government , but as foul way upon a journey : and bids us not conclude against our inn at night because the passage was dirty . ( This is according to his wont tenderness . ) 

now to my fancy , it looks rather thus . we have been hitherto misled ; our very guides have robbed us , and yet they bid us follow them still , they 'll bring us into paradise at last , — whither they 'll carry us , we know not ; — we 're in the briars at present : — we know the way home again ; — what have we then to do , but to return ? 

our author's little reasonings concerning trade , are trivial ; i shall refer him to the merchants for his answer . they are the fittest judges in the case . They have tried war , and peace , monarchy , and popular government ; let them say which they like best . — his pen begins to run a little muddy ; and what i do not understand , I 'm not obliged to answer . something he talks of peace abroad , and of the motives to it ; which he pronounces to be advantage ; and no denies it . 

this does not hinder , — because the reasons of the peace betwixt the crowns of France and Spain , Might properly result from a particular conveniency of state betwixt them ; that therefore the effects of that agreement cannot refer to us . they 're more at leisure now : nay there 's a high necessity incumbent upon them , to send abroad those forces , which otherwise would be both expensive , and dangerous , at home , ( Not to press other arguments , of themselves obvious , to hasten our composure , even for that very cause ; that they 're agreed . ) 

I presume not to direct , as our imperious commonwealths-man does ; but as one private person , i pretend to reason the opinions of another , submitting still my judgement to any legal determination , or rational conviction . 

Touching the King of Spain's design to propagate the Romish religion ; — we 're the securer for that very desigu , if we unite upon the basis of the English law : the mere antiperistasis preserves us : whereas , if we compel that person , who by divine assignment , and civil right , is our undoubted sovereign ; to employ foreign succours to recover his dominions ; it May be feared , ( and 't is but reason ) that Spain will article for some concessions , in favour of the Catholics , more than otherwise would , possibly , be granted to them : where the fault lies , in case of this extremity , let the persons judge . — 

 Bless us , — what a fit of piety has taken our friend , now of a sudden ! he calls in the ministers , for his compurgators , and desires them to declare — what government . ( he 'll feed their flocks in the mean while . ) Indeed , these placket-politics are not amiss . the priests shall tell us what government fits their reformation . pray Sir , let me help you out ; — a Closs upon the covenant , does your business : 't is but to tell the persons , that in the holy tongue , King , signifies commonwealth , and the work is done . 

The gentleman , begins now to rumble , and talk idle ; and , in effect , he 's drawing home . but first he recommends the nursery and education of his brat-project , even unto any kind and powerful hand that will promote it . From hence he passes into a quaint resemblance of the state of the nation , to a man in a favour , and the persons in Grosse , to a restive horse with a galled back : and so commiting the issue to the Lord ; the man departs . 

his thoughts , and mine do not agree ; what ere the matter is . His conceit is this , the nation 's mad ; and prompted by false appetite , covets things mischievous ; ( That is , monarchy ) the wise and charitable physician , ( That is , the commonwealths-man , ) he forces upon it what he knows to be more proper for the cure , ( And this is a free-state ) — now here 's our difference . 

I 'm of opinion , that the physicians are mad ; the nation sober , we 've tried their physic , for some dozen years together ; and every day we 're worse than other upon it ; although we find upon experiment , that they prescribe us poison , instead of remedies , and that they are but mountebanks ; they live by killing us . our former diet agreed much better with our constitution , we have no way left , but to fall to that again . 

But to conclude ; — his conceit of a jadish persons , with a galled back , that 's his masterpiece . he tells us , it will neither suffer a rider , nor a dressing , till it be overcome by force , and then a child May up , and ride it . 

These are somewhat broad signs . now by your favour , Sir , the faults not in the horse ; but rather in the rider , and the saddle ; the nation has been ridden these 12. years together , at switch and spur , and in a commonwealth-saddle ; that must needs pinch the back of a monarchical persons . — nor will it be yet so tame , as you imagine , change but the saddle , and the rider , and you shall see the nation will do well , without a horseleech . 

Finis . 





pag. 2.  ibid.  ibid.  ior. 27.  1 sam. 24.  pag. 2.  pag. 3.  pag. 3.  ibid.  pag. 4.  pag. 5.  page 6 : page 7.  nota.  ibid.  ibid.  ibid.  page 8.  ibid.  pag 9  ibid.  ibid.  p. 10.  p. 11.  ibid.  p. 12.  pag. 12.  ibid. pag. 13.  







