A copy of a letter written by mr Stephen Martial to a friend of his in the city , for the necessary vindication of himself and his ministry , against that altogether groundless , most unjust , and ungodly aspersion cast upon him by certain malignants in the city , and lately printed at Oxford , in their mendacium aulicum , otherwise called Mercurius Aulicus , and sent abroad into other nations to his perpetual infamy . In which letter the accusation is fully answered . And together with that , the lawfulness of the parliaments taking up defensive arms is briefly and learnedly asserted and demonstrated , texts of scripture cleared , all objections to the contrary answered , to the full satisfaction of all those that desire to have their consciences informed in this great controversy . 

Hosea 4. 1 , 2 , 3.  

1.  hear the word of the Lord , ye children of Israel , for the Lord hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land , because there is no truth , nor mercy , nor knowledge of God in the land . 
2.  by swearing , and lying , and killing , and stealing , and whoring , they break out and blood toucheth blood . 
3.  therefore shall the land mourn , &c.  


London printed for John Rothwell , at the sun in Paul's churchyard , 1643.  

Sir , 

Your letters brought not the first tidings of the continuance and increase of those strange reports concerning me , they filled the city even while i was there , and i perceive pursue me into the country : it is a lying spirit which God hath permitted to haunt me for my trial , as it hath done others of his servants before me . You know what a book Bolsec wrote of the life and death of Mr. Calvin : Beza lived to write a confutation of a book written of his renouncing his religion and turning Papist . And concerning Luther , the priests had long reported , that he had his call from the devil , and to confirm it , filled Italy with a rumour of his death , and that at his death he was carried away by the devil soul and body : which they ( Good souls ) divulged not to discredit the man , but in gloriam jesu christi , to the glory of Christ , and comfort of the godly . The like usage myself have lately met with in some degree , for being afflicted with a deep cold and distillation from my head upon my lungs , and some feverish distempers , my learned , loving and careful physician , finding that the too importune visits of my many loving friends , occasioned too much speech , and thereby too much expense of spirits , advised me to remove to the house of my noble Lord of Warwick , where i should have more air , and less company : hereupon a report was immediately spread about the city that i was distracted , and in my rage constantly cried out , i was damned for appearing in , and adhering to the parliament and kingdom in this defensive war : which when i first heard , i looked upon as a calumny invented by some simple adversary ( Though malicious enough to my person and ministry ) who finding it the readiest way to reproach me betook himself to this . But afterwards observing how studiously it was maintained , how laboriously propagated , how handed from court to city , from city to country , from England to foreign parts , mercurius Aulicus printed it , and a great officer of state having sent it into other kingdoms with his letters , assuring the truth of it , and that not nine days , no not a month did allay it , i then perceived the plot was not so much to disgrace me , ( For alas who am i that they should trouble themselves so much about me ) but through me to wound the cause , in which my poor labours have been engaged . This rumour it seems yet lives , and ( As your letter confirms ) increases ; from my going down into the country they have taken occasion not only to report me distracted , but dead , yea that i died crying our of my appearing in this cause ; and this is so confidently reported by some , that it is almost as confidently believed by others ; even thousands , you say , which makes you earnestly to press me to write unto you , whether i have not ( At least ) changed my former judgement about our defensive arms , and this not ( As you professed ) to satisfy yourself , but that you Might have something under my own hand to show for the satisfaction of others . Sir , your ancient love to me , and present desires to vindicate me from these aspersions , but especially your care that the public cause Might not suffer , do all command me to be your servant in this thing . 

I know it will satisfy you , that i solemnly protest unto you , that in all these fourteen weeks keeping in , i never had an hour's sickness , nor lost a night's sleep , nor had any distemper in my head , nor saw any cause of sorrow for my adhering to the parliaments cause but esteem it a great honour and mercy from God , that he should move his excellency my Lord , to require my service in this great expedition ; and that i have even therefore exactly followed the doctor's prescriptions , out of an earnest desire to be fitted for my work , that i Might return to my most honoured Lord , being fully resolved , if God say amen to it , never to give it over , until either there be an end of that work , or an end of my days . This i think will satisfy you , and it is possibly as much as you desire for the satisfaction of others , to have this under my hand . Take this concerning the cause , and concerning the report spread of me , what Luther said ( Of those above mentioned ) concerning himself ; fateor & testor hâc meâ manu , &c.  I profess and testify under my hand that i entertained this fiction of my distraction and death , laetaque ment & hilari vul••… ; very cheerfully . 

But since your love hath compelled me to put pen to paper , i shall compel you to read the largest letter that ever i wrote , being resolved to give you a full account both of my ground and warrant of entering upon my office , and how far i am from changing my judgement upon the present view of things . 

When his excellency vouchsafed to require my service ( For , God knows , i offered not myself in this great work ) there were but two questions ( Beside my care to walk aright in my ministry ) for my conscience to be resolved in . first , whether upon supposal of the truth of the parliament votes . viz. that his majesty seduced by wicked council , did levy war against the parliament ; the scripture did warrant them to take up defensive arms . secondly , whether the parliament was not misinformed about such his majesty's purpose , and practice . The first is a mear question in divinity . viz. whether a persons , especially the representative body of a state , May ( after all humble remonstrances ) defend themselves against the unlawful violence of the supreme magistrate , or his instruments , endeavouring ( and that in matters of great moment ) to deprive them of their lawful liberties . 

The second is a question merely of matter of fact . 

For the first , before the beginning of these unhappy differences , i had both learned , and taught to this purpose . First , that it is agreeable to God's will , that in all countries ( Especially when and where the persons are numerous ) magistracy be set up , with a sufficiency of power and authority to rule for the public good ; and that , even among them who are under the sceptre of Christ , against the anabaptisis . secondly , that among the divers kinds of lawful governments , monarchy , aristocracy , and democracy , no one of them is so appointed of God , as to exclude the other from being a lawful government . Thirdly , that the bounds and limits of the magistrates lawful power of commanding , and the subjects necessary obeying , must be sound , and taken out of the several laws , customs , and constitutions of those several states , and commonwealths : there are scarce two forms ( Especially of regal government , in the world ) but they differ one from the other , and that in matters of moment . Now i say , what the power of magistrates in one country differs from the power of magistrates in another country , and how the duty of subjects differs in each , must be found only in the laws of the respective places : that no man's right must be detained from him , that Caesar should have rendered to him the things that are Caesar's , and all persons the things that are their own , the scripture , and laws of all nations do determine . But whether ( For instance in England ) shipmoney be the King's right , and so to be yielded , or denied ; whether this house or inheritance be this or the other pretenders to it , must not be determined by any law , but by the law of England ; go therefore to the laws , and learned lawyers , and from them alone you shall learn what is the prerogative of the Prince , and both the duty , and liberty of the subject . but then fourthly comes in religion or the command of God , and binds the consciences of magistrates to rule , and of subjects to obey , according to those laws . And fifthly , ( In particular ) of subjects it requires these four things . First , to render to their governors , next under God the greatest fear , and honour , as being God's vicegerents , as having the greatest beams of his authority put upon them , and therefore called gods , and all of them the children of the most high . Secondly , loyalty to their persons , and office , that is , obedience according to law , and patient subjection , when we cannot actively obey , willingly for conscience sake to submit to the penalty of the laws , when for conscience sake we cannot observe the laws themselves . Thirdly , maintenance with payment of all lawful customs , tributes , and impositions . Fourthly , all manner of supplications , prayers , intercessions , and giving of thanks , their usefulness being great , their temptations many , their fall ( Like that of great cedars ) the crushing of many , and the shaking of the earth round about them , and all this we owe , not only to the King as supreme , but in proportion to all inferior governors , who are sent by God also for the punishment of evil doers , and for the praise of them that do well , they being all the ministers of God for our good , and this is the first commandment with promise . but sixthly , if our governors ( Whether supreme , or inferior ) leave to rule according to law , and set up their own will contrary to law ; there is no word of God acquitting them from sin in God's sight , but severely threatening them for abusing his name , which they bear ; nor any word binding the consciences of their subjects therein to yield them any active obedience . thus far we have all sides agreeing in all the particulars , except only a few court flatterers , who ( And that especially of late ) have endeavoured to cry up monarchy , as the only ordinance of God , for the government of states ; as if the other forms of aristocracy , and democracy were not approved by him : yea , and have cried up the power and authority of Princes to be such , as that they are absolved from all laws ; and that whatsoever the subjects enjoy under them , is only by the Prince's favour , which if they please to recall , how justly or unjustly soever , the subjects are bound to yield all unto them , and have no plea against their Prince , only in the court of heaven ; no law , no judge , no court here below , having any authority to say unto him , what dost thou : this divinity hath of late been preached ; and , as sweet enchanting music , often chanted in the ears of our Princes : and no doubt was one great occasion of these heavy yokes we have of late groaned under . But these absurdities need no refutation . Egyptian Pharaoh claimed not the wealth of his persons , till he had bought it . And Ahab himself , who durst not lay claim to Naboth's vineyard , without purchase , or colour of confiscation , proclaims their ignorance sufficiently to the world . And among ourselves , the constant proceedings of our Princes , even in their most heavy illegal exactions , borrowing always a colour of law , and the known laws of the land , enabling the meanest subject to maintain his propriety , even in a twopenny matter , against his sovereign ; and the innumerable verdicts in all courts , passing for the subject , against the King ; assure me that unless God for our sins should give up our parliament and s•ate to the vassalage which this popish army would bring it to , we shall hear no more of this divinity . 

The only question now is about passive obedience ; they who cry down our defensive arms , confess that the magistrate cannot require any thing but by law , and that the subject need not yield up his right but by law ; to tie lies upon the conscience of Naboth to let Ahab have his vineyard : but if a Saul will by force take away our sons to ea•e his ground , and our daughters to be his confectioners , cooks , and bakers ; if he will by force take our fields , even the best of them , and give them their servants , we have no help in that day , but preces & lachrymae , to cry unto our god : but no liberty to defend ourselves by arms against such tyranni ; if we do ( Say they ) we resist the ordinance of God , and must receive to ourselves damnation . 

But if this opinion be weighed in the balance of reason , how much lighter than vanity will it be found ; how absurd a thing is it , that these men will allow me , if the King pretend law in any thing i May try it out with him , and not when he or his instruments come with open violence : if the King will sue me , and by pretence of law seek to take away my coat , my house , my land , i May defend these from him with all the strength of law i can , but if he come with armed violence to take away my liberty , life , religion , i must yield up these without making any resistance : i May secure that which i have nothing but lex terrae to plead my propriety in , viz. my money , which i May give away , and in the mean time my liberty , life , religion , which are mine by the laws of God and man , i May not secure with a good conscience . True it is , if in case it do ( Upon circumstances duly weighed ) appear that our receding from our right , and not resisting wrong , will tend to the promoving of a greater and a more general good , or the preventing of a greater and more general evil , it is agreeable to right reason , and our saviour's rule , mat. 5. 39 that we should both remit of our right , and submit to wrong , whether sued or unsued , whether to superiors or inferiors , or equals . But that men should give a liberty of defence in law , and yet absolutely condemn defence against unlawful violence , is such an {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , such an absurdity as you shall seldom meet with . 

But give me leave to weigh it a little further ; if the subjects defending themselves by arms against the violence of oppressing governors and their instruments be unlawful , either it must be because their Prince hath by conquest spoilt them of that liberty which God and nature gave them at the first . Or secondly , because they or their ancestors having submitted by covenant and consent to him to be their supreme ruler according to law , they must therefore be interpreted to have yielded up all their liberty so far as to be now unable with a good conscience to defend themselves against his violence though contrary to law . Or thirdly , because God hath lifted up Princes so far above all mortal men , that all hands are by him bound from daring to resist them . 

The first i find not many pleading , that people's being conquered , makes it unlawful for them to defend themselves against the unjust violences of their conqueror or his successors : most of them grant , that the people's right is to design the person of their Prince . and indeed it is the most absurd reasoning in the world , that because a strong robber hath over ed me in my house , in conscience i am tied to be his servant or slave for ever . Because Eglon hath mightily oppressed Israel for eighteen years , it is unlawful for them to shake off his yoke when they are able to resist him : certainly , whatever of mine another takes by violence from me , let him keep it never so long , it is but continuata injuria , a continue wrong , till i consent to his holding it ; and all reason allows me to recover it again as soon as i can . And i fear not to say , that had William surnamed the conqueror taken and held this crown only by his sword , and ruled over the nation only by force , and all his successors to this day had no other claim to it , all the reason in the world would allow us to redeem ourselves from that yoke , if we were able . 

But though the sword begin the conquest , yet many times the consent of the persons comes in , and makes their conqueror their lawful King ; and then so far as by covenant or laws , they agree to be under him for the public safety and good , they are bound up from any resistance . but that their parting with some of their liberty for the public good should ( Upon the usurpation of him whom they have trusted ) deprive them of that liberty which they never parted with , is most abhorring to reason . Suppose a free man indents with another to be his servant in some ingenious employment , as , suppose to attend upon his person ; and expressly indents that his Master shall not have power to command him to rub his horse heels , or fill his dung-cart , or the like ; if now this Master shall usurp , and command him to such sordid employment , and by force seek to compel him to them , some show of reason ( At least ) there would be for the servant to plead that his Master had forfeited all his power over him , and that he was free from his service , and Might go seek another Master ; but no colour of reason that the servant hath now forfeited that immunity from sordid and drudgery works that he first covenanted , and must thenceforth lie at his Master's feet , as wholly prostitute to all his imperious humours . 

Secondly , can it be imagined , by reason that a persons submitting to a lawful government , should thereby be necessitated to that which May overthrow the end of all government , that is , inability to provide for their common safety . That whereas when they were free and under no government at all , they Might by the law of nature defend themselves against injury : now having submitted , though upon good conditions , they are utterly disabled to defend themselves if he that should be their protector , would prove their murderer : if he who both in himself and instruments should be only for the punishment of evil and the praise of them that do well , will go , or send , or suffer a company of thieves or murderers to go in his name , and spoil and destroy them that do well : can their being subjects ( In reason ) deprive them of their defence allowed them by the law of nature ? yea were they not guilty of self-murder in suffering such a thing ? For instance , some of our historians relate of King John , that he was transported with so deep a hatred against his nobles and Commons , that he sent an ambassador to Miramumalin , entitled the great King of Africa , Morocco , and Spain , wherein he offered to render unto him his kingdom , and to hold the same from him by tribute as his sovereign Lord , to forgo the Christian faith ( Which he held vain ) and receive that of Mahomet ; like enough some court-chaplain ( May be the clerk that went on the errand ) Might warrantise the King's conscience , and tell him , that it was the more shame for them who professed the Christian religion , to compel him to it . but whether the King did lawfully or not , is not our question , but whether the subjects Might lawfully have resisted that attempt of his , and have stood for their religion , lives , and liberty . 

Thirdly , is it not quite contrary to reason , that whereas Kings and rulers nothing differing by nature from their meanest subjects , were at first constituted , and are still continue for the protection , welfare , benefit , yea and service of the persons ; and who therefore should value their prerogatives , sceptres , and lives no further than they May advance the public good , yet if they degenerate , and will be destroyers , the persons should suffer all to be spoilt , as if kingdoms and persons had been create by God for the will , pleasure , profit , yea and lusts of Princes . As if a pilot purposely appointed for the safe wafting over of passengers , who instead thereof will dash the ship against the rocks : or a general purposely chosen ( And to whom the soldiers have therefore sworn ) for the safety of the whole army , should yet turn the cannon mouth upon his own soldiers , or deliver them all up into the hands of the enemy : the passengers and soldiers , yea the officers in the ship , and council of war in the army , should be morally disabled from doing any thing to prevent their own apparent destruction . By this reason the Bishop of Burgeu in the council of Basil proved the council to be above the Pope , and a kingdom above the King , and said they were but flatterers who taught otherwise . 

And fourthly , doth not right reason as much abhor this , that whereas Princes are the public fathers , and the persons owe them the duty of children , that these children should be prohibited from keeping their public fathers from the greatest evils : if our natural father through ignorance or distemper should go into a pest-house , his children Might by force fetch him out ; or if in a raging passion go about to kill himself , wife , children , or any others , their children May disarm them , yea we are tied not to suffer friend or foe to incur the guilt of rapine or blood , if it lie in our power to hinder it ; and ( Speak to my reason ) what evil have Princes deserved , that if they go about to murder themselves , subjects , and children , not any of their persons , no not the whole body politic should have power to restrain them . 

And if reason will allow this liberty of resistance to private persons ( As even Barclay and Grotius the two great propugners of the sacred and inviolable power of Kings , grant ) how much more clear , honourable , and safe must such a defence needs be , when done by the representative body of a state , who are God's ordinance as well as Kings , the ministers of God sent by him to be a terror to evil , and a praise to them that do well . And in England are the highest court of judicature , and in whom his majesty confesses there is legally placed sufficient power to prevent tyranny . 

Upon such reasons as these , not only heathens have resisted their Princes , when bent to subvert their laws and liberties ; but even most of the states of Christendom , Papists and Protestant's when they have been put to it , have born defensive arms against the unlawful violences of their misled Princes . 

But now if notwithstanding all this fair show of reason God's word hath determined the contrary , we must lay our hands upon our mouths and shall no longer deserve to be accounted the servants and subjects of Christ , then while we turn our reason ( How specious soever ) out of doors , when once it offers to oppose the least Jota of his revealed will . But where is this scripture to be found ? Certainly the good subjects in the old testament knew it not . Saul's subjects who swore that Saul should not kill Jonathan , nor pluck an hair from his head , though Saul had sworn by God he should die , knew no such scripture and i believe that if the same men had been about him when he protested the priests of the Lord should die , they would not only have withheld their own , but Doeg's hands from doing execution . David knew no such scripture ; nor the 600 men with him , that would have fortified Keilah against Saul . nor those many choice men of the several tribes of Israel , among whom were some of Saul's brethren and kindred and chief officers , that fell to David ( Though Saul had proclaimed him traitor ) from day to day to help him , till it was a great host like the host of God : and all this while David was ( Though an innocent yet ) but a private man . And i think if Elias had took himself bound in conscience to render himself prisoner to the captains which Ahaziah sent for him , he would not have killed them with fire from heaven : neither would Elisha have taken such a rough course with the messengers sent to take his head . Nor would the eighty valiant priests have thrust Uzziah by force out of the temple , who was a King still , though a leper . neither can these examples be eluded with saying these were extraordinary persons ; for first they were not all so , not the persons that resisted Saul , nor the persons that fell to David , nor the eighty priests , unless in the extraordinariness and valiancy of their spirits : and for the extraordinary persons themselves , i know nothing why their examples May not be pleaded , for our defensive arms , as well as David's eating the showbread was pleaded by our saviour , for his disciple rubbing the ears of corn , unless they can first show , that their practice was against a known law , i mean , unless there were some known law that innocents' Might not defend themselves , and one another against the unjust violence of their Princes . indeed we often read in the old testament of fearing the King , honouring the King , obeying the King , which their practice shows they understood to bind them to yield honour , loyalty , obedience , and subjection to their magistrates according to law ; but not that they were bound to let them do what mischief they pleased . 

Neither is there any more in the new testament ; there indeed are full and frequent exhortations to submit ourselves to magistrates , to be subject to the higher powers which are ordained of God , and not to resist the ordinance of God ; but not one word that we May not resist the tyranny of men , no colour for it , unless any will say that tyranny is God's ordinance , that tyrants bear the sword for the punishment of evil doers , are the ministers of God , &c. full proof there is that we must be under the authority of rulers , that is , under their legal commands ; not one word of being at the dispose of their illegal wills : the word used there is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , derived ab {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , licet , to show as one observes , that the text binds subjects to obey superiors not ablibitum , but ablicitum , not to obey their lawless lusts and wills , but their lawful authority , without resisting . And surely it were strange , that if God had laid this yoke of subjection to the illegal will of rulers , that neither the Jews under their Kings , nor under Antiochus , nor the churches of Christ , nor the primitive churches after once their religion and liberties were established by laws , nor any of the reform churches have took themselves , concluded under it : which of all the reform churches have not by their practice manifested , that religion binds them not to give their throats to be cut , or their liberties and states to be spoilt at the mere will of their Princes and their instruments , contrary to their own laws and edicts ? Were not the Lutheran churches put to it , and defended themselves against the Emperor Charles the fifth , when the Smalchaldian confederacy was entering ? did not both the divines and lawyers being consulted with , agree , that the inferior magistrates Might at some time resist the superior ? Have not the states and churches of the Netherlands done the like constantly against the King of Spain ? the Protestant's in France against their Kings ? How often and how lately have our brethren in Scotland done the same ? And although since the reformation England was never put to it , until these unhappy differences , yet how constantly have our most learned divines , Bishops as well as others , defended by their pens , and our Princes and states by their aids of men and money , their distressed and oppressed brethren and neighbours in the like case ; and now in our own sight both the King and states have acquitted the Scots , as having done nothing in their late defence , but what became good subjects . and what the judgement of this nation was in the time of popery is plain enough by their practice , in their usual taking of arms , and not leaving till they had compelled their Princes to ratify their privileges and charters , which through ill counsellors they had infringed and observable it is , that because the Bishops and clergy of those times saw the Princes go about to take down their pride , they were ever the most forward to justify the proceeding of the state ; and i suspect , in case the tables were turned , and we had a King endeavouring to take down the Bishops , to take away pluralities , non-residents , &c. and a parliament seeking to maintain them , the world would hear another divinity from many of them , who now cry out , that all our defence is damnable . 

But lest i Might be thought not to have weighed the scripture and reasons of both sides equally , i will give you a further account what my thoughts were and are concerning the scriptures usually pleaded against this resistance , and the reasons deduced from them . The strongest hold they pretend to , is built upon Romans 13. 1. &c. 1 Peter 2. 13 , 14. where we are enjoined subjection to the higher powers , especially to the King as supreme , and all know that Nero the then supreme governor , was no better than a tyrant . answ. first , it is observable that this objection and almost all the rest taken out of the scripture make the case of all subjects in all kingdoms to be alike ; that although ( As i touched before ) there are hardly two kingdoms in the world but do differ in laws customs and constitutions bounding the King's authority and the subjects obedience , yet if any of these would change the the bounds of his authority ( For instance , if the King of Denmark , or Sweden or Polonia would invade the liberty of his subjects , and make himself as absolute , ( Not only as the King of England , but ) as the King of France , or Spain , or the great Turk ) this argument ties all their subjects from resisting ; let any man show an outgate for the subjects of the one , which will not let out others , and for my part i will yield the cause : if they say these Kings took their crowns upon those terms , and the subjects indented to have liberty of resistance in such cases , than they grant that where the laws of the kingdom allow a liberty of resistance , resistance May be used notwithstanding these texts , which is as much as we plead for : if any persons have covenanted in no case to resist let them seek another answer , in the mean time these texts tie not those from resisting ( By their own answer who have not tied themselves . 

Secondly , i appeal to their own judgements , whether these texts forbid all forcible resistance ; suppose a Prince in his rage should go about to kill himself , or run some innocent man thorough with his sword , Might no man take the sword out of his hand ? and if it be lawful for a private man to disarm him of the weapons wherewith he would kill one , May not the state take such weapons out of his or the hands of his instruments , wherewith they go about to destroy all . thirdly , both texts lay the same charge for subjection to inferior magistrates , who likewise have their authority from God , though under the superior : as our saviour said to Pilate , who was but a deputy , thou couldst have no {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , no power at all against me , if it were not given thee from above . And May no resistance be made against the unjust violence of inferior officers ; if there May , it is sufficient ; sure i am , the texts have not one word to allow the one and prohibit the other . Fourthly , what one syllable in either of these texts so much as looks towards the forbidding of a persons to resist tyranny , but only that we resist not the magistrates in the rightful exercise of their authority given them by God : the texts speak not of their persons , but of their power ; not of their dictates , but of their legal commands ; no more of Kings than of an higher power in an aristocracy or democracy , binding all persons to subject themselves to that power and authority which in the several places where they live is the highest or supreme power . 

object . but Nero was a tyrant . 

answ. not in his five first years , nor secondly , was he a tyrant in all things ; he had authority to rule according to law , that was not his tyranny ; his tyranny was , what he usurped contrary to the law : nor thirdly , were all his under-officers tyrants , many of them could say with Festus , Acts 25.  it is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die , before that he which is accused have the accuser's face to face , and have leave to answer for himself ; and would accordingly dismiss them , if they had done nothing worthy of death , or of bonds . 

object . 2.  But doth not the thirteenth chapter of the Romans plainly bind men's hands from resisting the supreme power . 

answ. by the supreme power must be meant , that power , which by the original and fundamental constitution of any persons and nation , hath authority to make laws which shall bind the whole nation , to dispose of the estates and lives of any person or persons for the good of the nation to judge every person and persons in the nation determinatively and conclusively , so as from that judgement there is no appealing , that power itself being subject to the judgement and authority of none but God : and Aristotle makes three distinct branches of this power . 

1.  The power of making and repealing laws , a legislative power . 

2.  The power of making war and peace , of imposing customs and tributes . 

3.  The power of judging causes and crimes ultimately and decisively : where these three meet , and make their residence , whether in one person , as in absolute monarchs ; or in many , as in mixed monarchies or aristocracies ; or in the body of the persons , as in the ancient Roman government , there is the highest power which every soul is forbidden to resist : but now what ever be the higher power in England , most certain it is , that the King's absolute or illegal will , is not the highest power , that hath neither power to make laws , nor repeal laws ; that hath not power to acquit or condemn ; nor May men appeal from the King's lawful judgement seat to the King's absolute will ; but his legal will in the highest court , or the King and parliament May make laws or repeal laws , May engage the whole nation in a war , and command both the bodies and purses of men unto the service , is the highest court of judicature , to which all May appeal , and from which none May appeal , and consequently against which there is no resistance . So that if men would read this text of the thirteenth to the Romans , in plain English , it amounts directly to thus much , let every soul in England be subject to King and parliament , for they are the higher powers ordained unto you of God , whosoever therefore resisteth King and parliament , resisteth the ordinance of God , and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation . I would desire no other text but this to confound the great chaplains and champions of the antiparliamentary cause , or to strike terror into their loins , if their long conversing with god-dammees , hath not drawn such a kawl over their hearts , that to them damnation is ridiculous . 

object . 3.  But doth not saint Peter say expressly , the King is supreme , 1 pet. 2. 12.  

answ . 1.  It May as well be translated superior , as supreme , the same word in the 13 of the Romans is translated superior , higher , not highest . 2.  It is plain , the apostle is not there constituting governments , but giving direction to persons to obey the government they lived under ; and the text hath as much strength to enforce subjection to aristocracy , as to monarchy : if the persons of Pontus , Asia , Cappadocia , Bythinia , were under an absolute monarchy , as sometimes they were , being petty kingdoms crumbled out of the great monarchy of Alexander ; and it May be did retain yet the same form of government , if not of their own , yet as lately received from the Romans ; all that can be enforced from thence is , that the apostle names the Kings of those particular countries to be such as they were , and commands subjection to them , but no ways ties other kingdoms to be like unto them . 

object . 4.  But we in England by our oaths , do acknowledge the King to be supreme . 

answ . 1.  We willingly grant him to be supreme , to judge all persons in all causes according to his laws , and the established orders of the kingdom ; but not at or by his absolute will or pleasure . 2.  Whoever considers the title , scope , and words , both of the oath and the act of parliament that enjoins it , will easily see that both the act and oath were intended in opposition to that supremacy which the Pope sometimes challenged and usurped in this kingdom of England , and no more : and this to be the true intent and meaning of it , appears more fully by that explication or limitation of the oath , made the next parliament , 5. eliz. wherein it is declared , that that oath made , 1. eliz. shall be taken and expounded in such form , as it is set forth in an admonition added to the Queen's injunctions published , anno 1. of her reign , viz. to confess or acknowledge in her , her heirs and successors , no other authority then that which was challenged and lately used by King Henry the eighth , and Edward the sixth . And by this time you May see how little offensive these two ( So much boasted ) texts are to our defensive arms . 

other places of scriptures the adversaries seem not much to confide in , therefore i will pass them over the more briefly ; yet let us a little consider of them , matth. 26. 52.  they that take the sword shall perish with the sword . where Christ seems to rebuke Peeter for using defensive arms against the officers that came with a pretext of authority to apprehend Christ . 

answ . 1.  This is not a reproof of the sword taken for just defence , but of the sword taken for unjust oppression , and a comfort to those that •…re oppressed by it ; for Origen , Theophylact , Titus , Euthimius , interp••• the meaning to be , that Christ doth not rebuke Peter for using defensive arms , but to let Peter know that he need not snatch God's work out of his hand ; for God would in due time punish those with the sword , that came thus with the sword against him ; and that these words are a prophecy of the punishment which the Roman sword should enact of the bloody Jewish nation ; according with the like expression , revel. 13. 10.  he that kills with the sword , must be killed with the sword , here is the patience , and faith of the saints , that is , this May comfort the saints in their persecutions , that God will take vengeance for them . But secondly , suppose it was a reproof of Peter's using the sword ; then the plain meaning is to condemn Peter's rashness , who drew his sword , and never stayed to know his Master's mind , whether he should strike or not ; and so reproves those who rashly , unlawfully , or doubtingly use the sword : add this , that now was the hour come of Christ's suffering , and not of his apostles fighting , wherein Christ would not be rescued , no , not by twelve legions of angels , much less than by the sword of man ; therefore he saith to Peter , put up thy sword , &c.  But intended not that it should always be unlawful for his persons to use the sword in their just defence , against unjust violence ; for than he would never have commanded them , but a little before , that he that hath two coats , let him sell one and buy a sword . 

eccles. 8. 2.  &c. i counsel thee to keep the King's commandment , &c.  he doth whatever he pleaseth , &c.  where the word of a King is , there is power , and who May say to him what dost thou ? 

answ . 1.  no man can understand it literally in all things , as if every commandment of the King must be kept , as if no actions of the King Might be scanned , nor reproved by any man , as the canonists say of the Pope , that if he lead thousands to hell , none May say , why dost thou so ? Surely , if Saul command to murder the Lord's priests , that commandment need not be kept ? If David lie with his neighbour's wife , Nathan May say , why dost thou so ? If Ahab murder Naboth , and swallow his inheritance , worship Baal , persecute and kill the prophets of the Lord , Elijah May reprove him ; notwithstanding this text , who can say unto him what dost thou . secondly , the text plainly enough interprets itself , keep the King's commandment , according to the oath of God , stand not in an evil thing against him , he hath power to do what ever he will . Siscelus patraveris effugere non poteris , if you commit evil , you cannot escape punishment , where the word of a King is , there is power . viz. to punish them that do evil , and none to call him to account for doing it , and who can say unto him , what dost thou . 

another text is , prov. 8. 15.  by me Kings reign , &c.  Whence they plead , that because Kings and Princes receive their authority only from God , and the persons at the utmost only design the person , but give him none of his power ; therefore they May in no case , take away his power from him . 

answ . 1.  It saith no more of Kings , then of nobles , senators , and all other judges of the earth ; for it follows , by me Princes rule , and nobles , even all the judges of the earth . secondly , although no such thing is in the text , that the persons give no power to the magistrate , yet we will suppose it to be true , what then will follow more than this , that although they May not take from the magistrate that power which God hath given him ; yet they May defend themselves against such unjust violences , as God never gave the magistrate power to commit . A woman hath power to design the person of her husband to herself , but the authority of a husband is from God ; now though the wife May not take away the husband's just authority , she May defend herself against oppression and injury . 

Some allege God's judgement upon the two hundred and fifty Princes , numb 16.  

answ. they were rebels against their lawful governors , ruling exactly , according to the express will of God , and May all those perish with them who will plead for such as they are . 

others allege , 1 sam. 8. 11.  where the persons are let to understand how they shall be oppressed by their Kings ; yet for all that , have no just cause of resistance ; for they shall have no other remedy left them , but preces & lachrimae , crying to the Lord , verse . 8.  

answ. but saith the text so ? Let us read the words a little , and you shall cry out in that day , because of the King , which you have chosen , and the Lord shall not hear in that day . is this to say , they have no just cause of resistance , nor no remedy left , but complaining ; indeed , if the holy ghost had said , you shall not resist , nor fight for your liberties , &c.  There had been some show of reason for such a deduction , as some would extort from them ; but yet , even then , why Might not the words have been a prediction of the curse of God upon the persons , giving them up to such a base degenerate ignoble spirit , that they shall have no heart to stand up in the defence of their liberties and lives , rather than a prohibition of such resistance . the Lord foretells the persons , ezek. 24. 21.  Of calamitous times , in which he tells them , verse . 24 , that they should not mourn or weep ; will any man interpret this , as if God made it unlawful for them to mourn , or to weep , or was it not rather a prediction of their stupidity of spirit , when they should pine away under these calamities , so jere. 27.  God said they should put their necks under the yoke of the Kings of Babylon ; will any man thence gather , that other persons are bound to put their necks under the yoke of a foreign enemy invading them . In one word , the plain meaning is , that this persons should dearly rue it for casting off the form of government which God had chosen for them ; and when they should mourn under their own choice , God would not take the yoke from off their necks ; and so it is a threatening of a judgement , not an imposition of a duty . 

but David durst not lift up his hand against the Lord's anointed , though he did tyrannically persecute him ; yea , though it were sometimes in his power to have killed him . 

answ. no man pleads that any David should kill the Lord's anointed ; yet he May defend himself against his unjust violence , as David here did . 

object . but if they May not kill him , who can be secured , that in a battle ( As at Keynton field ) his bullet May not hit the Lord's anointed . 

answ. is this their fault , who have so often petitioned his majesty to withdraw himself from such dangerous ways , as both the parliament and his excellency hath done ; if their petitions would have been received , or rather theirs ? Who ( The worse subjects they , and the more accursed they ) have led him into these unnatural wars , and do in a manner enforce his presence in them ; did they bear that affection to his majesty as they pretend , they would with David's men , swear , thou shalt no more go out with us to battle , least thou quench the light of Israel , 2 sam. 21. 17.  We have heard much of the cavaliers swearing , but i never yet heard that one of them had the honesty to swear this ; nay they are wronged in reports , if some of them have not sworn the contrary . 

object . but David would not fight against him . 

answ. indeed he never did fight against him , because his numbers never were considerable till towards the last , but he would have fortified the city of Keilah against him , and it had been a strange madness to have had 600 men with him , if his conscience would have suffered him to have done nothing but flee , sure one Might more easily be hide then 600.  But there is a plain text assuring us that David and his men would have done more than run up and down , if occasion had served , 1 chron. 12. 16. and so forward . When divers of the children of Judah and Benjamin came to join with him , David went out to meet them , and said , if ye be come to help me , &c.  But if ye come to betray me to my enemies , i being innocent , the god of our fathers look upon it , and rebuke it . Now mark their answer , the spirit came upon Amasa the chief captain , and he said , thine are we David , and of thy side , peace be to thee , and peace to thy helpers , than David received them , and made them captains of the band : can any man imagine their meaning was to run up and down the countries with him , if they were able to cope with any number that Saul should bring , or send against them , especially adding this to it , that they fell to him from the several tribes day by day , till his host was like an host of God . now by these men's arguiment , if David's host had been forty thousand , and Saul come against him but with five or six hundred they must all have fled from him , and not have put it to a battle . credat Judaeus appella , non ego . 

object . but the fathers of the primitive times knew no defence but preces & lachrymae in all their unjust sufferings . 

answ . 1.  It follows not , because they knew it not , therefore we cannot know it : there Might be special reasons of God's dispensations towards them . 2.  Their liberties and religion were not established by law , and this was the cause saith abbot Bishop of Salisbury why the Christians in the primitive times before their religion was established by law , caedebantur non caedebant , would rather be killed then kill : but after the times of Constantine , when religion was established , they shook off the yoke of persecution from the church , & caedebant non caedebantur , they did kill rather than be killed . 3.  Where did any of the fathers ever oppose this opinion , and condemn this practice , that is , declaring it unlawful especially for a representative body to defend themselves against the unjust violence of their misled Princes : i believe if any such testimonies were to be found , the parliament should have heard of them before this time . 4.  We want not examples of such defence in the primitive times , when once religion was established by edict of the Roman empire , and Licinius the Emperor of the East ( legum violator maximus , contrary to law and his covenant ) would persecute the Christians , they defended themselves by arms , and Constantine the great joined with them ; and as Eusebius saith , held it his duty , infinitum hominum genus , paucis nefariis hominibus , tanquam quibusdam corruptelis è medio sublatis , in columes servare . To deliver an infinite multitude of men , by cutting off a few wicked ones , as the pests and plagues of the time . the Christians living under the Persian King , and wronged by him , sought for help from the Roman Emperor Theodosius , and were assisted by him , and when the King of Persia complained that Theodosius should meddle in affairs of his kingdom , Theodosius answered , that he did not only protect them because they were suppliants , but was ready to defend them , and no way to see them suffer for religion , it being the same with their own . it seems they thought it as lawful to help an innocent persons against the oppressions of their own Prince , as for one neighbour to succour another against thieves and robbers . The Macedonians obtained of the Emperor Constantius , four thousand armed men to help them drive out the Novatians from Paphlagonia , the orthodox assisted the Novatians against the unjust violence , and were armed falcibus , clavis , & securibus , with scythes , clubs and hatchets , and cut off almost all the soldiers , and many of the Paphlagonians . at Constantinople the orthodox defended Paulus his election against Macedonius and his abettors , though assisted with the military forces , and the historian blames them only for killing the commander Hermogenes . Justina Valentinianus mother , infected with Arianism , commanded to banish Ambrose , but the persons resisted , and for a while defeated the plot of them who would have sent Ambrose into banishment . The inhabitants of Armenia the greater professing the Christian faith , were abused by the Persians' ( Among whom they lived ) especially for their religion , they entered into a league with the Romans for their safety . You see here are some examples where the ancient Christians used defensive arms , and i doubt not but such as are well read in the stories of those times Might produce many more . 

but there is one doctor who goes about to prove by reason , that oppressed subjects should not defend themselves against their Princes , though bent to subvert religion , laws , and liberties , because ( Forsooth ) such resistance tends to the dissolution of order and government , that is , to disable Princes from subverting religion , law , and liberty ( Which is the very dissolution of all order and government ) tends to the dissolution of all order and government ; as if hindering a man from pulling down his house , were the pulling down the house : as if the hindering the pilot from dashing the ship against the rock , tended to dash the ship against the rock ; if any man else see any colour of reason in this reason , i desire them to make it appear , for for my part i can see none . 

And indeed the case is so clear , that most of them who cry down defensive arms , though they use such scriptures and arguments to work upon the consciences of persons , yet when they come to dispute it , will hardly endure to have the question rightly stated , ( As being unwilling to dash against the rock of most learned divines , whether Protestant's or Papists , and i think of almost all politicians ) but fall to discuss matters of fact , charging the parliament with invading the King's just prerogative , usurping an exorbitant power and authority , &c. yea his majesty in all his declarations insists only upon this , never suggesting that in conscience they are prohibited to defend themselves , in case he should violently invade their liberties , yea , expressly grants that there is power sufficient legally placed in the parliament to prevent tyranny . 

And therefore now i leave the case of divinity , and shall more briefly give you an account what satisfied me in the second , i mean matter of fact , that his majesty being seduced by wicked council did leafy war against the parliament : my great evidence was , the parliament judged so ; the judgement of a parliament of England was never questioned till now by a persons of England : all patents , charters , commissions , grants , proclamations , and writs of the Kings of England , receive their judgement , and are often repealed and made null by a parliament : all controversies betwixt the King and subject receive their final determination in the parliament ; the judgements of all other courts are ratified or nullified by a parliament . I have heard some wise men say , that a parliament in England ( Like Paul's spiritual man ) judgeth all , and itself is judged of none , and therefore if i should give you no other account of my entering upon my office in the army ( Which was not to fight , nor meddle in the council of war , but only to teach them how to behave themselves according to the word , that God Might be with them ) should i ( I say ) give no other account but the determination of that wise assembly , i should be acquitted by indifferent men . But although i had learned that no dishonourable thing should be imagined of that honourable assembly , yet i held it my duty not to yield blind obedience , or go by an implicit faith , but search whether the things were so , and the rather because both sides have appealed to heaven to that God , who no doubt in due time will clear the righteous cause : and upon my search these things were quickly apparent . 

It was very clear that the persons too much prevailing with his majesty had long before this parliament a design for overthrowing our laws , enslaving our liberties , and altering our religion , and it had so far prevailed that we were tantùm non swallowed up , and when through the good providence of God , this parliament was called , and many hopes conceived that now his majesty seeing the mischief of adhering to such ill counsellors , would for the time to come be wholly guided by the great council of his kingdom , alas it soon appeared that the same kind of counsellors were still most prevayling , insomuch that ( Soon after the pacification with Scotland ) the Northern army should have been brought up to London , as appears by the very oaths of some who should have acted it , a thing than thought so pernicious , that not only the chief actors fled beyond the seas , but many real courtiers earnestly solicited their friends in both houses , that this our in excusable error Might be passed over , and now to begin upon a new score . But that which made me the more suspect their prevailing with his majesty was , that the horrid rebellion broken out in Ireland , the rebels pretending his majesties and the Queen's commission for their warrant , it was at least three months after , before they were proclaimed traitors , and when it was done no copies of the proclamations to be got for love or money ; whereas when the Scots were proclaimed rebels and traitors , it must speedily be published in all the churches of England . i must acknowledge this made me to think that the parliament had just cause to be jealous of great danger . But when his majesty returned from Scotland , discharged the guard which the parliament had set for their own safety , & an other denied except under the charge of the Queen's Chamber-lain , and his majesty himself entertained divers captains as a supernumerary guard at Whitehall , went to the house of Commons after that manner to demand the five members to be delivered unto him ; the Earl of Newcastle ( Now general of the army of Papists in the North ) sent to Hull , attempting to seize it and the magazine there , his majesty according to the Lord Digby's letters retiring from the parliament to a place of strength , and the Queen going beyond sea to raise a party there ; i must have shut my eyes if i had not seen danger , and thousands of thousands would have thought he parliament altogether senseless if they had not importuned his majesty ( As they did ) to settle the militia , all former settlings of it by commissions of lieutenancy being confessedly void : his majesty refusing this in that manner as they thought necessary for security , they voted the putting of it into the hands of persons whom they thought the state Might confide in ( Though alas many of them since have discovered to us how vain is our hope in man , ) and secured the town of Hull and the magazine there : soon after this his majesty in the North seized Newcastle and under the name of a guard begun to raise an army ; all this was done before the parliament voted that his majesty seduced by wicked council , &c.  And when his majesty's army was more increased , he then declared that he was resolved by strength to recover hull and the magazine and to suppress the militia : after this indeed the parliament began to make vigorous preparations by their propositions for plate , money , horse , &c.  

This being the true progress and state of the business , i saw clearly all along , the kingdom and parliament were in danger , that it was therefore necessary to have the militia and navy in safe hands , which his majesty also acknowledged ; that he refused to settle it for a time in the way they conceived necessary , and that by the judgement of both houses when they were full , they had power by the fundamental laws of the kingdom to settle it especially for a time upon his majesty's refusal ; that his majesty raised force , and declared it was to suppress the militia , and recover hull and the magazine is as clear , and made pregnant preparations both at home and beyond the seas : and the civil lawyers say that pregnant preparations are the beginning of a war . The only question remaining was , whether the parliament did justly in ordering the militia , and securing the magazine and navy , in a confessed time of danger upon such his majesty's refusal . 

What the King's power and prerogative , and what the parliaments power was for securing the militia in time of danger according to the laws of England was out of my profession , and in great part above my skill ; but certainly unless i was bound rather to believe the votes of the Papists and other delinquents about his majesty , who hitherto had prevailed to bring upon us all the miseries that we have lain under , than the votes and judgements of the highest court of judicature in England , ( Which so far as i have heard was never by common law or statute law presumed to be guilty of , or charged with the overthrow of the King's prerogative , or the laws and liberties of the subjects until now , and who have given us so much evidence of their wisdom , watchfulness and faithfulness ) i was bound to be concluded under their testimony , and so consequently that his majesty was seduced , &c.  And surely if men who serve upon justice between Prince and persons , party and party , in matters of life or state , May rest in the resolution of the learned judges that this , or that is law when themselves know it not : well Might i rest in the judgement and resolution of that court , which is the judge of all the judicatures in the land . And in case i were unsatisfied to whom should i appeal in whose judgement i Might more safely rest , especially when i saw their vote agreeable to that which is the supreme law of all nations , namely , that public safety is the highest and deepest law , and that it is requisite that every state have a power in time of danger to preserve itself from ruin ? and no law of England more known , then that the parliament is the highest court from whence there is no appeal . This satisfaction i had then , and since by the declarations and remonstrances of the parliament concerning these military matters , and by other books lately published , it is most apparent that they have not usurped upon his majesty's prerogative , but what they have done is agreeable to the practice of former parliaments , in putting the militia , forts and navy into safe hands in these times of danger ; and that it was therefore lawful for them , yea , necessary to take up these defensive arms , and consequently to call in for supply from all such who should share with them in the benefit of preservation , and to disable such from hurting them who were contrary minded : i spend no time to answer the objections that some make , that his majesty could not tarry at London with safety of his person , that the Lords and Commons that are with him , were driven away by popular tumults , and could not enjoy freedom of their votes , &c.  Because i think these things are now believed by none , but such as would believe no good of the parliament though one should rise from the dead again . 

Thus Sir you have a just account of the grounds that first induced me to own this cause ; you desire to know whether i see not yet reason to repent of what i have done , i confess i never undertook any thing but i saw cause to repent of my miscarriage through the corruption which cleaves to me , and great cause i have to bewail my many failings in this great work , but for the work itself , i as solemnly profess , i never saw cause to repent of my appearing in it ; the cause is a right cause , the cause of God , my call to it , a clear call , and though the work prove harder and longer than at first it was thought , yet the cause is far clearer than at the first , 

The work indeed is harder than i expected , for whoever could have believed he should have seen in England so many Lords and Commons even after their solemn protestation , to defend the privilege of parliament , and their own vote ; that his majesty seduced by wicked council intended war against the parliament , so shamefully to betray the trust committed to them ? so many of the Protestant profession joining with an army of Papists ( Under pretence of mantaining the Protestant religion against a Protestant parliament ) to fight themselves into popery ? so many unworthy gentlemen fight to destroy a parliament , and thereby fight themselves and posterity into slavery ? so many Papists in arms contrary to so many known lawer , and armed with commission , to disarm Protestant's contrary to their known liberties , and the Protestant's who exceed their number an hundred fold not to rise as one man to subdue them ? And who would have believed that he should have seen after all this an army raised by the parliament in such an extremity , for such an end , ( Having hazarded their lives , undergone all these hardships , performed all these services , and whose untimely disbanding May prove our irrecoverable ruin ) strai•…ed for want of pay while England is worth a groat . Behold , regard , and wonder marvellously , i relate a thing which many will not believe though it be told unto them . hab. 1. 5.  

But though the work be harder , the case is still clearer , both in regard of the intentions of the parliament and also of their adversaries . For the parliament , multitudes would not believe , but that they had further aims then their own and the public safety , that they intended it not to depose his majesty , yet by force of arms to compel him to that which is not fit for a King to yield to ; but now by their frequent petitioning of his majesty especially by the reasonableness of their late propositions and instructions , wherein they desire a present disbanding of all arms , even before any other bills were past , and were willing to have the ports , forts and sh••ss , etc of the kingdom resigned up into his majesty's hands , provided only that in these times of danger they Might , pro bac vice , be put into the hands of such as the state Might confide in ; the sincerity of their intentions are now so plain , that i think malignity itself cannot but be convinced of them . 

And the intentions of the contrary counsels are as plain , their mask now falling off , and their design more than ever discovered to be the overthrow of parliament , liberty , laws and religion . For at first we had declarations to preserve all the just privileges of parliament , but now we see men proclaimed traitors for executing the commands of the two houses , and the two houses themselves , if not in direct , yet in equivalent terms proclaimed traitors , yea denied to be a parliament , because his majesty withdraws himself , and after multitudes of petitions refuses to return , and because many of their members have deserted them , and are protected by his majesty from the houses who have sent for them . Yea , they are required to recall their votes as illegal , and that such as they have fined and imprisoned May bring their habeas corpus to be tried in an inferior court . Yea , persons provoked to scorn them , and thereupon multitudes not fearing to trample upon , and cast as vile scorn and contemptunjustly upon that thrice-honorable court , as ever was cast justly upon the commissaries courts . 

We have heretofore been assured that the known laws of the land should be the only rule of government : but ( To name no other instances ) now we see the commission of array to be justified to be law , which the parliament hath not only declared , but demonstrated , and the countries ( Where ever it hath prevailed ) found , to be the utter destruction of all the laws made for the subjects liberty . 

Heretofore proclamations were put out that no Papists should be entertained into his majesty's army , because the resolution was to maintain the Protestant religion ; but now we see them armed , and armed with commission , and Protestant doctors in their writings justifying it , and being armed dare profess their religion publicly , set up their mass in the second city of the kingdom , cutting 〈◊〉 pieces , and burning bibles , and as multitudes of reports come from beyond the seas , ( And the supplies that come from thence confirm it ) all the Papists in Christendom contributing to this war as to the Catholic cause . Heretofore the liberty of the subject seemed to be stood for , yea defended against the parliament , ( As if it were possible the representative body should enslave itself ) and in the mean time while these things are promised , hundred , yea thousands of his majesty's subjects plundered with his majesty's proclamations against plundering , in the hands of diverse of the plunderers . And their persons led away in ropes and chains like Turkish gallyslaves , and many cast into prisons and dungeons only for detending themselves against robbers and murderers abusing his majesty's name : where their jailers use them worse than the Turks do their Christian slaves , or one that hath any thing of man in him could use a dog . 

And when all these things are now done , the parliament not only sitting , but having so much strength in the field , what can we expect when these men have prevailed , when at the putting on of their harness their usual language is nothing but blasphemy against God , ( Not to be mentioned , ) and against his persons calling all that adhere to his and the kingdom's cause , parliament dogs , and parliament rogues ? what language will you expect to hear if once they come triumphantly to put it off ? If while the event is uncertain they cut us out such kind of laws , liberties , and parliament-privileges as these are , if God for our sins sell us into their hands , think if you can , what laws , liberties , and parliament-privileges our posterity shall find recorded in our blood ; for ourselves alas , who shall live when God doth this , nay who would desire to live ? i would rather with holy Austin make it my humble suit to that God whose are the issues of life and death , that he would rather take me from the earth , then let me live to see his dear church , and my native country delivered into the hands of such blasphemous , and barbarous men . 

So that in stead of repenting and withdrawing from the work , i could wish that my voice were able to reach into every corner of the kingdom , and that i could awaken all persons to see the danger and misery that is flowing in upon them . That every soul Might be quickened up to make his own , and help to make England's , bleeding , dying England's peace with God , and every one who hath any interest in heaven to cry mightily unto that god in whose hand the hearts of Kings are , and who rules in the kingdoms of men , that the power of our god Might be great towards us , in turning away these imminent calamities , and turning the heart of our King towards his great and faithful council , and rescuing him out of the hands of this generation of men who delight in blood . Our god hath nor yet said , pray not for this persons , but if the Lord say he hath no delight in us , righteous art thou oh Lord , and just are all thy judgements : only let us not be accessary to our own destruction , and the destruction of so flourishing a kingdom ; let us not through our covetousness or cowardice , self-love or sloth , betray our laws , liberties , lives , religion into the hands of men from whose hands , we befool ourselves if we expect more mercy , or less misery , than the poor Christians of Constantinople found with the Turks , when thanks to their own niggardliness ( Oh let it never be so with England ) they fell into their hands . Oh let us labour to prevent their swords thrusting into our bodies , and their swords into our souls , let our God do with us what he will , let us do what we should , and while we have any money in our purses , any blood in our veins , or any spirits in us , devote all to the maintenance of this rightful cause , and if we perish , we perish . 

Nor do i fear to be for this condemned by any right discerning man as an incendiary to a civil war , i know the miseries of a civil war : war is the severest of all God's judgements , and civil war the cruelest of all wars , where is the greatest hatred , the deepest treachery , the most unnatural butcheries , where the father murders the son , the son the father , the brother embrues his hands in his brother's blood , and whoever gains , all are losers : quis suror o cives , quae tanta licentia belli ? oh the madness of our age and country , if England have such a lust to war can we find no foreign enemies , but we must war against ou• selves , and at this time too , cumque superba foret Babylon spoliand• trophaeis . when the proud turrets of the whore of Babylon are to be leveled with the earth : when Germany , when Jreland are to b• rescued out of her bloody paws ? Can we find no fit obj••• for the fury of the cannon , than our towns , houses , bodies ? Bu• alas ! The generation with whom we have to deal had rather  thousand times see the glory of England in the dust , than the pride O•rome : and though a civil war be miserable , yet no such misery as the peace which they would beteeme us , a Sicilian vesspers or a Parisian massacre , from which good Lord deliver us , save Lord let the King hear us when we call . 

Thus Sir , you have my thoughts at large , you May either lay this letter by you , or communicate it for the satisfaction of others at your own pleasure , i bless God i am gathering strength , and hope ere long by my return to my Lord and the army ( If God please not to smile upon us with a safe accommodation in the mean time ) to give a real proof that my judgement is the same that formerly it hath been , and i hope you believe my affection is the same still to you , and therefore without further trouble , i subscribe myself . 

Your loving friend , Stephen Martial . 

Fjnjs . 





Luther Tom . 8. 〈◊〉 pag. 206.  iudg. 3.  acts and Monum• vol. 1. p 8  Barcl . lib contra •…narchom . Grotius iure bel•… l. 1. c. 4.  answer 〈◊〉 the 19 p••position   .  to 22.   chry•… Mathias po••… lib. 3.  sect 3.  sleid. hist l•b. 18.  abbot 〈◊〉 Laliso . d•mon stra•… antichr•… 6. 7.  bils•… differ . between christia•… Bed•…s' letter to Wadsworth rom. 13. 1.   pet. 2. 12.  object• answ.     ob. 3.  answ. ob. 4.  answ. object . matth. 26. 52.  answ. object . eccle. 8.  &c.  answ. Mercer . ad locum object . prov. 8. 15.  answ. num. 16  object . 1 sam. 8. 11.  answ. •bject . ob ans. 〈◊〉 go••••… a••••… 〈◊〉 demon stra••• Antichr . c. 7.  euseb. 10. c. 8. 9  niceph.  niceph. 9 42  Socrates 2. c. 10.  Socrates l. 5. c. 11.  zo•omens . 7. 13.  evagri . l. 5. c. 7.  object . 



































