An answer to a proposition in order to the proposing of a commonwealth or democracy . 

Proposed by friends to the commonwealth by Mr.  Harringtons consent ; who is so overwise in his own conceit , that he propounds a committee of parliament , with above one hundred Earls , nobles , members , gentlemen , and divines ( Named in his list ) May dance attendance twice a week on his Utopian excellency in the banqueting house at Whitehall or painted chamber , to hear and see his puppet-play of a new commonwealth : the very first view whereof the presumes will infatuate all dissenting parties , spectators , and our divided nations by their example into a popish blind obedience thereunto , upon his ipse dixit . 

prov. 26. 3 , 5 , 12.  

a whip for a horse , a bridle for an ass , and a rod for the fools back . Answer a fool according to his folly , lest he be wise in his own conceit . Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit , there is more hope of a fool , than of him . 

London printed in the year , 1659.  

A proposition in order to the proposing of a commonwealth or democracy . 

If the parliament shall be pleased to appoint a committee to receive Mr.  Harringtons propositions for settling the government of this commonwealth ; it is humbly proposed that unto the committee of the house May be added 

The Earl of Northumberland . 
The Earl of Denbigh . 
The Earl of Clare . 
The Earl of Kingston . 
The Duke of buckingh•m . 
Lord Grey of Warke . 
Lord Faulkeland . 
Lord Lambert . 
Lord Bronker . 
Richard Nevil esq 
Mr. Nathaniel Fiennes . 
Lord mayor of London . 
Alderman Titchborne . 
Mr. Thurlo . 
Mr. William Pierepoint . 
Sir John Eveling . 
Mr. Crew . 
Mr. Ansl•of Ireland . 
Mr. Prynne . 
Sir Paul neal.  
Sergeant Maynard . 
Colonel Taylor . 
Lord Broughall . 
Mr. Hubard . 
Mr. Trevor ▪ 
captain Adam baynnes . 
Mr. Josias Bernard's . 
Mr. Samuel Moyer . 
Mr. Anthony Samuel . 
major Wildman . 
Mr. Maximilian Petty . 
Mr. William Harrington . 
Mr. Wren . 
Mr. Baxter of Kidderminster . 
Mr. Walwin . 
Mr. Brooks . 
Mr. Arthur Eveling . 
Mr. Cook . 
dr. Ferne . 
dr. Haymond . 
dr. Owen . 
dr. Seaman . 
Mr. Calamy . 
Mr. Manton . 
captain Andrew Ellis . 
Mr. Chalinor Chute . 
Mr. Slingsby Bethel . 
Sir Cheany Culpepper . 
Sir Henry Blount . 
Sir Horatio Townshend . 
Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper . 
Mr. Job Charleton . 
Mr. Edward Waller . 
Colonel Harloe . 
major Harloe . 
colonel John Clark . 
Mr. John Denham . 
Mr. Morrice . 
Mr. Hugh Bisscowen . 
Sir George Booth . 
Mr. Robert Roles . 
dr. Mills . 
Sir Orlando Bridgeman . 
Mr. Robert Stephens . 
Mr. William James . 
Sir Justinian Isham . 
Lieutenant colonel Kelsey . 
Sir Robert Honnywood . 
Mr. Sedgwick . 
Mr. Philip Nye . 
dr. Thomas Goodwin . 
Colonel Lilburn . 
Charles Howard esq ; ; 
Colonel Ashfield . 
Sir Thomas Gower . 
Lord com. Bradshaw . 
General Desborow . 
colonel James Berry . 
major William Packer . 
Praisegod Barbones . 
Sir William Waller . 
Colonel Sanders . 
Colonel Hatcher . 
colonel Edmond Salmon . 
colonel Francis Hacker . 
Mr. rich. Knightley . 
colonel John Burch . 
Mr. John Swynfen . 
Mr. Thomas Bampfield . 
colonel John Okey . 
Mr. William Kiffen . 
Anthony Pierson . 
Colonel moss . 
Mr. Frecheville of Stavely . 
Mr. James Morley . 
dr. Philip Carteret . 
captain Richard Dean . 
Adjutant general William Allen . 
Mr. William Forester of Aldermarton . 
Mr. Edward Harison . 
Mr. Arthur Samwell . 
Mr. Samuel tull.  
Mr. Edward Salloway . 
That this committee sit Tuesdays and Fridays , by three of the clock afternoon , in the banqueting house , court of requests , or painted chamber , the doors being open , and the room well fitted for all comers : and that Mr. Harrington having proposed by appointment of the parliament , such others May propose as shall have the leave of the parliament . 

This by friends to the commonwealth is proposed with Mr.  Harrington's consent . 

The reasons for this proposition are these : 

It is the fairest way of proposing a government , that it be first proposed to conviction , before it be imposed by power . 

The persons herein nominated being convinced , it must necessarily have an healing influence upon all the parties , degrees or qualities in this divided nation . 

The answer . 

It is the desire of our three divided nations ; 

That there be no committee appointed by those commoners now sitting to receive Mr.  Harringtons propositions for settling our old kingly government in his new way of a commonwealth , till the house of peers , and the secluded members of the Commons house who sat in parliament till December 6. 1648. be permitted freely to fit , debate , and vote in parliament , according to the statute of 17 caroli , c. 7. by which the present conventicle pretends to sit . 

That this being done , a committee of both houses May be appointed to receive Mr. Harringtons propositions . And that the persons named in Mr.  Harringtons list who are no members , with such other wise men as Mr. Harrington and the friends to his propounded commonwealth shall nominate , May have liberty to propose to the said committee what Mr. Harrington and they shall think fit in relation to the forming and erecting of the same . 

That to the end the said Mr. Harrington and his friends May in their proposals be kept within the bounds of sobriety and moderation , according to the ancient law of Charondas , the lawgiver of the Athenians , ( The first erectors of commonwealths , ) Mr. Harrington and his friends May all come to the said committee with ropes about their necks , and in case they shall not convince the said committee ( And parliament ) that their new commonwealth is better , safer , and more profitable for the English nation , than their old legal hereditary kingly governusent , that then they shall forthwith by sentence of parliament be carried to Tyburn , and undergo the penalty of Charondas law , to be hanged up by the neck as traitors and seditious persons till they be dead . 

But if their proposals take effect : that then Mr. Harrington for his rare invention and extraordinary good service in minting a new commonwealth , shall have the monopoly of coining all new Harringtons , alias brass farthings , which shall henceforth pass for the only coin of his new copper commonwealth , gold and silver which are royal mines & metals annexed to the imperial crown of the realm ) being as inconsistent with his new commonwealth , ( Which hath swallowed them all up ) as kingship , and therefore to be banished with it . 

The committee is desired to sit every afternoon in the week by two of the clock at the session's house in the old Bailey , or rather in the old King's bench court in Westminster hall , being places open to all comers , and fitted for that end , without further charge to the poor commonwealth : that so Mr. Harrington and his friends May not be delayed from receiving a deserved execution , or glorious reward . 

This by the generality of our 3 nations friends to our ancient monarchy is proposed , and they hope to have Mr.  Harringtons post-consent thereto . 

The reasons for this answer to the proposition are these : 

1.  It is the fairest way of altering our ancient kingly government , and parliament , that they be first legally impeached and condemned to conviction before they be injuriously suppressed by armed power . therefore m. Harrington must first answer M Wren & m. Pryn's reasons in his new published true and perfect narrative ; for the restitution of our old hereditary Kings & kingship , as the best of governments , before he propound his new Utopian republic , to thrust them out of their long-enjoyed possession . 

2.  That Mr. Harrington and his friends being convinced of the illegality of the said commonwealth , and the dangerous consequence of proposing such a seditious novelties , against our old kingship and kingdoms , and duly executed according to Charondas law , it must needs have a healing influence upon all the parties , degrees or qualities in these divided nations ; since the exemplary execution of such leading innovators will so terrify all others that they will not dare mutter one word for the future against our ancient fundamental government by King , Lords and Commons ; which they are all obliged to maintain by sacred oaths and covenants . 

3.  All the three nations will judge Mr. Harrington and his republican friends are in good earnest for the government of Oceana , and as valiant as Sir John Harringtons Ajax , when they shall so fairly adventure a voyage to Tyburn to introduce it . 

funis coronat opus . 

resolved upon the question , ( On Mr.  Harringtons friends petition ) that dr. chamberlain shall attend him during all the time of his travel with his gigantic commonwealth , lest it should miscarry , and be strangled in its birth : that if the orifice of his brain or womb be so narrow that the doctor's hands cannot usher it into the world without suffocation , that then ( caesar-like ) the general council of officers of the army , shall violently cut it out of his womb with their swords , rather than it should be still born , though with the parent's death : that if it be live-born , it shall not be christened , till it be able to render an account of its faith to Cardinal Mazarin , dr. Owen , Mr.  Nigh , and John Canne : that new dipped col. Bennet , col. Hewson , Major Packer , and lieut.  Col. Allen , shall be godfathers ; the whore of Rome , Mrs. Rolls , Mrs.  haggat , and mal cutpu•se godmothers to it : that it shall be then called by the father's name , Harringtons ( Not England's ) commonwealth , and bear his arms instead of the superstitious red English cross upon its forehead : that in the mean time it shall be strongly guarded night and day by the keepers of the liberties of England , and col.  Fleetwood's regiment , lest dr. chamberlains den of thieves , or the Queen of fairies , should fteal it away out of its cradle , and put a mishapen changeling without wit or reason , into its place , to the parent's dishonour , and great disappointment of the hopes and prayers of all the publicans and sinners , falsely styled , the godly persons , and saints of the 3.  Nations , who rather desire to enjoy a share in the commonwealth and crown lands of England , Scotland and Ireland , than in the kingdom and crown of glory in heaven , bonum quo communius eo melius , being a sure principle , and the chief cornerstone on which they intend to build their new commonwealth , having little private wealth of their own , except brass Harringtons , to inherit . 

Finis . 















