Loyalty banished : or England in mourning . Being a perfect narrative of the present affairs and proceedings , between divers members of parliament , and m. Will . Prynne , near the lobby at Westminster . with the several speeches made in the house , by Sir Arthur Haslerigge , Sir Henry Vane , Master Hungerford , and Mr. Ansley ; and the answer and reply of the said Mr. Prynne thereunto , by virtue of the power and summons , derived from King Charles : together with his proposals to the persons ; and the names of the secluded members cast into hell , by the power of the sword ; and what proceeded thereupon . As also Mr. Prynne's demands to the parliament , in the name of all the Commons of England . 

Printed in the year , 1659.  

On the seventh of this instant May , Mr. Prynne walking to Westminster-hall , ( Where he had not been six days before ) meeting with some old secured and secluded members of parliament , summoned by King Charles his writ and authority , for these only ends ( Expressed in all writs of summons to the Lords , and of elections issued to sheriffs of counties for electing knights , citizens and burgesses of parliament , and in the indentures themselves by which they were returned members ; ) to confer and treat of certain , great and arduous affairs , concerning the defence of the King , kingdom , and church of England , and to do and consent to those things which shall happen to be therein ordained by common counsel , ( of the King , Lords , and Commons , ) touching the aforesaid businesses : which parliament began at Westminster the third day of November , 1640.  They showed him a declaration of the officers and counsel of the army , made in such haste and confusion , that they mistake the month wherein they made it dating April 6. instead of May 6. published by them that morning , ( Which declaration the day before , was presented to the speaker of the said parliament , at the rolls , by divers officers of the army , in the name of coll : Fleetwood , and the counsel of officers of the army , in presence of many members of said the parliament ) containing their earn•st desire , that those members who continue to sit since the year 1648. until the twentieth of April 1653. would return to the exercise and discharge of their trust . upon which Mr. Pryn , if he could enter the house , intended to send for the rest of the members walking in the hall to come in unto them : and to move that all surviving members of this parliament , Might by joint consent particularly be sent to , and invited to meet and sit in the house at a convenient day , before any vote or order passed by them then sitting , thus suddenly convened without any notice ( Which would be interpreted rather a surprise , and unparliamentary practice , both by the absent members and the whole nation , than any obliging parliamentary vote or order of the house ) and more discontent then invite or unite the absent unsummoned members , of that parliament making the rent greater than before . Upon these resolutions alone , and none other , which Mr.  P intended to propose to those then sitting , he went to the lobby door of the Commons house , accompanied with Sir George Booth , Mr. Arthur Annesley , Sir John Evelyn , Mr. th. Gewen , Mr. Charles Rich , Mr. Montague , Mr.  rich. knightly , Mr. Hungerford , and one or two more ; which being shut to keep out the persons crowding on the stairs to get in , through whom they could hardly pass ; Mr.  P. knocked twice or thrice , but could get no admittance , till the door being opened to let out Mr. Nye and some other ministers , mr , p. with Sir George Booth and Mr. Annesley , being foremost , pressed into the lobby ; and than the door being shut and bolted again , Mr.  p. unbolted and held it open till the rest came in ; where they finding Mr. John and Mr. James Herbert standing in the lobby , acquainted them with their intentions to go then into the house , who resolved to go in with them . Coming all up to the house door , which was shut and kept guarded ( As it presently appeared ) by some officers of the army ; Mr.  p. required them to open the door to let them in , being all members of the old parliament ; who thereupon demanded ; whether they had continue sitting in it since 1648. to 1653 ? m. p. and the rest all answered , that being members of the old parliament , they would give no account to them or any others of their sitting , but only to the house itself whereof they were members , being contrary to the privilege of parliament , which they and others were obliged inviolably to maintain : upon which demanding their names , they said ; that if they would send in a note of their names to the house , and they ordered them to come in , they should be admitted . whereto Mr. p. replied we yet knew not who were within the house , nor whether they were yet sitting , nor upon what account they sat ; nor was it agreeable with the custom or privilege of parliament for one member to send tickets to his fellow-members for free admission into the house , being all equals , and having an equal right freely to enter into it at all times , as well as they ; nor was it their duty thus to capitulate with members , but obey their just commands in opening the door : which they still refusing , Mr.  p. demanded , who and what they were , being all strangers to them ? and by whose authority , or order they thus forcibly kept them out ? they answered , they were officers of the army , and had sufficint authority to keep them out , if they had not sat since 1640. till 1653.  Mr. p. demanded , from whom they had their warrant , since they could have none from those within , being but newly entered ; and none else could give them such a warrant , nor they within before they heard them , and gave good reason for it ; demanding them to produce their order , if they had any in writing , that they night know by whose authority they were thus forcibly kept out ; demanding their several names twice or thrice , wherewith they refused to acquaint them . Upon this M p. told them , they doubted of their authority , or orders thus to seclude them , because they were either ashamed or afraid to tell them their names , when as th•y told them theirs : that they knew not whether they were officers of the army , or not , unless they knew their names , so that they Might inquire the truth of it , or saw their commissions : and if they were army officers indeed , they had published a printed D•cl . in all their names that morning , inviting ( As they conceived ) all members they formerly secluded , to return & sit again in the house to discharge their trusts : wherein they professed their former force upon , and seclusion of them , to be a backsliding , and wand'ring into unrighteous paths ; w•ich they seemingly repent of ; promising to yield their utmost assistance to them to sit in safety ; and praying for the presence and blessing of God upon their endeavours : and if now within few hours after this remonstrance published , they thus highly and publicly violated it in the view of all there present by returning to their former backslidings and unrighteous paths ; in secluding those who were members a fresh , and violating their own declaration , none would henceforth credit them , or it . upon which one of them told Mr.  p. he knew he was none of them who sat since 1648. till 1653. therefore they were not bound to let him in , being not within their declaration , who retorted , he thought their repentance had been universal , not partial ; of all their forces upon the house and members , especially of their greatest dec. 1648. when they not only secluded , but secured and imprisoned him and forty more in hell , and other places , and forced away three 3 times as many more for discharging their trusts , and asserting the true good old cause ; against their commissions , trusts protestations , and printed remonstrances ; which if they would look back upon and well consider ( as they proclaim they had done in their new decl. ) they would find to be one of their greatest backslidings where they first turned out of the way , which caused God to withdraw his presence and good spirit from them ever since , and give them up to the prosecuting of a new Romish good old cause , which had brought us into that posture , and occasioned those vicissitudes of dangers , and caused God in his providence to make all essays to settle us , utterly ineffectual ; to convince them of , and reclaim them from their error , which they now pursued afresh , as vigorously as ever : that for his own part after his imprisonment by them against both law and privilege in 1648. in sundry places , he was again forcibly seized by some of the army in his house in 1650. and kept a close prisoner near three years under armed guards of soldiers in three remote castles far distant from those then sitting : therefore they could not make their unrighteous imprisonment of him then without any cause or heaving , a just ground to seclude him from sitting now . 

But all these expostulations of m. p. and others , not prevailing , they desired all present to take notice and bear witness of this high affront and breach of privilege in this their forcible seclusion : and so departing , Mr.  knightly meeting major general Lambert in the lobby , complained to him of this forcible seclusion , who gave him a civil answer to this effect , that things were now in an hurry , and their entering at this time into the house Might cause some disturbance , but doubted not such course would be taken by the officers of the army in few days , that none should be forcibly secluded : and so they went from the lobby into the hall from whence they came , acquainting those members they left there with the premises . 

After some conference with one another , it was thought fit they should meant about four a clock in the evening under Lincoln's inn chapel , and in the mean time that every one should e•quire , what old secluded , or secured members were now in town , and how many members of the long parliament were yet living , chosen or sitting before December 6. 1648. when they were first forcibly secluded by the army . Some met accordingly , and upon conference found , there were about eighty secluded members now in London and Westminster , being near double the number of those sitting that day , and above three hundred members of all sorts yet living , chosen or sitting in the Commons house before December 1648. over and above those that now sat ; all which they conceived aught in justice to be summoned by the speakers letter , freely to meet and sit in the house at a convenient time to be agreed upon : in order whereunto , some ten of them met in the council chamber of Lincoln's inn , ( Where the old speaker used to sit in council as a bencher with the rest of the benchers concerning the affairs of the society ) as the fittest place to write down a catalogue of all the surviving members names , by the help of their memories , and the printed list of them ; which having finished , they departed , agreeing to meet in Westminster hall about nine of the clock on Monday morning , whither m. p. carried the list of the names formerly written , digested into an alphabetical order , to communicate it to other members . 

Those that sat meeting on the Lord's day , adiourned their house till ten of the clock Monday morning : but the courts not sitting in Westminster hall that day , Mr.  p. found the hall very thin , and few members in it while he was standing in the hall expecting those who promised to meet there , he was twice informed one after another , that there were no guards at all at the house door , that any person Might freely go into it without any examination , there being but few members within , & the doors standing open . Whereupon he spoke to four or five members there met to go along with him into the house , and if they were freely admitted , to give notice of it to the rest to follow after if they were pleased , some of them were unwilling to go being formerly repulsed , thinking it better to make a narrative of their former forcible seclusion on Saturday , and to signify it by a letter directed to the speaker , subscribed with their names , which Mr.  p. conceived superfluous , since the door now stood freely open to all , without any guards to seclude any , and that as he apprehend in pursuit of major general Lambert's promise to Mr.  knightly ; and it would be idle to complain of that force by letter , wherewith they Might now acquaint those then sitting by their own mouths if there were cause . Upon which ground , Mr. Prynne , Mr. Annesly , and Mr. Hungerford about ten of the clock went to the house , where the doors of the lobby and house were at first knock opened to them by the ordinary doorkeepers , upon their telling them they were members , ( There being no guard at either door : ) who delivered to each of them as members a printed paper , entitled , a declaration of the parliament assembled at Westminster , Saturday 7.  May 1659.  They found above nine or ten of those who sat within the house , who courteously saluted them : after some short discourses , Mr. Ansley , and Mr. Hungerford leaving Mr.  p. in the house , ( Out of which he resolved not to stir upon any occasion for fear of a new forcible seclusion ) went back into the hall to acquaint the members in it , they Might freely enter if they pleased : Mr.  annesly returning , was forcibly kept out from reentring by some soldiers sent thither ( As he conceited ) for that purpose , wherewith he acquainted Mr.  p. by a note , desiring to speak with him at the house door ; which being opened , Mr.  annesly pressed to go in to speak with him , but was denied entrance , unless he would give his parole presently to come out again and not to stay whithin : whereupon he said , though they had often broken their parolls with him , yet he would not break his parole but would come forth so soon as he had spoken with Mr.  p. which he accordinly performed . After this , m. p. had conference with divers members as they came in , who said they were glad to see him in health , and meet him there again . The house being thin Mr.  p. turned to the statute of 17 caroli , c. 7. reading it to himself , and after that to two other members , telling them it was a doubt whether the old parliament was not determined by the King's death , notwithstanding that act which was fit to be first freely debated in a full house , before aught else was done . Upon which they demanded , why he came amongst them , if he made a scruple or thought it to be dissolved ? who answered to have it fully debated and resolved in a full and free house . 

After which Sir Arthur Haslerigge coming in , Mr.  p. saluted and told him , he was glad to meet him again in this place ; who presently answered , he had nothing to do to sit there as a member , being formerly secluded . Whereto he replied , he had as good right to sit there as himself , or any other member whatsoever , upon the account of the old parliament , if in being , having acted , written , suffered more in defence of the rights and privileges of parliament , than himself , or any sitting with him . Upon which Sir Henry Vane coming in , and stepping up to them , said in a menacing manner , Mr. Prynne , what make you here ? you ought not to come into this house , being formerly voted out , i wish you as a friend quietly to depart hence , else some course will be presently taken with you for your presumption : which Sir Arthur seconded , telling him , if he refused , that there would be a speedy course taken , and a charge put in against him , for his meetings on Saturday , and actings against the house : to which he replied , he had as good , if not a better right to sit than either of them : that he knew of no vote to seclude , nor of any there who had right or power to vote him out , being equally entrusted with themselves for the whole nation , and those he represented : that he was never convicted of any breach of his parliamentary trust , and hoped they would have both the justice and patience to hear , before they voted him out : and then he doubted not to make it appear , themselves were greater infringers of their trusts , and more worthy to be voted out than himself . As for their charge and menaces , he was no way affrighted with them , it being as free and lawful for him and other members , to meet and advise together , both as members and freemen of England , for preservation of themselves , the people's rights and parliaments privileges , when forcibly secluded , as they did on saturd•y ; as for themselves , or the army officers to meet privately and publicly , both in and out of the house , to deprive them of their privileges , as they had oft times done of late : that these high menacing words , where a very ill performance of their new published declaration , delivered him at the door , viz.  

that they were resolved ( by the gracious assistance of almighty God ) to apply themselves to the faithful discharge of their legal trust ; to assert , establish and secure , the property and liberty of the persons in reference unto all , both as men and as Christians . ) which if they should publicly violate and null by any unjust charge , or proceedings against him , who had suffered so much , both as an English freemen , Christian , and member too ( by their three years close imprisonment of him without cause or hearing ) under their new free-state , when first erected , and now again upon their very first reviving of it , though a member , only for coming into the house and meeting with other members , to claim their rights : it would highly reflect upon their intended new free-state , and make all out of love with it . 

Mr. p. having acquainted some secluded members in the hall with these passages in the house ; who agreeing to send a letter to the speaker touching their forcible seclusion on Saturday , he returned to Lincoln's inn , where he dined in the hall : immediately after dinner he repaired to Westminster with a resolution to go into the house , if admitted , or protest against the force , if secluded by the army guards there placed ; he found an whole troop of horse in the palace-yard , and a company of foot on the stairs , and court of requests , drawn thither to keep him and other members out ; whereupon he walked in the hall till past three a clock , expecting the speakers coming , with whom he intended to enter : at last , being informed that he went the back way without the mace , and was gone into the house , Mr.  p. to avoid tumult ( A company of unknown persons in the hall going after to see the issue ) went purposely forth towards the abbey , till all were gone from the steps ; and then going up only with one of his acquaintance , ( No member ) he found the door and stairs before the lobby strictly guarded with red-coats , who with their halberds crossed the door and steps so thick , that none could pass : whereupon Mr.  p. demanded entrance , saying he was a member ; and they being ignorant who he was , permitted him to pass through their pikes into the lobby , but secluded his friend from going up with him . When he came at the house door to enter , several officers of the army there placed ( One of them sitting in a chair ) told him , that he must not enter , and that they had special order to keep him out of the house : whereupon he protested against this their forcible double seclusion , as an high contempt and breach of privilege , contrary to their own and the sitting members declaration published that day , demanding in the name of all the Commons of England , and those for whom he was elected , free admission for himself and other members they kept out by a visible force of horse and foot , which was a worse and more real levying of war against the parliament , than the beheaded King or his party were guilty of . 

After which one of the army-officers told Mr. Prynne , he had deserted the good old cause : to which he replied , that the true good cause for which they were first raised , was only to defend the King's person , kingdom , parliament , all its members , privileges , and secure them against all force and violence whatsoever , which cause they had not only deserted , but betrayed , and fought against , contrary to all former engagements . To which cause he adhered , and desired admission to maintain it . To which he answered , that indeed was once their good old cause , but now it was not so , for since they had pursued another cause , Mr.  p. replied , that then they were real backsliders therein , and their cause neither old nor good , but bad , new , and destructive to the former old one . 

In sum . 

Thomas Campanella , in his Spanish universal monarchy , chap. 30. speaks thus ; all heresies when centred in atheism , are by the wise management of the church reduced into the way of truth ; for heresies have their periods as well as commonwealths , that first from lawful monarchy , are changed into a tyranny , from thence to an aristocracy , thence to a council of state , and at length to the confusions of democracy , and at last ( As the final rest of all tumultuous , and otherwise ceaseless distempers ) return again into kingship . 

Finis . 






















