THE Royal Address : OR , THE Lion's COMPLAINT AGAINST The Wild BEASTS of the Forest . 

When Fish and Fowl , and Wild Beasts of the Wood , 
Thought , Acted , Spoken , and likewise Understood , 
The Bear of Rome brought forth a Whelp or Son , 
That was both Heir and King of Lebanon . 
But O! that bloody Bitch , that 's void of Fear , 
Forced him his Subject-beasts in pieces tear , 
Until a Herd of Foxes , Sheep and Geese , 
With other Grumblers , of the Golden Fleece , 
Went slily , and their Grief , with Mourning Eye , 
Made known unto a Neighbouring Lion by , 
Who rescued them out of the Tyrant's Paws , 
Secured their Lives , and did restore their Laws . 
But now these Bruits , that never chew the Cud , 
( Or rather Monsters of Ingratitude ) 
They prove perfidious , false , and would devour 
Him whom they 're bound by Nature to Adore : 
wherefore the Royal Lion , in disdain , 
Against the thankless Beasts doth thus complain . 
AS I lay silent , couching in my Den , 
Beloved of Beasts , of fishes , Fowls and Men , 
A Herd of Bullocks , Foxes , Wolves and Hogs , 
With Mastiffs , Mongrels , Curs , & other Dogs , 
Approached my Court , with more than mournful eyes , 
And made my Den to Echo with their Cries ; 
A thing so strange , to see such beasts agree , 
Surprised my watchful Lioness and me . 
But , stupified , I stepped aside , and then 
I saw them beasts , but rational like men . 
And as I stood amazed , with bent knee , 
One of the Driven , with Tears , Petitioned me . 
Brave Prince , descended of the stem of Kings , 
Of whose great Valour every Forest ring's , 
Vouchsafe to hear our more than sad complaint , 
Which we , in strains of sorrow , do present . 
we 're chased from Lebanon , our Native Soil , 
Poor , destitute , and broke with Grief and Toil ; 
Our king 's turned Tyrant both and Cannibal , 
And , in a moment , would devour us all . 
he 's got the Bear of Rome upon his back , 
And now outdoes the Inquisition-rack . 
Ourselves he tears to pieces , and our Dams , 
He Heads and Hangs , and after burns in Flames . 
Our Young he keeps in Arms , at every Tree , 
To kill their Fathers , if occasion be ; 
And , if he takes offence at any Whelp , 
He ties him to a Rope , and makes him yelp . 
Our Lives , our Laws , our Liberties and all , 
Unless supported suddenly will fall , 
For he doth roar and swear that we shall go 
To Italy , and kiss the Dragon's Toe . 
Now , all the Beasts of Lebanon declare , 
That , after him , your Lioness is Heir ; 
But he , to frustrate both your Rights , hath bought 
A little Cub , which he hath slily brought 
Into his Den ; and now doth swear that he 
Shall Heir the Wood , from Shrub to Cedar-tree ; 
Although he looks not like a Lion's Whelp , 
But some Cur's Puppy , if you heard him yelp . 
My Dam , a Mid-bitch of a noble kin , 
Can tell you how the Lioness lay in . 
Now , mighty Prince , this is our woeful Case , 
Sick at the heart , though cheerful in the face ; 
Protect us from the bloody Roman Elf , 
In saving us , you do but serve yourself . 
I stood amazed , and nothing had to say , 
But drove the Proud , Rebellious beasts away , 
Not thinking that the Lion had the Face 
To cheat his own , to serve the Fox's Race . 
But still they lurked near my pleasant Den , 
And with their cries molested birds and men , 
Till I ( informed that what they spoke was true ) 
Called them poor Bruits , and no Rebellious Crew : 
I mustered then my forces of the Wood , 
And swum the Sea , to do the poor beasts good , 
Intending things to trial first to bring , 
And reconcile the Subject to his King. 
But , when I entrance in the Forest made , 
The Lion , Lioness , and Cub , were fled , 
And , in their flight , t' accomplish their desire , 
Set all the Trees of Lebanon in fire . 
I quenched the flames , convened the beasts , to see 
What was their aim , and who their King should be ; 
They proffered me the Crown , but I denied 
So weighty Care , whilst all the Herd replied , 
Great Prince , if you refuse to be our King , 
This Forest to Democracy we 'll bring , 
We can choose whom we will for King , now , since 
Our former's turned an Abdicated Prince ; 
And , though you take our proffer in disdain , 
Of Lebanon he 's ne'er be King again . 
Thus with their wheedling , cringing at my feet , 
I did accept the weighty , sour , and sweet ; 
But when I had this Diadem put on , 
And scarce was seated on the Royal Throne , 
The old red Lion , with a crew of Dogs , 
Invaded me , to kill my harmless Hogs : 
But I , in Person , went for their defence , 
And chased the red , Old , Raging Lion thence . 
All that I had , both Fortune , Life and Blood , 
I hazarded , to do my Subjects good ; 
And , in returning home , I did redress 
Their injuries , and cured their grievances , 
And , ever since , have ready been to grant 
All their Requests , according to their want . 
I 'm striving now their Int'rests to advance , 
To save them harmless from the Bear of France , 
That Beast of Prey , the Apostate of Rome , 
The Scourge of Europe , Curse of Christendom . 
I 'm not profuse , to keep the Forest poor , 
I keep no Cracks , no Wanton Bitch nor Whore ; 
I lead the Lame , I help the beasts that Halt , 
I cover Crimes , and pardon every fault ; 
And ever since I to their Forest came , 
I have still seemed more Lion , than a Lamb. 
And yet , although they have their whole desire , 
Ungrateful beasts ! against me do conspire . 
The Leopard , and Panther , first were they , 
Who with their sugared Words for aid did pray , 
Now they 're the first that strive me to betray . 
They make my Star of Virtue seem a Comet , 
And , Doglike , would drink up their own Vomit . 
Now let all beasts , that in the Forest be , 
Be Judge betwixt my cruel bruits and me . 
But hear , proud beasts ; now , since my paw is in , 
And Acts of Grace your favour cannot win , 
I 'll imp my Rage with Furies , like yourselves , 
And be revenged on all deceitful Elves . 
With Steel and Rope , I 'll pay you what is due , 
And that 's the way to teach you to be true . 
A Lion's Noble , but provoked to Rage , 
Hath no respect to Person nor to Age. 
Be wise in time then , turn your Coats once more , 
And run no further upon Justice score . 
Licenfed , 

April 30. 1691.  

