Heaven's Blessing , And Earth's joy.  

OR A true relation , of the supposed Sea-fights & Fireworks , as were accomplished , before the Royal Celebration , of the al-beloved Marriage , of the two peerless Paragons of Christendom , FREDERICK & ELIZABETH . 

With Triumphal Encomiasticke Verses , consecrated to the Immortal memory of those happy and blessed Nuptials . 

By john Taylor , 

Imprinted at London for joseph Hunt , and are to be sold 

To the illustrious Lamp of true worth , the noble , Ingenious , inditious , and understanding Gentleman Sir james Muray Knight . 

Unto the prospect of your Wisdom's eyes 
I consecrate these Epithalamies . 
Not that I think them worthy of your view , 
But for in love my thoughts are bound to you : 
I do confess myself unworthy far 
To write , in such high causes as these are , 
Which , Homer , Virgil nor the fluent Tully , 
In fitting terms could scarce express them fully : 
But since the Muses did their bounties show , 
And on me did poor Poesy bestow , 
I hold it best to play the thankful man , 
To spend their gifts the best ways that I can , 
And not like peddling Bastards of the Muses , 
That Like to Lawyers live on Time's abuses . 
Thus unto you I give it as it is , 
Desiring pardon where there 's aught amiss . 
Your Worships ever to be commanded in all integrity : john Taylor . 



Epithalamies . OR ENCOMIASTIC TRIUMPHAL VERSES , CONSECRATED to the Immortal memory , of the royal Nuptials , of the two Paragons of Christendom , Frederick and Elizabeth . With a description of the Sea-fights , and Fyreworkes , with other royal occurrences which were accomplished at the Princely Celebration . 

I Did not write nor publish ( this description of fire and water triumphs ) to the intent that they should only read the relation that were spectators of them for to such ( perhaps ) it will relish some what tedious like a tale that is too often told : but I did write these things , that those who are far remoted , not only in his Maistties' Dominions , but also in foreign territories , may have an understanding of the glorious pomp , and magnificent domination of our high and mighty Monarch King james : and further , to demonstrate the skills and knowledges that our warlike nation hath in engines fireworks and other military discipline , that there by may be known , that howsoever war seems to sleep , yet ( upon any lawful ground or occasion ) the command of our dread Sovereign can rouse her to the terror of all malignant opposers of his royal state and dignity . But to the purpose . 

In this representation of a Sea-fight there were 16.  Ships , 16.  Galleys and 6.  Friggots : of the which Navy , the Ships were Christians and the Galleys were supposed Turks , all being artificially rigged and trimmed , well maned and furnished with great ordinance and Musquettiers : one of the Christian fleet was a great vessel or a supposed Venetian Argosy , and another was a tall Ship , as it were appointed for the safe Conuoye of the Argosy . And for the avoiding of the troublesomnesse of Boats and Wherries , and other perturbatious multitudes , there was a lists or bounds made with Lighters , Hays , and other great Boats to the number of 250. or there about's : the one end of the Lists was as high ( almost ) as Lambeth bridge , and the other end as low as the Temple stairs , and so fastened to the sowth shore , or the upper end of the banks on sowthwarke side , in the form of a half Moon or Cemicircle , So that Boats might pass up and down the river betwixt London side and the Lighters any way . The aforesaid Turketh Galleys lying all at an Anchor ever against Westminster , in a haven or harbour made artificially with Masts and other provision , 60. yards into the River , which harbour or haven was belonging to a supposed Turkish or Barbarian Castle of Tunis , Algeirs , or some other Mahometan fortification , where the Galleys might scout out for purchase , and retire in again for safeguard at their pleasure . About 2. of the clock on saturday the 13. of February , the aforsaid Argosev and the other Venetian ship her convoy , sets forward from ward the Temple , and driving up with the wind and tide till they came as high as York house , where 4.  Galleys met and encountered with them : where upon a sudden there was friendly exchanging of small shot and great ordinance on both sides , to the great delectation of all the beholders : the Drums , Trumpets , Fises , Weights , Guns , shouts , & acclamations of the Mariners , Soldier's and spectators , with such reverberating Echoes of joy to and from , that there wanted nothing in this fight ( but that which was fit to be wanting ) which was ships sunk and torn in pieces , men groaning , rent and dismembered , some slain , some drowned , some maimed , all expecting confusion . This was the manner of the happy and famons battle of Lepanto fought betwixt the Turks and the Christians , in the year of grace 1571. or in this bloody manner was the memorable battle betwixt us and the invincible ( as it was thought ) Spanish Armado in the year 1588. but in the end , in this friendly fight ) the ship and Argosy were encompassed round by the Galleys , and surprised and taken : whereupon , the whole Fleet made towards them to rescue them , and revenge their received injuries . 

then there was a Eeacon flered by the Turks which gave warning to the Castle and the Galleys , of the coming of the Christian Fleet : then all the Ships and Galleys met in freíndly opposition and ymaginary hurleyburley battalions : then the lofty instruments of Wars clamorous encouragements sounded : the thundering Artillery roared , the Musqueteirs in numberless volleys discharged on all sides , the smoke ( as it were ) eclipsing Titans refulgent Beams , filling all the Air with a confused cloudy mistress The Castle and the Land adjacent , continually dischardging great shot in abundance at the Ships , and the Ships at them again : so that after this delightful battle had doutfully lasted three hours , to the great contentment of all the beholders , the Uictorie inclining to neither side , all being opposed foes , and combined friends : all victors , all tryumphers , none to be vanguishd , and therefore no conquerors . The Drums , Trumphets , Flutes and Guns , filling the air with repurrussive acclamations : upon which , for a Catastrophe or Period to these delightful royalties , command was given that the Retreat should be sounded on both sides . And thus these Princely rocreations were accomplished and finished . 

These things could not conveniently be printed in order as they were done , by reason of the diversity of them . 

For here I was fain to describe the fight of the ships & Galleys first , which was performed last . For the Fireworks were performed on Thursday night the 11. of February , and the fight was upon the Saturday following . 

At the which fireworks the master Gunner of England , on the shore did perform many skilful and ingenious exploits with great Bumbards , shooting up many artificial balls of fire into the air , which flew up in one whole fiery ball , & in their falling dispersed into diverse streams like Rainbows in many innumerable fires . After all which , was discharged a great peal of Chambers , to the contentment of the royal spectators , and the great credit of the performers . 

The true description of such part of the Fireworks as were devised and accomplished by Mr. john Nodes Gunner , and servant to the King ; most excellent Majesty . 

The Imperial and Beauteous Lady Lucida Queen of the Feminine Territories , of the man hating Amazonians , with whose bright eye dazzling Coruscancis , and whose Refulgent feature , the Black-sould hell commanding Magician Mango ( A Tartarian born , ) was so ensnared and captivated , that for her love , and to be assured to enjoy her , he would set all Hell in an uproar , and pluck Don Belzebub by the beard : assuredly persuading himself , that without her he could not live , and for her he would attempt any thing : but she having vowed herself ever to be one of Vesta's Usataries , always kept Cupid out at the arms end : and bad Madam Venus make much of stump-footed Vulcan , and keep home like a good huswife , for she had no entertainment for her . 

Whereupon this hellish Necromancer Mango , ( being thus repulsed ) converts all his love to outrageous rigour , and immediately , with his Charms , erorcismes , and potent execrable incantations , he raises a strong impregnable Pavilion , in the which he immures , and encloses this beautiful Amazonian Queen with her attendant Ladies , where ( though they lived in captivity and bondage , yet ) they had variety of Games and pleasant sports allowed by the Magician , in hope that time would work an alteration in her fair flinty breast . And for her sure Guard in her absence , he had erected by Magic , another strong Tower , as a watch house , wherein he had placed a fiery Dragon , and an invincible Giant : ( of whom I will speak in another place hereafter . ) 

Now to this aforesaid Pavilion wearied with toil and travail , the Great unresistable Champion of the world , and the uncontrollable Patron Saint George comes : and seeing so bright and luculent a Goddess , ( according as his necessity required ) demanded entertainment , whereby he might be refreshed after his laborious atchivements , and honourable endeavours . 

The courteous Queen ( although the cared not for the society of man ) seeing his outward or external feature and warlike acouterments , did presently resolve with herself that so fair an outside could not be a habitation for fowl Treachery , and with most debonaire gesture , admits his entrance into the Pavilion , where after he had feasted a while , she relates unto him the true manner and occasion , of her unfortunate thraldom : Saint George ( ever taking pleasure in most dangerous attempts , holding it his chiefest glory to help wronged Ladies ) vows , that as soon as Rhoebus roused himself from the Antipodes , he would quest the burning Dragon , Conquer the big boned Giant , subvert the enchanted Castle , and enfranchise the Queen with her followers , or else die in the enterprise thereof . After which promise of his , the Queen to pass away the time , delights him with these pastimes following , being all fireworks . 

First , the Pavilion is beleagerd or environed round about with fires , going out of which , many fiery balls fly's up into the Air , with numbers of smaller fires ascending , that cemicircled Cynthia is ( as it were ) eclipsed with the flashes , and the stars are hoodwinked with the burning exhalations . 

Secondly , is seen a royal hunting of Bucks , and Hounds , and Huntsmen , flying and chase one another round about the Pavilion ( as if Diana had lately transformed Actaeon , and his ignorant dogs ready to prey on his Carcase ) from whence continually is flying many fires dispersed every way : The lower part of the Pavilion always burning round about , giving many blows , and great reports , with many fires flying aloft into the Air . 

Thirdly , there doth march round about the Pavilion Artificial men , which shall cast out fires ( as before ) as it were in skirmish : another part of the Pavilion is all in a Combustious flame , where Rackets , Crackers , Breakers , and such like , gives blows and reports without number . 

Fourthly , the Queen of Amazonia with all her train of Virgin Ladies , with fires , marcheth round as the men did before , with the fire flying despearsedly diverse ways : the whilst another part of the Pavilion is fired , with many blows and reports , and fires flying aloft into the air , from whence it comes down again in streaching flakes of slashing fire . 

Fifthly , aloft with the Turret , shall runns ( whirling round ) a fyerie Globe , with the Turret and all on fire , with many more greater blows than before had been heard , and diverse and sundry other sorts of fires ( than any of the former ) proceeding from thence , and flying into the air in great abundance . 

All which things being performed , and the undaunted Knight Saint George taking his leave of the Amazonian Queen Lucida , he mounts upon his Steed , and adventerously rides towards the enchanted Tower of Brumond . 

Now these disports being ended , wherein Saint George's entertainment was only expressed , with the Queen's relation of her bondage , this brave Champion was seen to ride over the bridge to combat with these aforesaid Monsters , the Dragon and Giant : all which was expressed in the next device of Mr. Thomas Butler : and so I end , with my hearty invocations to the Almighty to send the Bride and Bridgraome the years of Methushalah , the fortitude of joshua the wisdom of Solomon , the wealth of Crefsus , and last of all an endless Crown of Immortality in the highest heavens . 

FINIS . 

john Nodes . A true description of the Platform of a part of the fireworks , devised and made by Mr. Thomas Butler Gunner , and servant to the King's Royal Majesty . 

This enchanted Castle or Tower of Brumond is in height 40. foot and 30 square , between which and the Pavilion of the Amazonian Queen , is a long Bridge , on the which Bridge , the valiant and heroic Champion Saint George being mounted on horseback , makes towards the Castle of Brumond , which being perceived by the watchful Dragon , ( who was left by Mango the Conjurer as a Sentinel ) is encountered by him , where as Saint George ( being armed at all points ( but especially ) with an unrebated courage ) having in his Helmet a burning flaming Feather , and in one hand a burning Lance , and in the other a fiery Sword , with which weapons he assails the dreadful Dragon , with such fury and Monster-quelling streaks , as if the Cyclops had been forging , and beating Thunder bolts on Vulcan's Anvile : where in conclusion , after a terrible and long endured Combat , with his Lance he gores the Hellehound under the wing , that he presently aftermost hideous roaring , and belching of fire , is vanguished and slain : at which the terrible shaped Giant rises ( who having sat as a spectator of this bloody battle upon a great stump of a tree at the Castle Gate ) and addresses himself towards Saint George , meaning to revenge the death of the Dragon , and to swallow his enemy for a modieum : but at their first encounter , the blows on both sides fell like Thunder claps , enforcing lightning , and fiery exhalations to sparkle , from whence their powerful strokes lighted : at last the Monstar gaping wide , as an Arch in London Bridge , runs furiously , intending to swallow his adversary at a bit : which Saint George seeing , upon the sudden thrust his Sword into his greedy throat and overthrewe him : at which the Monster yells and roars forth such a terrible noise , as if the Centre of the earth had cracked , that with the uncouth din thereof , the Neighbouring hills , woods , and valleys , seemed to tremble like an earth quake . 

The Gyane lying at the mercy of Saint George , entreats him to spare his life , and he will show him the way how he shall conquer the Castle , and bring the enchanter to his everlasting downfall . 

Upon which promise , Saint George and the Giant walk into the Castle together , where he tells Saint George that there is an enchanted fountain , and whosoever can attain to drink of it , shall be he whom the Fates have ordained to be the conclusion of the Castle's glory . 

In the mean space , whilst these things were doing , the Magician Mango , having intelligence of the dangerous estate of his Castle , and fearing the loss of his Lady : suddenly mounts him on a flying invinsible devil , and in a moment alights within the Castle , upon whom St. George makes a prosent conquest . 

The Castle hath on the top thereof a fiery Fountain , which burns and sends up Rackets into the air , with many reports and blows : some great , and some less , and fire dispersed many ways in great abundance with innumerable lights round about . 

Secondly , the Magician is taken with his Conjuring Sceptre in his hand , and bound to a Pillar by Saint George and burned , with store of lights ( as before ) with fires and. Rackets ascending and descending too and from in the air . 

Thirdly , the four squares of the Tower are stered , with abundance of lights , with Rackets flying into the air , with hers dispersed , and scattered diverse and sundry ways , and with reports and blows , some great , and some less , according to their making . 

Fourthly , the fours Turrets are fired with fire , and innumerable lights , with abundance of Rackets flying to and from in the air , giving diverse reports , as before . 

then the main Castle is fyered , and upon two of the corner Terrets are two Globes fyered , and betwixt each Globe at two other corner Turrets , are two men , catching as it were at the Globes which still turn from them , and they chassing and following the Globes , still burning and turning till all be extinguished with fire : always Rackets flying and reports thwacking , and lights burning . 

Thomas Butler . 

William Bettis his invention , of such part of the fireworks as were performed by him at the Royal Celebration : which he had contrived in such sort , that if the weather had been Rainy or Windy , yet his dessignments should have been accomplished . 

A Castle with diverse fireworks , representing and assuming diverse variable shapes , and immagiary forms : which continued the space of an hour or thereabouts : the nature and quality of which firework , was performed as followeth . 

1 First , there was seen 13. great fires , to fly to and from round about the Castle , whereby it seemed to be beleagerd or Circumvolved with fires , which yielded a most pleasing object to all the spectators . 

2 Secondly , a flight of great store of Rackets was seen to ascend into the air , and descend again , which in their descending were extinguished . 

3 Thirdly , the whole Castle was all on fire , wherein was seen many things very delightful . 

4 Fourthly , was seen many Buttons fly , dispersed diverse ways from the Castle , with great cracks , blows , and reports , in great number . 

5 Next that , was seen a Stag or Hart , hunted and chased with dogs , all their bodies being artificially made , and preportiond in one flame of fire , where the following Hounds were plainly seen , to pull down and vanguish the Stag which they before had chased . 

6 Sixtly , there was seen a great flight of Rackets , with two or three fires piece . 

7 Seaventhly , were seen two or three hundreth fires flying from the Castle , and then flying to and from in and out , many ways all together . 

8 Next which , was seen a great slight of Rackets , with many great fires , some of the said fires breaking into many parts , diverse ways dispersed in abundance , which fires were seen to fall burning into the water . 

9 Ninthlyt , was seen many Rackets flying into the air in great abundance , giving many blows , Cracks or reports , numberless . 

10 Tenthly , was seen diverse other Rackets flying aloft into the air , which Rackets did assimilate the shapes or proportions of men , women , fowls , beasts , fishes , and other forms and figures . 

11 Last of all , was heard 100 blows and reports as loud as the report of a reasonable Chamber is able to give , and so with fires , lights , Rackets , and such like , ( to the delight of all the beholders , and the great credit of the inventor of this firework ) all was extinguished and concluded . 

William Bettis Mr. john Tindall Gunner and servant to the King's royal Majesty , The true description of such part of the Fireworks , as were by him devised and performed at this Royal Triumphs . 

A Castle , old and very Ruinous , called the Castle of Envy situated and erected on a Rock ( all ragged and horide to behold ) called the Rock of Ruin , encompassed round and drenched in a troublous Sea , called the Sea of Disquiet : the Captain of this Castle name was Discord with his Liettenant Lawles , ancient Hatred , Sericant Malice , Corporal Contention , with his Lancsprezado Hellhound . The Rock or foundation of this Castle being all replenished with Adders , Snakes , Toads , Serpents , Scorpions , and such venomous vermin , from whose throats were belched many fires , with Crackers , Rackets , blows and reports in great number . 

To the subversion of this malevolent Edifices , there came three Ships , the one of them being called Goodwill , in whom Loyalty was Captain , and Zeal was master . 

The second Ship was named the True-love , in whom Trust was Captain , and perseverance was master . 

The third Ship was called Assurance , in whom Circumspection was Captain , and Providence the Master . 

These three Ships and Captains , with their valorous and confident assotiates , assaults this Castle of Envy , where after half an hour's fight , or thereabouts , ( by the invincible prowess of the assailants ) the Hellborn defendants were vanquished , their Castle utterly razed , demollished , and subverted , with Rackets , breakers , blows and reports innumerable . 

The description of such part of the Fireworks as were devised and accomplished by Mr. William Fishenden Gunner , and servant to his Majesty . 

A Pyramids or lofty Platform , in the form of a Triangled spire , with a Globe fixed on the top thereof , the whole work turning and burning , the space almost of half an hour , or near thereabouts : from whence proceeded many Rackets , fires , blows and reports , in great numbers , to the great delight and contentment of the King the Queen , the Prince , the Princess Elizabeth , the Prince Palatine , and diverse others , the Nobility , the Gentry and Commons of this Kingdom . 

FINIS . 

Epithaleamies . 

OR ENCOMIASTIC TRIUMPHAL Verses , consecrated to the immortal memory of the royal Nuptials , of the two Princes and Paragons of Christendom , Frederick and Elizabeth . 

With A description of the Sea-fights , and Fireworks , with other royal occurrences which were accomplished at the princely Celebration . 

By john Taylor . 

Printed for Henry Gosson , and are to be sold at his shop on London Bridge . 1613.  

Epithallamies' . OR ENCOMIASTIC TRIUMPHAL VERSES CONSECRATED to the Immortal memory , of the royal Nuptials , of the two Parragons' of Christendom , Frederick and Elizabeth . With a description of the Sea-fights , and Fyreworkes , with other royal occurrences which were accomplished at the Princely Celebration . 

Hhe that upon the Poles hath hinged the skies 
Who made the Spheres , the Orbs , & Planets seven 
Whose justice damns , whose mercy justifies , 
What was , is , shall be , in earth , Hell , or heaven : 
Whom men and Angels lauds and magnifies , 
( According as his law's command hath given ) 
The poor , the Rich , the Beggar and the King , 
In several Anthems his great praises sing . 
then as the meanest do their voices stretch 
To lewd the sempiternal Lord of Lords : 
So I a lame Decreppit-witted wretch , 
With such poor phrases as my skill affords : 
From out the Circuit of my brain did fetch , 
Such weak invention as my wit records . 
To write the triumphs of this famous I 'll , 
On which both heaven and earth with joy doth smile . 
My Genius therefore my invention moves 
To sing of Britain's great Olympic Games 
Of mirth , of heaven and earth beloved loves . 
Of princely sports , that noble minds inflames 
To do the utmost of their best behoves ; 
To fill the world with their achieved fames . 
TO ataine eternities all passing bounds , 
Which neither Fate , nor Death , nor Time confounds . 
Guns , Drums , and Trumpets , Fireworks , Bonfires , Bells , 
With acclamations , and applausefull noise ; 
Tilts , Attorneys , Barriers , all in mirth excels , 
The air reverberates our earthly joys . 
This great triumphing , Prophet-likefore-tells 
( I hope ) how Leathes lake all grief destroys . 
For now black sorrow from our land is chased , 
And joy and mirth each other have embraced . 
How much Ichovah hath this Island blessed , 
The thoughts of man can never well conceive : 
How much we lately were with woes oppressed , 
For him whom Death did late of life bereave . 
And in the midst of grief , and sad unrest , 
To mirthful sport he freely gives us leave : 
And when we all were drenched in black despair , 
joy conquered grief , and comfort vanquished care 
thou high and mighty Frederick the fifth , 
Count Palatine , and Palsgrane of the Rhine : 
Bavares great Duke , when God on high doth lift , 
To be the tenth unto the'worthies nine . 
Be ever blessed with thy beloved Gift , 
Whom God , and best of men makes only thine : 
Let annually the day be given to mirth , 
Wherein thy Nuptials gave our joys new birth . 
Right gracious Princess , great Elizabeth 
In whose Heroic , pure , White , ivory breast , 
True virtue lives , and living flourisheth , 
And as their Mansion hath the same possessed : 
Beloved of God above , and men beneath , 
In whom the Goddesses and graces rest . 
By virtue's power , jehovah thee hath given , 
Each place doth seem , ( where thou remain'st ) a heaven 
The Royal blood of Emperors and Kings , 
Of Potent Conquerors , and famous Knights 
Successively from these two Prince's springs : 
Who well may claim , these titles as their rights : 
The Patrons Christendom to Union brings , 
Whose unity remoted lands unites . 
And well in time ( I hope ) this sacred work , 
Will hunt from Christian lands the faithless Turk . 
Since first the framing of this world's vast Room , 
A fitter , better match was not combined : 
So old in wisdom , young in Beauty's bloom , 
And both so good and graciously inclined . 
And from this day , until the day of doom : 
I doubt succeeding ages shall not find : 
Such wisdom , beauty , grace , compact together , 
As is innate in them , in both , in either . 
None ( but the Devil and his infernal crew ) 
At this beloved heavenly match repines , 
None ( but such fiends , which hell on earth doth spew : ) 
Will wish Eclipse of their illustrious shyves , 
The Gods themselves , with rare inventions new , 
With inspiration man's device refines : 
And with their presence undertakes these tasks , 
devices , Morions , Revels , plays , and Masks . 
The thund'rers Bride hath left her heavenly bed , 
And with her presence this great Wedding graces ; 
Hymen in Saffron Robes enveloped : 
joins and accords these lovers loved embraces : 
Yea all the Gods down to the earth are fled , 
And amongst our joys their pleasures enterlaces . 
Immortals joins with mortals in their mirth , 
And makes the Court their Paradise on earth . 
Majestic jove hath left his spangled Throne 
To dance Levaltoes as this Bridal feast : 
Infusing jovial glee in every one , 
The high , the low , the greatest and the least . 
Sad minds to sable melancholy prone , 
Great jove their vital parts hath so possessed : 
That all are raped in sportful ecstasies , 
With shouts and Clamours echoing in the skies . 
Apollo from two topped Muses Hill 
Light of the Sisters nine hath brought from thence , 
( Leaving Melpomena alone there still 
To muse on sad and Tragical events ) 
The rest all stretching their all matchless skill 
To serve this Royal Princess , and this Prince . 
Thus Sol descended from his Radiant shrine , 
Brings Poesy and Music down divine . 
The wrathful God of War in Burnished Arms 
Lays by his angry all-confounding mood : 
And in the lists strikes up sweet loves Alarms , 
Where friendly wars draws no unfriendly blood , 
Where honours fire the noble spirit warms 
To undertake such Actions as are good . 
Thus mighty Mars these triumphs doth increase 
With peaceful war , and sweet contention's peace . 
The Queen of love these Royal sports attend , 
And at this Banquet deigns to be a guest : 
Her whole endeavours , wholly she doth bend , 
She may in love's delights outstrip the best : 
For who so ere doth Hymen's laws pretend 
If Venus be but absent from the feast , 
They may ( perhaps ) be merry in some sort , 
But 't is but painted mirth , and eyrie sport . 
Bright Maia's son , the God of tricks and sleights 
Hath opened the treasure of his subtle wit : 
And as a servant on this wedding weights 
With masks , with revels , and with triumphs fit , 
His rare inventions , and his quaint conceits 
( 'twixt heaven aloft , and hell's infrerall pit ) 
He in immaginary shows affords 
In shape , form , method , and applausfull words . 
Old sullen Saturn hid his moody head 
In dusky shades , of black Cimmerian night : 
And wavering Luna closely cooched to bed , 
Her various change she knew would not delight 
The loyal minds where constancy is bred , 
Where Proteus t thoughts are put to shameful flight . 
These two ( by jove's command were straight bound 
To stay at home ( as better lost then found ) 
Cupid descended from the Crystal skies 
And leaves behind his golden feathered darts : 
In steed of whom he makes fair Ladies eyes 
The piercing weapons of true loving hearts . 
And be amongst these high solemnities , 
His awful presence freely he imparts , 
To all in general with mirthful cheer , 
All sports the better if loves God be there . 
The offspring of the high celestial jove 
His braine-bred daughter , and his thigh born son 
One with advice of wisdom showed her love , 
And tother bounteously made plenty run : 
Where wine in streams 'gainst one another strove , 
Where many a cask was bankrupt and undone , 
Deprived the treasure of the fruitful vines : 
By Bacchus' bounty , that great God of wines . 
Thus jove , and juno , Imps of aged Ops 
With wise Minerva , Mars and Mercury : 
Resplendent Sol with music's strains and stops 
Fair Venus' Queen of love's alacrity , 
loves God with shafts betiped with golden tops 
And Bacchus showering sweet humidity , 
Gods , Goddesses , the Graces and the Muses , 
To grace these Triumphs all their cunnings uses , 
amongst the rest was all recording Fame 
Insculping noble deeds in brazen leaves : 
That meager Envy cannot wrong that name , 
Where brave Heroick acts the mind upheaves : 
Fame's golden Trump will through the world proclaim 
Whom Fortune , Fate nor Death nor Time bereaves . 
Thus like a Scribe Fame waited to record . 
The Nuptials of this Lady and , this Lord  
All-making-marring Time that turneth never 
To these proceedings , still hath been auspicious , 
And in his progress will ( I hope persever 
To make their days and hours to be delicious . 
Thus Fame , and Time affords their best endeavour 
Unto this royal match to be propitious : 
Time in all pleasure through their lives will pass 
Whilst Fame records their fames in leaves of brass 
You sons of judas and Achitophel 
Whose damned delights are treasons , blood , and death : 
th' almighty's power your haughty prides will quell , 
And make you vassals , vessels of his wrath , 
Let all that with these Princes worse than well , 
Be judged and doomed to everlasting scathe , 
For 't is apparent , and experience proves 
no hat prevails , where great jehovah loves . 
To whose Omnipotent eternal power , 
I do commit this blessed beloved pair : 
O let thy graces daily on them shower , 
Let each of them be thine adopted Heir : 
Raise them at last to thy Celestial Bower , 
And seat them Both in lasting glories Chair . 
In fine , their earthly days be long and blessed : 
And after , bettred in eternal rest . 
A Sonnet to be Imperious majestic mirror of Kings , james , great Britain's Monarch . 

Great Phoebus spreads his Rays on good and ill , 
Dame Tellus feeds the Lion and the Rat , 
The smallest Sails God Aeol's breath doth fill : 
And Thetis harbours both the Whale and Spratte . 
But as the Sun doth quicken dying Plants , 
So thy illustrious shine doth glad all hearts : 
And as the earth supplies our needful wants , 
So doth thy bounty guerdon good deserts . 
And like the airy Eoll's pleasant gales , 
thou fill'st with joy the Sails of rich and poor , 
And as the sea doth harbour Sprats and Whales , 
So thou to high and low , yeald'st harbours store . 
Thus Sea , Air , Earth , and Titan's fiery face , 
Are Elemental servants to thy grace . 
To Life . 

Since that on earth thou wondrous wand'ring guest , 
Arithmeticians never number can 
The several lodgings thou hast ta'en in man , 
In Fish , in Fowl , in tame , or brutish beast 
Since all by thee from greatest to the least , 
Are squared ( and well compared ) unto a span , 
O fleeting Life take this my counsel than , 
Hold long possession in the royal breast : 
dwell ever with the King , the Queen , the Prince , 
The gracious Princess , and her Princely Spouse , 
In each of these thou hast a lasting house : 
Which Fate , nor Death , nor Time cannot convince . 
And when to change thy lodging thou art driven , 
Thyself and they exalted be to heaven . 
To Death . 

TO thee whose avaricious greedy mood , 
Doth play at sweepe-stake with all living things : 
And like a Horseleech Quaffes the several blood , 
Of Subjects , Abjects , Emperors and Kings : 
That high and low , and all must feel thy slings , 
The Lord , the Loon , the Caitiff and the Keasar , 
A beggar's death as much contentment brings 
To thee , as did the fall of julius Ceasar . 
then since the good and bad are all as one , 
And Larks to thee , no better are then Kites , 
Take then the bad , and let the good alone , 
Feed on base wretches , leave the worthy wights . 
With thee the wicked evermore will stay , 
But from thee , Fame will take the good away . 
To Eternity . 

Thou that beyond all things dost go so far , 
That no Cosmographers could ever survey , 
Whose glory ( brighter than great Phoebus' Car ) 
Doth Shine , where night doth never eclipse the day : 
To thee I consecreate these Prince's acts , 
In thee alone let all their beings be : 
Let all the measures of their famous tracts 
In thee begin , but never end like thee . 
And when thy servant Time , gives Life to Death . 
And Death surrenders all their lives to Fame : 
O then inspire them with celestial breath , 
With Saints and Martyrs to applawd thy name . 
Thus unto thee ( as thine own proper rights ) 
I consecreate these matchless worthy wights . 
FINIS . 

john Taylor . 



  God.  There are some that think scorn that I being of mean degree should write of such Princely occurrences . But I make hard shift to shoulder into the press in despite of envy    The lake or gulf of forgetfulness of the which I hope our griefs have sufficiently carrowsed ,   Prince Henry .   God.    The Princess Elizabeth . By this happy marriage , great Britain , France , Denmark , Germany , & the most part of Christendom are united , either in affinity or consanguinity . That which God loves most , the Devil hate's most : and I am sure that none but the blackcrew are offended with these Royal Nuptials .   june . Where the planet jupiter hath sole predominance there is all Royal mirth and jovial Alacrity .   Soll.    Parnassus .   The muses .   A tragical mournful those who hath been here already , but I hope now she 's lame of the gout , that she 'll keep home for ever .   Wars   Venus .   All , worth nothing .   Mercury .   A dogged melancholy planet , a malevolent opposite to all mirth .   The moon , who doth never continue at a stay , and therefore she absented herself from those delights which I hope will be permanent .   Saturn and Luna for in deed the nights , were dark at the wedding because the Moon shined    Minerus , whom the poet's fame to be the Goddess of wisdom , born and bred in the brain of jupiter .   Bacchus , whom his father jove saved from Abortive birth from his mother Semell & sowed him upon his thigh till the time of his birth was come to a period Ovid Lib. 3.    Time's progress . 