News and strange News from St. Christopher's of a tempestuous Spirit , which is called by the Indians a Hurry-cano or whirlwind . 

Which happeneth in many of those Lands of America or the West-indieses , as it did in August last , about the 5. day . 1638.  

Blowing down houses , tearing up trees by the roots , and it did puff men up from the earth , as they had been Feathers , kill diverse men . 

Whereunto is added the true and last relation of the dreadful accident which happened at Withicombe in Devonshire the 21. of October last passed . 

Imprinted at London by P. O. for Francis Coules dwelling in the Old-bailey . 1638.  

New and Strange News from St. Christopher's , of a tempestuous Spirit , which is called by the Indians a Hurry Canon , which happeneth in many of those Islands of America , or the West-indieses , as it did in August last the 5. 1638.  

GOD , who is every way infinite and incomprehensible , is pleased sometimes in his just Judgements , to punish or restrain by Terrors and Affrighting , most obstinate and rebellious sinners : for those that will not lovingly be alured to obey him for his Goodness and unspeakable Mercies , will be fearfully enforced to abide the rigour of his most upright and severe Justice , by which means He makes his ways to be known upon Earth , and his saving health amongst all Nations . And it is to be noted , that where God is least known and honoured , there the Devil hath most power and domination . But he that drew light out of darkness , hath often ( and can when he will ) draw good out of evil ? for through slavery and bondage many people and Nations that were Heathens , and barbarous , have been happily brought to Civility and Christian Liberty . The Great Alexander's conquests , those whom he overcame , learned to build Towns , Cities , and defencible places , to apparel their naked bodies , in their thraldom they found Religion : and whereas in their Freedoms they did use to kill their aged Parents inhumanely , to eat them with savage , ravenous , most greedy Gormandizing , by Servitude they learned more reverend Duty ; they were taught the Rites and Laws of Matrimony : And whereas in their licentious freedom , they bedded with their Mothers , Sisters , Daughters , and Nieces , not sparing any Kindred , Alliance , Propinquity , or any degree of blood or consanguinity , they by Servitude learned better life and manners ; and also by being conquered and overcome , they were taught the use of Arms , the practice of Arts , and the laudable Experience of Tillage and Husbandry . And such as these rude people were in ancient times ; even such were the first Inhabitants of this our Island of great Britain , until such time as more civiller Nations did conquer , tame , and teach us . 

Yet in the latest Days of the World all are not civilised ; there are yet many Heathens , Indians , and barbarous Nations unconverted : as for the known Examples in America , and in diverse Islands adjacent , where this Hurri Canon is frequent ; of which with the manner of the Description of it as followeth . 

From whence the name of it is derived , I know not ; but the Indians do call it Hurri Canon , or Hurri Caenae , or Cani : some say that it comes to the same place once in five years , but that is uncertain , for it hath no certain or set times of either years or days for the coming of it . It is held by the Natives to be a Spirit , it comes with such an extraordinary violence , with Thunder , Lightning , and impetuous gusts of wind , ( as it hath done many times ) for it touches not all places there , but sometimes it comes but once , or never in a man's age to one place , and more often to another , according as it is swayed or hurried with its own robustuous motion , or as the influences and force of the Planets do drive it : and the Indians are so skilful , that they do know two or three or four days before hand of the coming of it , and then they do make provision to prevent the harm which it may do unto them , by such means as shall be related in the latter end of this Treatise : the Indians do know when it will come , by the marks or signs here mentioned . They do observe that just so many days as it will be before the Hurri Canon doth come , so many Circles will be as it were fringed and gleaming about the Moon : as if it be but one day before it come , than there will be but one Circle ; if two Circles , than it will be two days ; and so perhaps three or four Circles , as it did lately at Saint Christopher's , where it came in that fearful and unresistable fury , on the fifth day of August last , 1638.  Where , although that the Dutch and English had warning of the coming of it , by the knowledge that the Indians had by observation of the Moon and the Circles , and that all possible means was used for the safeguard of men ships , and goods , yet when it came , the force of it was so great , and continued so vehemently the space of four days and nights without intermission , that maugre all the industry that could be , it sunk five Ships , whereof two were English , and three were Dutch ; and of Englishmen , Dutchmen , and Indians , it did drown and kill to the number of Seventy and five persons , besides the harm it did to many Houses and goods . 

Where the Here or Hurri Canon comes , the Wind doth blow so strong and forcible , that it will puff men from the ground into the Air five or six foot high , as if they were no more but rags , clouts , or feathers ; and so violent it is , that it leaves not a lease upon any Bough or Tree : and likewise it overthroweth many Trees , rending them up by the roots , so that the Inhabitants ( when they are warned of the coming of the Hurri Canon by the Circles about the Moon ) they do lordship off the limbs and great heads off from the Trees , because the violent and outrageous Tempest of the tempestuous Winds shall have the less force and power to overturn them ; and especially those Trees which they do intend to preserve and keep for bearing of fruit , they do commonly cut off , and graft them again by our English advice . 

The people all of them forsake their Houses , as not daring to remain in them for fear that they should be blown down about their ears ; at which dangerous times they do creep for safety into holes Caves , pits , Dens and hollow places of the earth , which are either natural of themselves , or digged and framed by Art or laborious industry of man , which places are good harbours and defences against the Hurry-cano . They do likewise tie or make fast Hamackoes or hanging Cabin unto two Trees that are lopyed , and then the people do get into those Cabins , & so they do lie down in them , being hanged above the ground six or seven foot , either with strong Ropes or iron chains ; and so they swing two and again like a Bell when it is rung , when this tempest is ; their Hamackoes are made either of course linen cloth , or of strong stuff made of twisted threads spun out of the rinds of trees ; some who have not these Cabins , do for fear bind themselves with cords , singlely or severally to diverse trees , and so they do remain bound until the fury of the Hurry-cano is past . And this is the true relation of the nature and quality of it , and also partly of the harms which it did in the month of August last passed . The Indians do foreknow it by certain circles which appear about the Moon , and those Indians that are servants under our English , did give some notice , or else far more hurt had ensued ; and is when the Moon hath diverse circles like mists and fogs about it , and of a flaming colour , and by some other signs , the people do sometimes save themselves and their goods , in making caves or cellars in the ground , or else they lose all . 

But for a late remarkable proof of God's mercy and power , in drawing good out of Evil ; I desire the Reader to note that in the year 1609. eight ships were bound from London unto Virginia , Sir Thomas Gates , and Sir George Summer Knights , were General and Admiral of the Fleet , and Captain Newport was Vice-admiral . The Admiral Ship , wherein Sir George Summer was , was by a Hurry-cano dispersed and sundered from the rest of the Fleet , and with the greatness of the storm driven between two rocks at the Island of Bermudas , where his ship stuck fast , and was there lost and split . But he landed all his men safe , with some of his chiefest goods , where he found good relief of Swine , Fish , and Fowl . But Sir Thomas Gates and the other Ships did give Sir George with his men to be utterly lost & cast away , but he made such shift , that with Timber that he found , and felled in the Island , he caused two Ships to be built , with the which he sailed from the Bermudaes to Virginia , ( after he had been ten Months supposed dead ) where he was most joyfully welcomed : and thus out of this great danger ( which in man's imagination was evil ) God was graciously pleased to make it the happy finding and discovery of that good and fruitful Island , the Plantation whereof is now so profitable and beneficial to the English Adventures ; and the Bermudaes , with some other Islands , are at this time called the Summer Islands , in memory of Sir George Summer , who was the first discoverer of them : and thus much shall suffice for the true Report and Description of the Hurri Cano.  

Innumerable of other the like of such things as these , I have formerly related , and many of them are Recorded in our own Histories , to have happened in our own Country , which who so do desire to read more , may see them amply and truly recorded in the works of the learned Cambden , painful Speed , Stowe , and Howes , Histories and Chronicles , wherein they may be certainly informed , that former Times have afforded as strange and fearful Signs and warnings , as this prodigious Tempest and lamentable Accident at Worthycombe , near Dartmoores in Devonshiere , as you may read in these ensuing Verses the whole truth , as followeth . 

A true Relation in Verse , of the strange accident which happened at Wit by comb in Devonshiere . 

th' Almighty was , is , shall be still the same , 
Who with his word did all of nothing frame ; 
Whose glory lightens all , whose Voice is Thunder . 
Whose mercy o'er his works , each work a wonder 
Whose Powerful arm 's not shortened , but his Will , 
( Unlimited ) is as his pleasure still . 
The sacred Text unto our Faith presents , 
How God plagued sinners with the Elements 
Of Water , Earth , Air , and consuming Fire , 
All Creatures are his Soldiers , in his Ire ; 
With means , with small means , with no means at all 
He aids his flock ; and gives his foes the fall : 
With Water he did first the World confound , 
Eight persons only saved , the rest were drowned ; 
When Sodoms' crying sins , to Heaven assumed , 
By fire from Heaven they were consumed : Inburned . 
Samaria's Captains with their fifties , slain 
By fire , when they Elias would have ta'en ; 
When Corah did rebel ( with heart unhallowed ) 
th' earth gaped , him wth his companions swallowed . 
By putrid Air ( for Ishaies offence ) 
Died seventy thousand of the Pestilence ; 
he 's Lord of Hosts , and when man runs amiss . 
The meanest thing God's mighty Soldier is ; 
Plagues , Botches , Blains , all mortal Maladies ; 
Grasshoppers , Darkness , Murrain , Frogs , Lice , Flies , 
With Gedeons' Pitchers , and with Shamgars' Goad , 
His Enemies he under foot hath trod ; 
With Foxes , and the jawbone of an Affe , 
He mighty Miracles hath brought to pass , 
Thus with Contemptible despised things , 
He tameth Tyrant's ; and He Conquers Kings : 
Thus Heaven , Earth , Hell , Seas , and th'ut most Coasts 
Declare him still to be the Lord of Hosts : 
His Power , by judeth ( a weak woman's hand ) 
slew Holophornes , foiled the Assyrian Band , 
By jacls hammered Nail , and David's Sling , 
God doth his foes to fell confusion bring : 
he 's still the same he was , and changes never , 
But yesterday , to day , the same for ever . 
And now ( good Reader ) with attentive mind , 
Read these ensuing lines , and thou shalt find 
Strange Prodiges , full of amazing fear 
IN the Church of Withy-combe , in Devonshiere . 
't is worthy thy best considerations weight , 
One Thousand Sixteen hundred , thirty eight , 
These signs and sights of terror chanced upon 
A Sunday last , October's twenty one ; 
A short space after Service did begin , 
( And our best prayers are mixed with too much sin ) 
An extreme Darkness did begin to fill 
The Church , which more and more increased still , 
In such Cimmerian manner it did spread , 
That none assembled there could see to read : 
The people ( all astonished ) straight way hears 
Most dreadful Thundering , rattling in their ears , 
With horrid sounds , in such a fearful sort , 
As Cannons or great Ordnance in Report , 
Attended with such direful Lightning flashes , 
As if the world should strait be turned to ashes . 
The darkness still increased , that mist and smother 
Was waxed so thick , one could not see each other : 
The smell like Brimstone , and the fire & smoke 
th' affrighted Congregation seemed to choke ; 
With darkness , smoke , stench , , lightning & thunder ; 
Their souls and bodies almost seemed to sunder . 
Most lamentable were the cases then , 
The cries of children , women , and of men ; 
Dispersed in their seats in diverse places , 
Some all astonished grovelling on their faces : 
Some on their Knees , did humbly Good intrete , 
To grant them Mercy from his Mercy Seat 
Some , one upon another tumbling lay , 
Expecting that should be their latest day ; 
Some burned , & some with scaldings overspread , 
And every one gave up themselves for dead . 
The Pastor of the Parish ( Master Lyde ) 
With Christian courage Reading did abide 
And heard and saw , all that was seen and heard 
And was not hurt or bruised ; nor singed or feared , 
But praying for himself and for the rest , 
The duty of a good Divine expressed . 
He after saw a lamentable sight , 
His poor Wife in a sad perplexed plight 
In many parts , lightning her body burned , 
Her Ruff and garments were into ashes turned : 
To think upon the torments that she felt , 
Will make a heart of stone , relent or melt : 
One Mistress Disford with her than was fate 
Within her Powe , and tasted of like fate ; 
She was much scalded , but yet not so bad 
As was the harm that Mistress Lyde than had . 
But God that saveth those that he will save , 
Unto her Maid and child , such favour gave , 
That though the Mistress was hurt very sore , 
The Maid and child were safe at the Pew door ; 
Which shows our lives & healths are no way fixed 
Betwixt death and life , oft but aboard betwixt . 
Two women were burned , scalded , torn , and rend 
The flesh quite from the bones ; incontinent 
Or in a moment , that with pains oppressed : 
The one of them that very night deceased : 
The other may perhaps again be cured , 
Hope is her comfort , nothing is assured ; 
For like to flowers , we bud , we spread , and fade , 
To day a Man , tomorrow but a shade . 
One Master Hill , ( a Gentleman of fame 
And worth ) was strucken with the Sulphur flame 
As in the Chancel , he was in his seat , 
The great tempestuous violence was so great , 
It beat his head ; against the stony wall 
That he surrendered up his life withal : 
And yet his Corpse was found unscorched & clear 
For no hurt on his body did appear . 
A worthy Knight ( Sir Richard Reynolds named ) 
( Who for good Housekeeping is loved & famed 
His Warrener that time , his Scull was cleft 
Three several ways , his brains beat out and lef● 
Whole on the ground ; against a Pillar there 
Was forcibly beat of his Scalp and Hair , 
And there it cleaves fast for a memory , 
And there that man ( untimely ) then did die . 
There were some others that were scorched , & frid● 
In Lightning flashes , which since then have died ; 
Some were but frighted , & scarce harmed or touch●● 
Some were a little Scalded and besmutched , 
Some had their clothes burned , and their body's no● 
Some had their bodies burned , their clotheses no jot 
Was touched at all ; thus God in judgement than 
Remembered Mercy amongst sinful men . 
There were some Seats or Pewes there overthrown 
And violently turned upsidedowne ; 
And yet scarce any Person , great or small 
Was either burned , or bruised ; or hurt at all : 
There was one man in this amazed rout , 
That near the Chancel door was going out , 
His Dog was with a Whirlwind whisked round , 
And presently fell dead upon the ground . 
The man perceived his dog dead suddenly , 
Steot back in fear and haste , unhurt thereby . 
The Church in many a place was rend and torn , 
And sundry pieces from their places born : 
And likewise ( with the lightning and the thunder ) 
A beam of Timber was burst quite in sunder : 
Betwixt the Minister and the Clerk it flew , 
And hurt them not , but only broke a Pew . 
Also a mighty Stone the storm did tear , 
That fixed was the Church's bottom near . 
The Steeple was most strange defaced & shattered , 
And pieces falling down the Church much battered . 
A Pinnacle was , by th' Tempests forced power , 
Beat through the Church , that fell from off the tower 
And from the tower the stones so thick were thrown 
As if a handred men had hurled them down . 
Yet 't is not known that any hurt was done 
To any one , by fall of wood or stone , 
Only from Manaton there came a Maid , 
That by a Stone was killed , as some men said . 
And where the Church was broke , 't is manifest 
There 't was hurt most , there people were hurt least . 
The Pulpit to a Pillar there is placed , 
Which Pillar is by Lightning much defaced : 
'T was newly whited , but with violence blasting . 
It hath a black and Sulphury overcasting . 
One in the Chancel happened to espy 
Near to the Church's neather-end to fly , 
Some things like dust or lime , which did arise , 
And suddenly it flew into his eyes , 
Where he for twelve hour's space was blinded quite , 
And ( by God's mercy ) then regained his sight . 
The Thunder and the Lightning being past , 
The people all into amazement cast , 
As if stupidious fear did them benumb , 
Unable scarce to speak , as 't were struck dumb . 
then Master Rowse , a Vintner there , 
Said , Neighbours , in the Name of God let 's cheers 
Our drooping spirits , you see the Church much broken , 
Which doth much danger unto us beroken : 
And therefore I do hope , without offence , 
In God's Name we may venture to go e-hence 
These , or the like , spoke Rouse , but Master Lyde 
With courage ( as beseemed his place ) replied , 
Beloved , of our prayers amend let 's make , 
And all of us to God ourselves betake : 
Where can we better our souls recommend 
To Him , whose glory never shall have end ? 
Let us beg mercy from the Throne of Grace , 
We cannot better die than in this place . 
These good words from this good man did proceed 
But yet the Congregation all agreed , 
( Because the Church was torn , and fearing more 
Would fall down from the Roof unto the floor ) 
All to avoid the danger imminent , 
And so with speed each party homeward went. 
Without , or near the Churchyard was a Green 
Or Bowling-place , or Alloy , which was seen 
Turned up in pits and heaps , so that it showed 
●n form and shape , like Land that 's newly ploughed . 
About that time , of Hail a mighty shower 
Did fall , and most impetuously down power : 
The Hailstones , big as Turkey's Eggs to sight , 
Some , five , or six , and some seven Ounces weight . 
At Brix●●n , near to Plymouth , this befell , 
What harm it did , Report will after tell . 
't is said , that in the County Somerset , 
At Norton , how the Church was hurt much , yet 
Because thereof no certainty we have , 
To future time I will Relation leave . 
FINIS . 

