THE PRAISE , ANTIQVITY , and commodity , of Beggary , Beggars , and Begging . 

Beggar's Bush. A Maunbering Beggar . A gallant Beggar . 

At London Printed by E. A. for Henry Gosson , and are to be sold by Edward Wright near Christ's Church Gate . 1621.  

TO THE BRIGHT EYE-DAZELING MIRROR OF MIRTH , Adelantado of Alacrity , the Pump of pastime , spout of sport , and Regent of ridiculous Confabulations , ARCHIBALD ARMSTRONG , alias the Court ARCHY . 

Envy and Hate are such daily followers , and deadly enemies , of the wife , honest , and virtuous , that my hope is , that they will never do you wrong or injury : And my belief is , that ( as you have ever ) you will always carry yourself so worthily in all your actions , that your best deserts shall neither merit envy or hatred . I have here made bold to present to your illiterate protection , a beggarly Pamphlet of my threadbare invention : I do assure you that I was more troubled in studying where to find a fit Patron , than I was in writing the Book ; I thought to have dedicated it to Beggar's Bush near Andever , or to his Hawthorne brother within a mile of Huntingdon : but I considered at last , that the laps of your long Coat could shelter me as well ●r better than any beggarly Thorne-lush . I did once dedicate a Book to your patronage , of the supposed drowning of M. Thomas Coriat , and I did also dedicated trice small Treatises to a Leash of Knights ; and because you all four make a well matched Murnivall of Patrons , ( for you all alike very illiberally put your hands in your pockets , and to make your monies even , gave me nothing : ) It makes me the bolder at this time to come upon you again , not doubting but your bounty will require my love and pains with as much more . It may be that your high affairs ( wherein you are continually pestered with needless employments ) rubs your mind quite from the Ryas , that you do not see in what declining predicament your own sometimes esteemed quality is : for the days hath been that many men kept Fools , but now ( to save that charge ) the most part of such Benefactors perform the function themselves : So that if you take not a speedy order , fooling will be as common as begging or whoremasters , and the sight or presence either of your worthy self , or any of your long-tailed tribe ( which was wont to be seen and heard with admiration ) will be no more regarded . To prevent which , I would counsel you to make a Corporation of fooling , and that none shall intrude into the society hereafter , but such as shall be Apprentizes to the quality , of which those that are now living , to contribute toward the building or purchasing of a Hall , yourself ( during your life ) to be perpetual Master of the Company . I hear that the valorous Sir Thomas , Knight of the Sun , hath had such a project in his head , end hath presumed to petition for himself , to have the sole approbation of all authorised Fools and Buffoons . But for aught I see , you need not fear that he will prevent you in this Monopoly , he being so far from the sufficiency of a general superintendent , that he is esteemed unworthy to be a setter up of the trade : for mine own part , a Beadle's place is only my ambition , to whip those out of the Society that are malapert fools , surcie fools , prodigal fools , courteous fools , proud fools , counter fait fools , or any one that is more Knave than Foole. Apart of Bridewell would serve silly for a Hall , and the Arms of the brotherhood shall be an Ass' head Dormant , in a field Gules , with a Babble and three Coxcombs rampant , and two morice-bels pendant , with a Whip passant lashant for the Crest , the Esoucheon mantled with powdered Vermin . This if you please to take in hand , no doubt but the work will be meritorious and notorious , and as the Roman Emperors Nero , Caligula , and Heliogabelus , are as famous for their acts , lines , and deaths , as the good Augustus , Alexander , Severus , and Marcus Aurelius : So shall you be remembered in succeeding ages beyond the memory of Scoggin , or worthy Will Summer . I pray you be not angry that I do not salute you with the flattering Epheihites , of honest , courteous , friendly , loving or kind ; for as yet you never gave me occasion to do you any such injury : I protest Sir , I do love you with that affection as is correspondent to the vaccuity of your Worthiness , and I am assured that at all times you will stand my friend in word or deed , for as much as comes to an unbaked Tobacco-pipe . In which assurance I kiss your hand as innocent as the new born Babe , or Lamb in the Cradle , and shall ever wish you a nimble tongue , to make other men's money run into your Purse , and quick heels to outrun the or Hue and cry , if occasion require . 

He that admires your unparallelable parts , and wishes the reversion of your gains rather than your Office : john Taylor . 

THE PRAISE , ANTIQVITY , AND COMMODITY of Beggary , Beggars , and Begging . 

A Beggar from an Ancient house begins , 
Old Adams soon , and heir unto his sins : 
And as our father Adam did possess 
The world , there 's not a Beggar that hath less . 
For whereof is the world compact and framed 
But Elements , which to our fence are named , 
The Earth , the Air , the Water , and the Fire , 
With which all live , without which all-expire . 
These , every Beggar hath in plenteous store , 
And every mighty Monarch hath no more . 
Nor can the greatest Potentate alive , 
The meanest Beggar of these things deprive . 
The Earth is common , both for birth or Graves , 
For Kings , and Beggars , Freemen , and for Slaves : 
And a poor Beggar as much Air will draw , 
As he that could keep all the world in awe . 
The Water , be it Rivers , Seas , or Spring , 
't is equal for a Beggar as a King. 
And the Celestial sun 's bright fire , from Heaven 
Amongst all estates most equally is given . 
Given , not to be engrossed , or bought , not sold , 
For gifts and bribes , or base corrupting gold . 
These things nor poor or rich , can sell nor buy , 
Free for all living creatures , till they die . 
An Emperor , a great command doth beat ; 
But yet a beggar 's more secure from fear . 
A King may use disports ( as fits the season ) 
But yet a Beggar is more safe from Treason . 
A Prince ( amid his cares ) may merry be , 
But yet a Beggar is from flatterers free . 
A Duke , is a degree magnificent , 
But yet a Beggar may have more content . 
A Marquesse , is a title of great fame , 
A Beggar may offend more , with less blame . 
An Earl , an honourable house may keep , 
But yet a beggar may more sound sleep . 
A Vizecoune may be honoured and renowned , 
But yet a beggar 's on a surer ground . 
A Baron , is a Style beloved and Noble , 
But yet a beggar is more stee from trouble . 
A Knight , is good ( if his deserts be such ) 
But yet a beggar may not own so much . 
A good Esquire is worthy of respect , 
A beggar 's in less care , though more neglect . 
A Gentleman , may good apparel wear , 
A beggar , from the Mercer's book is clear . 
A Servingman that 's young , in older years 
oft proves an aged beggar , it appears . 
Thus all degrees and states , what o'er they are , 
With beggar's happiness cannot compare 
Heaven is the roof that Canopies his head , 
The clouds his Curtains , and the earth his bed , 
The Sun his fire , the Stars his candle light , 
The Moon his Lamp that guide's him in the night . 
When scorching Sol makes other mortals sweated , 
Each tree doth shade a beggar from his heat : 
When nipping Winter makes the Cow to quake , 
A beggar will a Barn for harbour take , 
When Trees and Steeples are o'erturned with wind , 
A beggar will a hedge for shelter find : 
And though his inconveniences are store , 
Yet still he hath a salve for every sore , 
He for new fashions , owes the Tailor nothing , 
Nor to the Draper is in debt for clothing : 
A beggar , doth not beggar or deceive 
Others , by breaking like a bankrupt Knave . 
he 's free from shoulderclapping Sergeants claws , 
he 's out offeare of Envy's cankered jaws : 
He lives in such a safe and happy state , 
That he is neither hated , nor doth hate . 
None bears him malice , rancour , or despite , 
And he dares kill , those that dare him backbite . 
Credit he neither hath or gives to none , 
All times and seasons , unto him are one : 
He longs not for , or fears a quarter day , 
For Rent he neither doth receive or pay . 
Let Nation against Nation wars denounce , 
Let Cannon's thunder , and let Muskets bounce : 
Let armies , armies , force against force oppose , 
He nothing fears , nor nothing hath to lose . 
Let Townes and Towers with battery be o'erturned , 
Let women be deflowered and houses burned : 
Let men sight pellmell , and loose life and limb , 
If earth and skies-escafe , all 's one to him . 
OH happy begg'ry , every liberal Art 
Hath left the thankless world , and takes thy part : 
And learning , conscience , and simplicity , 
Plain dealing , and true perfect honesty , 
Sweet Poetry , and high Astronomy , 
Musics delightful heavenly harmony , 
All these ( with begg'ry ) most assuredly 
Have made a friendly league to live and die . 
For Fortune hath decreed , and holds it fit , 
Not to give one man conscience , wealth , and wit : 
For they are portions which to twain belong , 
And to give all to one were double wrong , 
Therefore although the Goddess want her eyes , 
Yet in her blinded bounty she is wise . 
I will not say , but wealth and wisdom are 
In one , ten , or in more , but 't is most rare : 
And such men are to be in peace or wars , 
Admired like black Swans , or like blazing Stars . 
Two sorts of people fills the whole world full , 
The witty Beggar , and the wealth Gull : 
A Scholar , stored with Ares , with not one cross , 
And Artless Naball stored with Indian dross . 
I have seen learning tattered , bare and poor , 
Whilst Barbarism hath domineered with store : 
I have known knowledge , in but mean regard , 
Whilst Ignorance hath robbed it of reward : 
And witless Coxcombs , I have heard dispute , 
Whilst profound Judgements must be dumb and mute . 
Apollo , with advice did wisely grant , 
That Poets should be poor , and line in want : 
And though plain Beggars they do not appear , 
Yet their estates doth show their kin is near . 
Parnassus' Mount is fruitless , bare and sterile , 
And all the Muses poor in their apparel : 
bare legged , and footed , with dishevelled hair , 
Nor Buskins , Shoes , or Head-tires for to wear . 
So far they are from any show of thirst , 
They scarce have ever a smock themselves to shifted . 
Homer , that was the Prince of Poetry , 
Was a blind Beggar , and in poverty : 
And matchless Ovid , ( in poor wretched case ) 
Exiled from Rome to Pontus in disgrace . 
And Maniun Maro , for some space in Rome , 
Was to Augustus but a Stable Groom : 
His verses show he had a learned head , 
Yet all his profit was but bread and bread . 
A Louse hath six feet , from whose creeping sprawled 
The first Hexameters , the ever crawled : 
And ever since , in memory of the same , 
A Louse amongst the Learned is no shame . 
then since the mountains barren Muses bare , 
And Prince of Poets had a Beggar's share : 
Since their blind Sovereign was a Beggar poor , 
How can the Subjects but be void of store ? 
What are their figures , numbers , types and tropes , 
But Emblems of poor shadows , and vain hopes . 
Their allegories , similes , allusions , 
Threadbare , do end in beggarly conclusions : 
Nor can their Comedies and Tragedies , 
Their Comitragy , Traggecomedies , 
no pastoral preterplupastorall , 
Their Moral studies , and Historical , 
Their sharp Iambic , high Heroick Saphique , 
And all where with their painful studies traffic : 
All these cannot allow a means complete 
To keep them out of Debt with clothes and meat . 
And though a Poet have th' accomplished parts 
Of Learning , and the Axioms of all Arts : 
What though he study all his brains to dust , 
To make his Fame Immortal , and not rust , 
Revolving day by day and night by night , 
And waste himself in giving others light , 
Yet this is all the Guerdon he shall have , 
That begg'ry will attend him his Grave . 
He ( in his own Conceit ) may have this bliss , 
And sing , My mind to me a Kingdom is . 
But 't is a Kingdom wanting form or matter , 
Or substance , like the Moonshine in the water . 
For as a learned Poet wrote before , 
Gross Gold runs headlong from them , to the Boar ; 
For which this unavoided Vow I 'll make , 
To love a Beggar for Poet's sake . 
I that never drank of Agganippes' Well , 
That in Parnissus Suburbs scarce do dwell , 
That never tasted the Pegassiar Spring , 
Or Tempe , nor e'reheard the Muses sing , 
I ( that in Verse ) can only Rhyme and matter 
Quite from the purpose , Method , or the matter . 
Yet some for friendship , Ignorance , or pity 
Will say my lines may pass , indifferent , pretty : 
And for this little , Itching , Vearsing vain , 
With me the Beggar vows he will remain . 
But if I could but once true Poetry win , 
He would stick close to me , as is my Skin . 
And sure if any man beneath the Sky , 
Had to his Nurse a Witch , it must be I , 
For I remember many years ago , 
When I would Cry , as Children use to do : 
My Nurse to still me , or to make me cease 
From crying would say hush lamb , pray thee peace . 
But I ( like many youth or froward boys ) 
Would yaule , and bawl , and make a wewling noise 
Than she ( in anger ) in her arms would snatch me , 
And bid the Beggar , or bulbegger catch me , 
With take him Beggar , take him would she say , 
then did the Beggar such hard hold fast lay 
Upon my back , that yet I never could 
Nor ever shall in force him leave his hold 
The reason therefore why I am not Rich 
I think is , cause my Nurse was half a witch . 
But since it is decreed that I must be 
A beggar , welcome begg'ry unto me : 
I 'll patiently embrace my destired Fate 
And live as well on some of higher Rate . 
Yet shall my begg'ry no strange Suits devose 
As Monopolies to catch Fleas or Flies : 
Or the Sole making of all Bleachers pricks , 
Or Corks for bottles , or for every six 
Smelled , Seacrab , Flounder , Playee or Whiting mop , 
One , as a Duty unto me to drop 
Nor to mark Cheeses , I 'll not beg at all , 
Nor for the Mouse trap Geometrical . 
Nor will I impudently beg for I and , 
Nor ( with Ambition ) beg to have Command : 
Or meat , or clothes , or that which few men give , 
I 'll never beg for money whilst I live . 
Yet money I esteem a precious thing , 
Because it bears and picture of my King : 
Unto my King I will a servant be , 
And make his pictures servants unto men . 
One only Begg'ry ever I 'll embrace , 
I 'll beg for grace , of him that can give grace , 
Who all things feeds and fills , and over-seeth 
Who gives , and casteth no man in the teeth . 
So much for that , now on my Theme again , 
What virtues Begg'ry still doth entertain . 
First amongst Beggars , there 's not one in twenty , 
But hath the Art of memory most plenty : 
When those that are possessed with riches store 
( If ever they were in Beggar's state and poor ) 
They quite forget it , and will ever hate 
The memory of any Beggar's state . 
For fortune , favour , or benignity , 
May raise a Beggar unto Dignity : 
When like a bladder , puffed with pride and pelf , 
he 'll neither know his betters , nor himself , 
But if a Beggar hath been wealth ever , 
He from his mind puts that remembrance never . 
And thus if it be Rightly understood , 
A beggar's Memory is ever good . 
Nor he by Gluttony , or swimish surfeit , 
Doth purchase Sickness with his bodies forfeit . 
On bonds or bills , he borrows not , or lends , 
He neither by extortion gets or spends . 
no Usury he neither takes or 'gins : 
Oppress he cannot , yet oppressed he lives . 
Nor when he dies , he leaves no wrangling heirs 
To lose by Law that which was his or theirs 
Men that are blind in judgement may see this 
Which of the Rich , or Beggars hath to oft bliss : 
On which most pleasure , Fortune seems to hurl , 
The Lousy beggar , or the gouty Churl : 
The Ragged beggar sitting in the Stocks , 
Or the Embroidered Gallant with the Pocks . 
A Beggar every way is Adam's Son , 
For in a Garden Adam first begun : 
And so a Beggar even from his birth , 
Doth make his Garden the whole entire Earth . 
The fields of Corn doth yield him straw and bread 
To Feed and Lodge , and Hat to hide his head : 
And in the stead of Cutthroat slaughtering shambles , 
Each Hedge allows him Berries from the brambles . 
The Bullesse , hedge Peake , Hips and Haws , and Sloes , 
Attends his appetite where ever he goes : 
As for his Salads , better never was , 
then acute Sorrel , and sweet three leaved Grass , 
And as for Sauce he seldom is at Charges 
For every Crabtree doth afford them Vergiss . 
His banquet , sometimes is green Beans and Peason , 
Nuts , Pears , Plumbs , Apples , as they are in season . 
His music waits on him in every bush , 
The Mavis , Bulfinch , Blackbird and the Thrush : 
The mounting Lark , sings in the lofty Sky , 
And Robin Redbrest makes him melody . 
The Nightingale chants most melodiously , 
The chirping Sparrow , and the chattering Pye. 
My neighbour Cuckoo , always in one tune , 
Sings like a Townsman still in May and june . 
These feathered Fiddlers , sing , and leap and play , 
The beggar takes delight , and God doth pay . 
Moreover ( to accomplish his Content ) 
there 's nothing wants to please his sight or sent . 
The Earth embroidered with the various hue 
Of Greene , red , Yellow , Purple , Watchet , Blue : 
Carnation , Crimson , Damask , spotless White , 
And every colour that may please the sight . 
The odoriserous Mint , the Eglantine , 
The Woodbine , Primrose , and the Cowslip fine . 
The Honeysuckle , and the Daffodil , 
The fragrant Time , delights the Beggar still . 
He may pluck Violets in any place 
And Rue , but very seldom herb of Grace : 
Hearts-ease he hath and Love and Idle both , 
It in his bones hath a continual growth . 
His Drink he never doth go far to look , 
Each spring 's his Host , his Hostess is each Brook : 
Where he may quaff and to 't again by fits , 
And never stand in fear to hurt his wits , 
For why that Ale , is Grandam Nature's brewing , 
And very seldom sets her Guests a spewing ; 
Unmixed , and unsophisticated drink , 
That never makes men stagger , reel and wink . 
Besides a beggar hath this pleasure more , 
He never pays , or never goes on score : 
But let him drink and quaff both night and day , 
there 's neither Chalk , nor Post , or aught to pay . 
But after all this single-soaled small Ale , 
I think it best to tell a merry tale : 
There was a Rich hard miserable Lord , 
That kept a knavish Fool at bed and board , 
( As Great men oft affected have such Elves . 
And loved a Fool , as they have loved themselves . ) 
But Nature to this Fool such virtue gave , 
Two simples in one Compound , Fool and Knave . 
This Noble Lord , Ignobly did oppress 
His Tenants , raising Rents to such excess : 
That they their states not able to maintain , 
They turned stark beggars in a year or twain . 
Yet though this Lord were too too miserable , 
He in his House kept a well furnished Table : 
Great store of Beggars daily at his Gate , 
Which he did feed , and much Compassionate . 
( For 't is within the power of mighty men 
To make five hundred Beggars , and feed Ten. 
At last , upon a time the Lord and 's Fool , 
Walked after Dinner their hot bloods to cool , 
And seeing three or four score Beggars stand 
To seek Relief from his hard Clutched hand , 
The Nobleman thus spoke his Fool unto , 
Quoth he , what shall I with these Beggars do ? 
Since ( quoth the Fool ) you for my judgement call , 
I think it best we strait ways hang them all . 
That were great pity , than the Lord replied 
For them and me our Saviour equal died : 
th' are Christians ( although beggars ) therefore yet 
hang 's uncharitable , and unsit . 
Tush ( said the Fool ) they are but beggars thee , 
And thou canst spare them , therefore let them go : 
If thou wilt do , as thou hast done before , 
thou canst in one year make as many more . 
And he that can pick nothing from this tale , 
then let him with the beggar drink small Ale. 
Thus is a Beggar a strange kind of creature , 
And begg'ry is an Art that lives by Nature : 
For he neglects all Trades , all Occupations , 
All functions , Mysteries , Arts , and Corporations . 
he 's his own Law , and doth even what he lift . 
And is a perfect right Gimnosophist . 
A Philosophical Pythagoras , 
That without care his life away doth pass . 
A Lawyer must for what he gets take pains , 
And study night and day , and toil his brains , 
With diligence to sift out Right from Wrong , 
Writes , travels , pleads , with hands , and feet , and tongue . 
And for to end Debate , doth oft debate 
With Rhetoric , and Logic Intricate : 
And after all his travel and his toil , 
If that part which he pleads for get the foil , 
The Client blames the Lawyer , and the Laws , 
And never minds the badness of his Cause . 
't is better with a Beggar that is Dumb , 
Whose tongueless mouth doth only utter mum : 
In study , and in care , no time he spends , 
And hath his business at his finger ends . 
And with dumb Rhetoric , and with Logic mute , 
Lives and gains more , than many that Dispute . 
If case a Beggar be old , weak or Ill , 
It makes his gains , and comings in more still ; 
When beggars that are strong , are paid with mocks , 
Or threatened with the Cage , the Whip , or Stocks . 
he 's better born then any Prince or Peer , 
In 's Mother's womb three quarters of a year : 
And when his birth hath made her belly slack , 
She four or five years bears him at her back , 
He lives as if it were Grim Saturn's Reign , 
Or as the Golden age were come again . 
Moreover many virtues do attend 
On Beggars , and on them do they depend : 
Humility's a Virtue , and they are 
In sign of Humbleness , continual bare : 
And Patience is a virtue of great worth , 
Which any beggar much expresseth forth , 
I saw a Beggar Railed at , yet stood mute , 
Before a Beadle , of but base Repute . 
For Fortitude a beggar doth excel , 
there 's nothing can his valiant courage quell : 
Nor heat or cold , thirst , hunger , Famines rage , 
He dares outdare Stocks , whipping-posts , or Cage . 
he 's of the greatest Temperance under heaven , 
And ( for the most part ) seeds on what is given . 
He waits upon a Lady , of high price , 
Whose birthplace was Celestial paradise . 
One of the Graces , a most heavenly Dame , 
And charity 's her all admired Name : 
Her hand 's never shut , her glory is in giving , 
On her the Beggar waits , and gets his living . 
His state 's more ancient than a Gentleman , 
It from the Elder brother ( Cain ) began : 
Of Runagates and vagabonds he was 
The first that wand'ring o'er the earth did pass . 
But what 's a Vagabond and a Runagate ? 
True Annagramatized I will relate : 
RUNAGATE , Annagram , AGRANTE . VAGABONDE , Annagram , GAVE A BOND . 

And many well born Gallants , mad and fond , 
Have with a Grant so often Gave a Bond. 
And wrapped their states so in a Parchment skin , 
They Vagabonds and Runagates have been . 
A beggar 's nob'ly born , all men will yield , 
His getting , and his birth b'ing in the field : 
And all the world knows 't is no idle fable , 
To say and swear the field is honourable . 
A beggar is most courteous when he begs , 
And hath an excellent skill in making legs : 
But if he could make Arms but half so well , 
For Heraldry his cunning would excel . 
A beggar in great safety doth remain , 
he 's out of danger to be robbed or slain : 
In fear and peril he is never put , 
And ( for his wealth ) no thief his throat will cut . 
he 's far more bountiful than is Lord , 
A world of hangers on at bed and board : 
Which he doth lodge , and daily cloth and feed , 
Them and their Issue , that increase and breed ; 
For 't is disparagement , and open wrong , 
To say a beggar 's not a thousand strong : 
Yet have I seen a beggar with his Many , 
Come in at a Playhouse , all in for one penny . 
And though of creatures Lice are almost lest , 
Yet is a Louse a very valiant beast . 
But did not strength unto her courage want , 
She would kill Lion , Bear , or Elephant . 
What is it that she can but she dares do , 
she 'll combat with a King , and stand to 't too : 
she 's not a starter like the dust-bred-flea , 
she 's a great traveler by land and sea , 
And dares take any Lady by the Rea. 
She never from a battle yet did fly , 
For with a Soldier she will line and die . 
And sure ( I think ) I said not much amiss , 
To say a Louse herself a soldier is . 
An Host of Lice did to submission bring 
Hard-hearted Pharaoh the Egyptian King. 
But when these cruel creatures do want meat , 
Man's flesh and blood like Cannibals they eat . 
They are unto the beggar Nature's gifts , 
Who very seldom puts them to their shifts . 
These are his Guard , which will not him forsake , 
Till Death course doth of his carcase make . 
A beggar lives here in this vale of sorrow , 
And travels here to day , and there tomorrow . 
The next day being neither here , nor there : 
But almost no where , and yet every where . 
He never labour's , yet he doth express 
Himself an enemy to Idleness . 
In Court , Camp , City , Country , in the Ocean 
A beggar is a right : perpetual motion , 
His great devotion is in general , 
He either prays for all , or preys on all . 
And it is universally professed , 
From South to North , from East unto the West . 
On his own merits he will not rely , 
By others men's good works he 'll line and die . 
That begg'ry is most natural all men know , 
Our naked coming to the world doth show : 
Not worth a simple rotten rag , or clout , 
Our silly earkasses to wrap about . 
That it will is , and hath perpetual been , 
All go as naked out , as they came in , 
We leave our clothes , which were our covers here , 
For Beggars that come after us to wear . 
Thus all the world in general beggars are , 
And all alike comes in , and goes out bare . 
And who so lives here in the best degree , 
Must ( every day ) a daily beggar be : 
And when his life hath run unto his date , 
He dies a beggar , or a reprobate . 
( Good Reader , pray misconstrue not this case , 
I mean no profanation in this place ) 
then since these virtues wait on beggary , 
As mild Humility , and Charity , 
With Patience , Fortitude , and Courtesy , 
And Temperance , Honour , Health , Frugality , 
Security , Universality , 
Necessity , and Perpetuity , 
And since heaven sends the Subject and the Prince 
All Beggars hither , and no better hence , 
Since begg'ry is our portion , and our lot , 
Our Patrimony , birthright , and what not : 
Let us pursue our function , let us do 
That ( which by nature ) we were born unto . 
And whilst my Muse a little doth repose , 
I 'll Character a Beggar out in prose . 
Now it follows , that I show some part of their forms , carriage , manners , and behaviour , their several Garbs , tones , and salutations that they accost their Clients or Benefactors withal , for they can wisely , and discreetly suit their Phrase and language , to be correspondent to their own shape , and suitable to whomsoever they beg of , as for example suppose a Beggar he in the shape or form of a maundering , or wandering Soldier , with one arm , leg or eye , or some such maim ; then imagine that there passeth by him some Lord , Knigt , or scarce a Gentleman , it makes no matter which , than his Honour or his Worship shall be affronted in this manner : 

Brave man of Honour , cast a favourable look upon the wounded estate of a distressed Gentleman , that hath born Arms for his Country in the hottest broils of the Netherlands , with the loss of his members ; Cleveland hath felt my strength ; I have bickered with the French , at Breast & Deep ; I have passed the straits , the dangerous Gulf : the Groin can speak my service ( Right Honourable ) with no less than two dangerous hurts hardly brought off from Bummil Leaguer , which I would unwillinly discover to your manliness , whose belief shall be therein as much available as eye sight . Fortune hath only left me a tongue to bemoan my losses , and one eye to be witness of your noble bounty ; I would be loath to weary your Lordship with the relations of my travels , to whom the story of these wars are as familiar as to myself ; your worthy liberality is the spur to valour , and the safeguard of his country ; and in your honourable memory my tongue shall supplies the defects of my limbs , and proclaim your merit through the 17 Provinces , whither your bounty shall bear this withered body , to inter it with the blood which I left there as a pledge of my return . 

This is the martial or decayed military kind of begging ; which if he speed , than he can fit himself with a prayer accordingly , for the prosperity of his liberal benefactor , as thus : 

Peace be to thy loins ( Right honourable ) and plenty at thy board , oppression in the country , and extortion in the city , embroder thy carcase , and keep thy Concubine constant , that Tailors may sue to thee for work , more than for payment , and Sericants may stand and gaze at thy fair progress by the Compters , whist thy coach mares shall whurrie thee free from Attachments . 

then ( after a scrub or shrug ) you must conceive that he meets with a Lawyer , and fitting his phrase to his language , he assaults him thus , and joins issue . 

Humbly showeth to your good Worship , your poor suppliant having advanced his bill in the late wars of Sweaden Copenhage , and Stock Holland ; after Replications in particular , and Reiounders drawn , with bloody pens and dreadful characters , your petitioner joined issue in that fearful day of hearing , at the grand castle of Smolesco , where he came off with the loss of his inheritance , having the evidence of his limbs violently rend from him , to make open passage to the benevolent charity of such of such pious persons as is your good worship ; for you are the true soldiers of the country , whose wars concern the domestic peace of our nation , as such as myself doth the foreign . My breeding was Gentle , Sir , and my birth English , a younger brother , driven to my shifts , to avoid the soul accidents of homebred miseries ; I measured foreign paces , and was delivered abroad of my breeding at home , in which estate the hand of your bounty must support me , or else calamity will crawl ever me , which hath no Surgeon but the gallows , to which I hope the Law will not deliver me , seeing it carries so fair a face as the reverend aspect of your masterships countenance . 

By this time you must suppose that his bount being awaked he gives him somewhat ; when with a correspondent prayer he thus takes his benevale . 

May the Terms be everlasting to thee , thou man of tongue , and may contentions grow and multiply , may Actions beget Actions , and Cases engender Cases as thick as hops , may every day of the year be a Shrove tuesday ; let Proclamations forbid fight , to increase actions of battery , that thy Cassock may be three piled , and the welts of thy gown may not grow thread bare . 

Perhaps he meets with some country Farmer , or some honest Russet homespun plain-dealing plowiogger , whom he assaults with a volley of lies and bravadoes , in manner and form following . 

You shall do well to take notice ( countryman and friend ) that I am a soldier and a gentleman , who having been made Fortune's tennis ball , was lately cast upon these coasts of my country by the merciless cruelty of the raging tempestuous seas , where I have been in that distress that the whole Christian world durst not so much as look on : mine Arms hath been feared by all the enemies that ever beheld them advanced , and my command hath been dreadful through Europe , Asia , Africa and America , from the Sun's Eastern rising to his Western declination . I was the first man that entered ( despite the mouth of the cannon ) into the famous city of Portrega , a city five times greater than Constantinople , where the great Turk then kept his Seraglio , Bassa Caphy , Bassa Indae , and Mustapha Despot of Servia being my prisoners , whose ransoms yielded my sword three million of Hungarian ducats ; with which returning , thinking to make thee and the rest of my nation rich , the ship which transported me ( being overladen ) took such a leak that she sunk , not a mortal eye being able to see one penny of that uncountable treasure , myself ( as you see preserved ) a miserable spectacle of unfortunate chance , for getting astride upon a demyculuering of brass , I was weatherbeaten three leagues ; on shore , as you see , an ominous map of manquelling calamity , to the relief whereof , my fellow and friend , ( for so my now poverty makes me vouchsafe to call thee ) I must entreat thy manhood , by offering a parcel of thy substance ; make no delays , Sir , for I would be loath to exercise my valour on thee , and make thee the first Christian that should feel the impregnable strength and vigour of my victorious arm , which hath done to death so many Turks , Pagans' and Infidels as cannot truly be numbered . 

After all this superfluous fustian , the poor man unwillingly draws and gives him some small mite , more for fear or lying , then either for love or charity . His fury being abated , he takes his leave thus : 

Fair be thy Harvest , and foul thy winter , that plenty may fill thy barns , and fear of scarcity raise thy price , may thy Landlord live unmarried , that thy fine may not be raised , to buy thy new Landlady a French petlicoate or a new Block Beaver , nor thy rents raised to keep her tyre in fashion . 

Invention many thousand ways could go , 
To show their variations to and from : 
For as upon the soul of man attends , 
The world , the flesh , the devil , ( three wicked friends ) 
So likewise hath a beggar other three , 
With whom his humour never could agree . 
A justice , to the world he doth compare , 
And for his flesh , a Beadle is a snare : 
But he that he of all accounts most evil , 
He thinks a Constable to be the devil . 
And 't is as easy for him as to drink , 
To blind the world , and make a justice wink : 
The Beadle ( for the flesh ) ' is little pain , 
Which smart he can recover soon again . 
But yet the Devils ( the Constable ) a spirit , 
From hole to hole that hunt's him like a ferret , 
Both day and night he haunts him as a ghost , 
And of all furies he torment's him most . 
all 's one for that , though some things fa'l out ill , 
A beggar seldom rides up Holborn hill : 
Nor is he taken with a thievish trap , 
And made dispute with Doctor's Stories cap.  
A common thief , for every groute he gains , 
His life doth venture , besides all his pains : 
For every thing he eats , or drinks , or wears , 
To lose his ears , or gain a rope he fears . 
But for a beggar , be it he or she , 
They are from all these choking dangers free . 
And though ( for sin ) when mankind first began , 
A curse was laid on all the race of man , 
That of his labours he should live and eat , 
And get his bread by travel and by sweat : 
But if that any from this curse be free , 
A beggar must he be , and none but he . 
For every fool most certainly doth know , 
A beggar doth not dig , delve , plough , or sow : 
He neither harrows , plants , lops , fells , nor rakes , 
Nor any way he pains or labour takes . 
Let swine be meazeld , let sheep die and rot , 
Let murrain kill the cattle , he cares not : 
He will not work and sweat , and yet he 'll feed , 
And each man's labour must supply his need . 
Thus without pains of care , his life he 'll spend , 
And lives until he dies , and there 's an end . 
But I this reekning do of beggary make , 
That it much better is to give then take : 
Yet if my substance will not serve to give , 
Lie ( of my betters ) take , with thanks , and live . 
FINIS . 





A Gleek . 

Antiquity of Beggars . Universality . Earth . Air . Water . Fire . If these elements could be bought and sold , the poor beggars should have small room for birth , life , or burial . Wit , wisdom , wealth , and conscience , are not usually heredetary , or in one man  The barrenness of Parnassus . The poverty or beggary of the Muses .  Virgil , he was born in a ditch , and afterwards being in Rome in service with Augustus Caesar , to whom he many times gave learned verses , and the Emperor always rewarded him with bread . A Louse the ground of the first Hexameters .  Parnassus .  Chris. Marlo . A Beggar never grows mad with too much study . Dumb Rhetoric moves Charity . The weak Beggar have a great advantage over the strong . Beggars ( for th' most part well born . Virtues that Beggars have  Humility . Patience . Fortitude . Temperance . It waits on Charity a worthy bountiful Mistress . Antiquity . Beggary descended from Cain , who was the first man that ever was born , & heir apparent to the whole world . Honour  Courtesy . Security . Bounty . Power . Frugality . A Beggar is no shifting fellow . True friendship  Beggars are travellers . He is seldom idle , though he never works . Devotion . Universality . He is a lover of good works . Peggery is natural , and general to all the world . Beggary is perpetual . The generality of beggary . It is most necessary for every one to live and die a Beggar . A justice of peace is as the world to a beggar , a Beadle as the flesh , and a Constable as the diveil . A justice will wink or connive at a beggar's faults often , partly for pity , & partly to a cold trouble  A whipping will be loove cured . A Constable in a Bugbear to a beggar .  Sybutae  