THE NIPPING OR SNIPPING OF ABUSES : 

OR The woolgathering of Witte . 

With The Muse's Tailor , brought from Parnassus by land , with a pair of Oars 

Wherein Are above a hundred several Garments of diverse fashions , made by Nature , without the help of Art , and A Proclamation from Hell in the Devil's name , concerning the propogation , and excessive use of Tobacco . 

By JOHN TAYLOR . 

judge not , before thou all dost overlook , And then if Nothing please thee , burn the Book . 

LONDON . Printed by Edelbert : Griffin for Nathaniel Butter , and are to be sold at the sign of the Pide-bull near Saint Austens-gate . 1614  

To the Sacred Majesty of King JAMES . 

To thee I dare not dedicate my book , 
Yet humbly , high my low invention Ames , 
That with thy Gracious view ( dread royal JAMES ) 
thou wilt be pleased my lines to overlook . 
A candle lights , when Phoebus hath forsook 
To guild the day with universal flames : 
And glim'ring glances of the humed Thames 
Aspects , and objects to the sight have struck . 
So mighty Sovereign , and most Learned King , 
When sweet Arion's Harp , Amphion's Lute , 
Are silent sleeping in their Cases mute : 
Vouchsafe to hear thy Sculler's Muse to sing ; 
And let Pan's Pipe , obtain a little grace , 
When Great Apollo's Harp is out of place . 
Your Majesty's Humble Servant , and only water Poet.  JOHN TAYLOR . 

A Skeltonicall salutation to those that know how to read , and not mar the sense with hacking or misconstruction . 

Thou true understander , my invention doth wander with the quill of a Gander , to shield me from slander , to thy good protection , I yield in subjection , my poor imperfection , with friendly correction , and as thou dost like me , or stroke me or strike me , Reprove me or prove me , or move me , or love me , or quite me , or spite me , friend me , or mend me , or else not offend me : If in aught that is written thy humours are bitten , seem not to espy it , and none will descry it . But if thou dost kick , the spur sure will prick , and if thou do fling , the wasp than will sting . My verses are made , to ride every jade , but they are forbidden , of jades to be ridden , they shall not be snaffeled , nor braved nor bafflled , wert thou George with thy Naggon , that foughtest with the dragon , or were you great Pompey , my verse should be thump ye , if you like a javel against me dare cavil . I do not intend , it as now to commend it , or yet to defend it . But to thee I do send it , to like it , or mend it , and when thou hast end it , applaud it or rend it . My wits I could bristle , for a better Epistle , but yet at this time , this Skeltonicall Rhyme , I send to thy view , because it is new , So Reader adieu . 

I thine , if thou mine , JOHN TAYLOR . 

To the Author and his book . 

To the superlative Water-poet john Taylor . 

no Waterman , or Sculler art thou none , 
Nor need thou ever taste of Helicon : 
They all mistake thee jack , full well I know , 
Thy Heaven bred brain could never stoop so low : 
For unto me , thou plainly dost appear 
The lofty Planet of the watery Sphere : 
So that Apollo he himself can tell , 
Thy influence gives water to his well . 
Thy true friend ja : Moraye . 

To the Castalian Water-writer , Splende & dignoscar . 

A Dial set upon an eminent place , 
If clouds do interuall Apollo's face : 
Is but a figured shape : whereby we know 
no article of Time , which it doth own : 
Unto our expectations , yet we see 
The tracts by which Times should distinguished be : 
In paralelled punctual , ciphered lines , 
Which by a shadow , when the fair sun shines , 
Explains the hours : So if the Son of men 
Thy Glorious Patron , deem to bless thy pen 
With his fair light , Thy Muse so young so fair , 
( So well proportioned in conceits so rare : 
And Natural strains , and stile , and every part , 
That Nature therein doth exceed all Art , ) 
Will then as with Enthusiasm inspired 
Print legends by the world to be admired . 
thine james Ratray . 

Praecomium johannis Taylor . 

What elemental sperms , begot a spark 
Of such conceited influence : bearing the mark 
Of such digestion , in his well knit rhymes , 
As if that Maro rebaptised our times , 
With well proportioned judgement ? this thy note , 
Distinction knows not from a graver cote . 
O where are you , styled by the happy names 
Of loves sole heirs : sleeps your immortal flames , 
In their original dulness see a good ? 
Born in the vein of far inferior blood . 
Taylor , I have taken measure of thy pains , 
Discharge my bill with love , and there 's my gains . 
thine in the best of friendship . Robert Anton.  

To his honest friend john Taylor , Poeta Nascitur . 

I oft ( with other men ) have wondered why 
Horace should write an Art of Poetry : 
Since all men know , a Poets born a Poet , 
And no man 's born an Artist : all men know it : 
And knowing this , I wonder who should scorn 
A Poet without Art , that so was born . 
Who thinks thy name , or watery education , 
Is to thy verses any derogation , 
Is far deceived in both , for all men know , 
Tailors are makers , Poets all are so . 
Nor is (null) thy education thee abuses . 
't 'as brought thee up a Tailor for the Muses . 
I could Apollogize , but thou hast don 't 
If Poets born have glory , thou hast won't : 
thou hast described the several signs of Heaven , 
Wherein the sun's whole Progress is made even . 
Thy Epigrams ; and Anagrams of late 
Are Philomel's sweet notes , let Parrots prate . 
I dare compare thy Genius with some men 
That vaunt in Tempe's well to have dipped their pen : 
For ( truly ) they do falsely steal translations , 
And speak in our tongue things of other Nations . 
Thy Oars and Sculls hath far out rowed their fames 
For thou hast rowed from Helicon , to Thames . 
Let them upbraid thee with a Sculler's name , 
And with that title think to obscure thy fame : 
They cannot jack for Mariners at seas 
Take pains , whilst passengers do sit at ease . 
Thy own true labour tugs thy verse a shore , 
Though fools in each man's boat will have an Oar . 
thine , whether thou wilt or no.  Sa : jones . 

To my friend by land and by water john Taylor . 

These leaves kind john are not to wrap up drams , 
That do contain thy witty Epigrams , 
Let worse Poems serve for such abuse , 
Whilst thine shall be referude for better use . 
And let each Critic cavil what he can , 
't is rarely written of a Waterman . 
Thy friend assured Rob : Branthwaite . 

To the Muse's Tailor , or the Pegafian Sculler . 

One Envy says th' art merely natural , 
Another when it doth on foam Art fall : 
In reading thee , believes it not thine own , 
Neither detracts thee , for the gift is known 
that 's called a Poets , to come with his birth , 
But if this Envy could make less thy worth , 
The second adds to it , by confessing art 
In that we know thine : Thus where every part 
Of Envy is examined 't is the end , 
Of all that do dispraise thee to commend . 
Thy hearty friend . Sa : Cal.  

To his friend john Taylor . 

You that read Tailor's verse , commend the same , 
If you have wit , or else subscribe your Name . 
Thy friend I P. Musophily . 

To my good friend and fellow , john Taylor . 

ON land , thy water works , with more praise floats 
then Standgate castle , or Thames flaming boats : 
Moore fitter for the press ( pulled from thy oar ) 
then many which may brag of learning store . 
If Coriat , or his Crew thy worth do blemish 
The care is taken all , Incumbe Remis . 
Hold on thy way , though others first shall ply me , 
thou art my first man , though last I chance to spy thee . 
Thy true friend Cornwallis Blague . 

To the Pegasian Taylor . 

Lo here the Tailor of Parnassus spring 
Whose offal shreads , do prove acquaint well made verses , 
Whose pen dismissed ; straight doth the bottles bring : 
From Bacchus' fuming pipes , to fill Tower Teirces . 
Who Sculd the Muses bravely o'er the flood , 
And since that time hath for a Poet stood . 
thine Edmund Blague . 

To the humidious Poet , and my very friend john Taylor . 

The Poets old , ( with much head breaking pain ) 
Did learn of others to compose a verse , 
But john , thy study , never broke thy brain : 
Yet canst in meeter many Acts rehearse . 
And when thy hand doth tug the heavy oar , 
thou canst speak verses , never spoke before . 
Naught comes amiss , for now thou tak'st delight 
In bitter Satyrs to explain thy mind : 
then tragic like , describst a bloody fight , 
And strait all merry art to mirth inclined : 
Of all thou mak'st a harmony sometimes 
To please the inclination of the times . 
then spite of each calumnions critics collar , 
no Sculler ever came so near a scholar . 
thine as thou wouldst wish , Samuel King.  

In Laudem Authoris . 

Well mightst thou wonder Tailor that I praise 
Thy home bred Muse , since in these critic days 
It is a Maxim , that who ere is known , 
To give to others worth , leaves himself none : 
Did not I see how much adulterous art 
Paints out the face of poesy for the mart : 
Of outside stages ; who can from 's loose pen , 
Shake ink at whores , and country gentlemen : 
Can make a soldier utter treason , curse , 
And Ladies whine , speak as new come from nurse . 
Who can with this , and an opinioned fame , 
A hungry pension purchase , wears the Name 
Of Poet ; when his idle pate hath naught 
To speak his art , but that 't is dear bought . 
( And yet cheap too ) should we but weigh the pain , 
And self felt guilt , of his translating vein . 
When I on both look , by Apollo's fire 
I laugh at him , and thee I do admire . 
thou owest thine own beget , which by thee 
Are made , not fashioned , such should Poets be . 
Such were the ancient Bards , and Druids songs 
Who used their own language , their own tongues : 
Where Nature , unto me seems Art to pass 
As much as Diamonds do a painted glass : 
For if who best translates a Poet were 
We might have more than one born in a year . 
And I have lived an age , and ne'er saw two , 
So much unbought , vnborowed , yet could show 
As I have read from thee , what wouldst thou more 
there 's many wears the Bays , deserves thy oar . 
Thy friend Robert Daborne . 

To his friend john Taylor . 

Go friend , let lose thy lines , and measure out 
The length and breadth of vice , it was a doubt : 
thou only wert for a man's Tailor sit , 
When thou didst through thy measures , waste thy wit 
On witless Coriat , but from henceforth 
The Laurel Synod shall allow thy worth : 
With more additions , for all may see 
thou likewise mayst a woman's Tailor be . 
thou canst with Satyrs their straight bodies wring , 
And lose their skirts again with sonnetting , 
Go on , and from me take a kind , good speed , 
With this proviso unto those shall read . 
Let there no Butcher that yet wants his trade 
Dive to find fault with that a Tailor made . 
Will : Rowley . 

To his dear friend Master john Taylor . 

MENANDER thinks I see the Sculler in his boat , 
With goodly motion glide along fair Thames , 
And with a charming and bewrehing note , 
So sweet delightful tunes and ditties frames : 
As greatest Lordings and the nicest Dames , 
That with attentive care , did hear thy lays 
Of force should yield due merit to thy praise . 
Worth to all Watermens , strain forth thy voice 
To prove so pleasing in the world's proud eye , 
As eyes , and ears , and hearts may all rejoice : 
To see , hear , muse , upon the melody . 
In contemplation of thy harmony , 
Let Thames fair banks thy worth and praises ring 
While I thy worth , and praise , beyond seizing 
Tho. Gent.  

To the Water-poet , john Taylor . 

Honest john Taylor though I know 't no grace , 
To thee , or me , for writing in this place , 
Yet know I that the multitudes of friends 
Will thee protect , from vile malignant minds : 
The rather cause what ever thou hast shows 
Is no one man's invention but thine own . 
Malicious minded men will thee despraise ; 
Envy debases all , herself to raise . 
then rest content , whilst to thy greater fame , 
Both Art , and Nature shrine to raise thy name . 
thine ever as thou knowest R : Cadner . 

To honest jack Taylor . 

Friend Taylor , thou hast here this glory wone , 
thou 'st made a coat Urania may put on . 
I do applaued thy quick ingenious spirit , 
And may thy fortune countervail thy merit : 
Which if it do ( thy worth I will not flatter , 
thou never more shalt toil upon the water . 
thine as the rest of thy friends William Bubb.  

To his loving friend john Taylor . 

Beloved friends ; words mend not much the matter , 
Nor morre the market of thy natural wit : 
They are but Pies , and like to Pies do chatter 
That fault thy act , and so would bemish it . 
For what is Art but imitation 
Tied unto rules , as such and such have taught ? 
And what those rules , but approbation 
Of that which Nature first , in others wrought ? 
From Nature than it was they took their light , 
The Proto-poets all , and sung their Rhymes : 
And why shall we deny our age like right 
When Nature is the same with former Tynees ? 
no , no , but since she sendeth forth fair rays 
In thy borne-muse , wear thou with all her Bays . 
Fr : Conniers . 

To my friend john Taylor . 

IF Homer's verse ( in Greek ) did merit praise , 
If Naso in the Latin won the Bays , 
If Maro amongst the Romans did exell , 
If Tasso in the Tuscan tongue wrote well , 
then Tailor I conclude that thou hast done 
In English , what immortal Bayss hath wone . 
Thy friend john Tap.  

Tho : Bretnor in commendation of the Author . 

That none are Artists but Academiques , 
' were vain to think and idle to maintain : 
sith Nature's free and tide to no such tricks : 
As fostered are among the learned train : 
The homely Peasant and the country Kerne 
Have often better wits than those that learn . 
And for thyself there is no Poet writes 
With words , or figures more adorned with Art 
Thy lines are stuffed with learned Epithets : 
Such sweet conceits thy pleasing Muse doth dart , 
That thou seemest wrapped into the highest airs , 
When thou but speakest of celestial Spheres . 
then cease not Tailor , garments more to shape , 
Of this projection or diviner matter , 
le 's have another suit of finest drape : 
And bury not thy talon in the water . 
That element's cold , but thou art all on fire : 
Go on , go on , and we will still admire . 
thine Tho : Bretnor . 

To my honest friend john Taylor . 

Thy Tailor's shears foul vices wings hath clipped , 
The seams of impious dealings are unripped : 
So Artlike thou these captoius times hast quipt , 
As if in Helicon thy pen were dipped , 
All those who 'gainst thy worth are Envious lipped , 
Thy sharp Satiric Muse hath nipped and snipt : 
And to conclude thy'nuention is not chipped , 
Or stolen or borowd , begged , or basely gripped . 
then Taylor thy conceits are truly sowed , 
And Sculler ( on my word ) it was well rowed . 
thine to my best power Enoch Lind . 

To him I love , yet never knew . 

TO praise thee without knowledge , were dispraise : 
I know thy Wit : in that , thyself I raise . 
Thy full fetcht-strokes so wafts me o'er the Strand , 
Of deep Conceit ; as bids me understands , 
That never Tailor shaped ( for such small price ) 
A Robe so covert , which uncovers Vice.  
Thy true friend john Handson .. 

In Landem Authoris . 

Most commonly one Tailor will dispraise , 
Another's workmanship , envying always 
At him that 's better than himself reputed , 
Though he himself be but a botcher bruited : 
So might it well be said of me ( my friend ) 
Should I not to thy work some few lines lend , 
Which to make probable this sentence tendeth , 
Who not commends , he surely discommendeth : 
In my illiterate censure these thy rhymes , 
Deserve applause even in these worst of times : 
When wit is only worthy held in those , 
On whom smooth flattery vain praise bestows . 
But I not minding with thy worth to flatter , 
Do know thy wit to good too toil by water . 
Rob : Taylor . 

To my friend john Taylor . 

This work of thine , thou hast compiled so well , 
It merit's better wits thy worth to tell . 
thine Maximilian Waad . 

To my kind friend JOHN TAILOR . 

Fie Momus cries , what frantic fit hath fired . 
The Pelting Sculler thus to play the Poet , 
As if he were with Homer's spirit inspir'de . 
Cease Critic , cease , and I will let thee know it . 
The honest Sculler seeking for a fare , 
Did meet the Muses in an evening late : 
And finding them disposed to take the air ; 
Such solace gave them with his Rustic prate , 
As there in guerdon of his homebred sport , 
It was decreed by all the Sisters nine 
He should receive ( since other means was short ) 
A brimful bowl of Heliconian Wine . 
Since when from him , such sweet conceits doth flow , 
As merit's all the praise thou canst bestow . 
Again , 

Iohn Taylor here I gladly would commend thee , 
And wish my note exceeded Ela's strain , 
Or that my Verse could equali Virgil's vain , 
Which might from Momus carping brood defend thee . 
Yet as I can I will this Reader tell , 
I know no Sculler ever written so well . 
Thy friend , Richard Leigh . 

To my true friend john Tailor 

amongst the best that Britain now doth bear , 
Graced by Apollo , and the Nymphs divine , 
Swollen with the Raptures of their great Engine , 
I think that few , or none , to thee comes near . 
They want the tru-true touch stone of the ear , 
Besides thy make all are merely thine , 
thou stealest no Chore , not Scene , nor page , nor line , 
If they do so , their works can witness bear . 
then justly jack , I do thee most esteem , 
Nor art thou always ignorant of Art , 
For Nature , so in thee doth play her part , 
As prodigal , not liberal she doth seem . 
Whilst thou her Champion , to thy greater grace 
mak'st Art to Nature even in Art give place . 
thine as I live , john Moraye . 

The Author's thanks to all those that have written in his Commendations . 

Right worthy , and my well-beloved friends , 
My love and service shall be all your debtors : 
A Beggar's thanks is all the best amends , 
And in that payment you shall all be getters . 
For words are cheap , and this my Book affords 
Your own , with double interest words for words . 
Yours , I T.  

To all in general on whose names I have Anagrammatized . 

Majestic Sol whose eye Eclipsing Rays , 
Shine with admired splendour o'er this land : 
And all you Mercuries , of Mars his band , 
Whose words and swords your temples crowns with bays . 
Your pardons grant me if I have transgressed , 
If you forgive , I 'll deal with all the rest . 
Ever at Command in all humble service , john Tailor 

The Author's description of a Poet and Poesy , with an Apollogie in defence of Natural English Poetry . 

Shall Beggars dive into the Acts of Kings ? 
Shall Nature speak of supernat'rall things , 
Shall Eagles' flights atempted be by Gnatts ? 
Shall mighty Whales be portrayed out by Sprate : 
These things I know impossible to be , 
And it is as impossible for me . 
That am a beggar in these Kingly acts , 
Which from the Heaven's true Poetry extracts . 
A supernat'rall fool , by Nature I 
That never knew this high born mystery , 
A worthless gnat , I know myself more weak , 
Yet of the Princely Egle dare to speak : 
A silly sprat the Ocean seeks to sound , 
To seek this Whale , though seeking he be drowned : 
then to proceed : a Poets Art I know , 
Is not compact of earthly things below : 
Nor is of any base substantial mettle , 
That in the world's rotundity doth settle : 
But 't is immortal , and it hath proceeding , 
From whence divinest souls have all their breeding . 
It is a blessing heaven hath sent to men , 
By men it is diwlged with their pen : 
And by that propogation it is known , 
And over all the world dispersed and thrown : 
In verbal elocution so refined , 
That it to Virtue animates man's minds 
The blessed singer of blessed Israel , 
In this rare Art , he rarely did exell , 
He sweetly Poetyzed in Heavenly verses , 
Such lines which ay eternity rehearses : 
What Reverend rate , and glorious great esteem , 
Augustus Caesar did a Poet deem : 
Admired Virgil's life doth plainly show 
That all the world a Poet's worth may know : 
But leaving Israel's King , and Roman Caesar , 
Let 's seek in England , English Poets treasure , 
Sir Philip Sidney , his times Mars and Muse , 
That word , and sword so worthily could use , 
That spite of death his Glory liu's , always 
For Conquests , and for Poesy crowned with bays : 
What famous men liu's in this age of ours 
As if the Sisters nine had left their bowers , 
With more post hast then expeditious wings 
They here have found the Helliconian springs . 
We of our mighty Monarch JAMES may boast , 
Who in this heavenly Art exceeds the most : 
Where men may see the Muse's wisdom well , 
When such a Glorious house they choose to dwell : 
The Preacher whose instructions doth afford 
The souls dear food , the everliving word : 
If Poet's skill be banished from his brain , 
His preaching ( sometimes ) will be but too plain : 
'twixt Poetry and best Divinity 
There is such near , and dear affinity . 
As 't were propinquity of brother's blood , 
That without tone , the other 's not so good : 
The man that takes in hand brave verse to write , 
And in Divinity hath no insight , 
He may perhaps make smooth , and Artlike Rhymes , 
To please the humours of these idle times : 
But name of Poet he shall never merit , 
Though writing them he waste his very spirit : 
They therefore much mistake that seem to say , 
How every one that writes a paltry play : 
A sottish Sonnet in the praise of love , 
A song or iegge , that fools to laughter move , 
In praise or dispraise , in defame or fame , 
Deserves the honour of a Poet's name : 
I further say , and further will maintain 
That he that hath true Po'sie in his brain , 
Will not profane so high and heavenly skill , 
To glory , or be prowed of writing ill : 
But if his Muse do stoop to such dejection , 
't is but to show the world her sin's infection : 
A Poet's ire sometimes may be inflamed : 
To make foul Vices brazen face ashamed . 
And then his Epigrams and Satyrs whip 
Will make basegald unruly jades to skip : 
In frost they say 't is good , bad blood be nipped , 
And I have seen Abuses whipped and stripped , 
In such rare fashion , that the wincing age , 
Hath kicked and flung , with uncontrolled rage . 
O worthy Withers I shall love thee ever , 
And often mayst thou do thy best indever , 
That still thy works and thee may live together 
Contending with thy name , and never wither . 
But further to proceed in my pretence 
Of Natr'all English Poetries defence : 
For Laureate Sidney , and our gracious james , 
Have plunged been in Arts admired streams : 
And all the learned Poets of our days , 
Have Arts great aid to win still living bays . 
All whom I do confess such worthy men , 
That I unworthy am with ink and pen 
To carry after them . But since my haps 
Have been so happy as to get some scaps : 
By Nature given me from the Muse's table , 
I 'll put them to the best use I am able : 
I have read Tasso , Virgil , Homer , Ovid , 
josephus , Plutark , whence I have approved , 
And found such observations as are fit , 
With plenitude to fraught a barren wit. 
And let a man of any nation be , 
These Authors reading , makes his judgement see 
Some rules that may his ignorance refine , 
And such predominance it hath with mine . 
no bladder blown ambition puffs my Muse , 
An English Poets writings to excuse : 
Nor that I any rule of art condemn , 
Which is Dame Nature's ornamental gem : 
But these poor lines I wrote ( my wits best pelf ) 
Defending that which can defend itself . 
Know then vnnat'ral English Mongrel Monster , 
Thy wand'ring judgement doth too much misconstrue : 
When thou affirmest thy Native Contryman , 
To make true verse no art or knowledge can : 
Cease , cease to do this glorious kingdom wrong , 
To make her speech inferior to each tongue : 
Show not thyself more brutish than a beast , 
Base is that bird that files her home-born nest : 
In what strange tongue did Virgil's Muse commerce ? 
What language wast that Ovid wrote his verse ? 
thou sayst 't was Latin , why I say so too , 
In no tongue else they any thing could do : 
They Nat'rally did learn it from their mother , 
And must speak Latin , that could speak no other : 
The Graecian blinded Bard did much compile , 
And never used no foreigne far-fetched stile : 
But as he was a Greek , his verse was Greek , 
In other tongues ( alas ) he was to seek , 
Du Bartas heavenly all admired Muse , 
no unknown Language ever used to use : 
But as he was a Frenchman , so his lines 
In natitue French with fame most glorious shines . 
And in the English tongue 't is fitly stated , 
By siluer-tongued Silvester translated . 
So well , so wisely , and so rarely done , 
That he by it immortal fame hath won . 
then as Great Maro , and renowned Naso , 
Brave Homer , Petrarke , sweet Italian Tasso : 
And numbers more , past numbering to be numbered , 
Whose rare inventions never were incumberd , 
With our outlandish chip chop gibberish gambling , 
To fill men's ears with unacquainted babbling : 
Why may not then an Englishman . I pray , 
In his own language write as erst did they , 
Yet must we suit our phrases to their shapes , 
And in their imitations be their Apes . 
Whilst Muses haunt the fruitful forked hill , 
The world shall reverence their unmatched skill . 
And for invention , fiction , method , measure , 
From them must Poets seek to seek that treasure . 
But yet I think a man may use that tongue 
His Country uses , and do them no wrong . 
then I whose Artless studies are but weak , 
Who never could , nor will but English speak , 
Do here maintain , if words be rightly placed , 
A Poet's skill , with no tongue more is graced . 
It runs so smooth , so sweetly it doth flow , 
From it such heavenly harmony doth grow , 
That it the understanders senses moves 
With admiration , to express their loves . 
no Music under heaven is more divine , 
then is a well-writte , and a well-read line . 
But when a witless self conceited Rook , 
A good invention dares to overlook : 
How piteous then man's best of wit is martyred , 
In barbarous manner tottered torn and quartered . 
So mingle mangled , and so hacked and hewed , 
So seuraily be scuruide and bemewde . 
then this detracting dutty dunghill drudge , 
Although he understand not , yet will judge . 
Thus famous Poesy must abide the doom 
Of every muddy minded rascal Groom . 
Thus rarest Artists are continual stung 
By every prating , stinking lump of dung . 
For what cause then should I so much repine , 
When best of writers that ere wrote a line 
Are subject to the censure of the worst , 
Who will their follies vent , or else they burst . 
I have at idle times some Pamphlets written , 
( The fruitless issue of a natural wit ) 
And cause I am no Scholar , some envy me , 
With foul and false calumnious words belie me : 
With brazen fronts , and flinty hard belief 
Affirming or suspecting me a thief : 
And that my sterrile Muse so dry is milched , 
That what I write , is borrowed , begged , or filch , d. 
Because my name is Tailor , they suppose 
My best inventions all from stealing grows : 
As though there were no difference to be made 
Betwixt the name of Tailor , and the Trade . 
Of all strange weapons , I have least of skill 
To manage or to wield a Tailor's bill . 
I cannot Item it for silk and facing , 
For cutting , edging , stiffning , and for lacing : 
For bombast , stitching , binding , and for buckram , 
For cotton , bays , for canvas and for lockram . 
All these I know , but know not how to use them , 
Let trading Tailors therefore still abuse them . 
My skil's as good to write , to sweated , or row , 
As any Tailors is to steal or sow . 
In end , my pulsive brain no Art affords , 
To mint , or stamp , or forge new coined words . 
But all my tongue can speak , or pen can write 
Was spoken and written before I could indite . 
Yet let me be of my best hopes bereft , 
If what I ever written I got by thest : 
Or by base simony , or bribes , or gifts 
Or begged , or borrowed it by sharking shifts . 
I know I never any thing have done , 
But what may from a weak invention run . 
Give me the man whose wit will undertake 
A substance of a shadow for to make : 
Of nothing something , ( with Arts great aid ) 
With Nature only all his Muse arraide . 
That solid matter from his brain can squees , 
Whilst some jame Artists wits are drawn to 'th leeze . 
By teaching Parrots prate and prattle can , 
And taught an Ape will imitate a man : 
And Banks his horse showed tricks , taught with much labour 
So did the hare that played upon the tabor . 
Shall man , I pray , so witless be besotted ? 
Shall men ( like beasts ) no wisdom be allotted , 
( Without great study ) with instinct of Nature , 
Why then were man the worst and basest creature ? 
But men are made the other creatures Kings , 
Because superior wisdom from them spring's . 
And therefore Momus unto thee again 
That dost suspect the issue of my brain 
Are but my bastards , now my Muse doth fly , 
And in thy throat gives thy suspect the lie . 
And to the trial dares thee when thou dar'st 
Accounting thee a coward if thou sparest . 
I have a little wit , and brain , and spleen , 
And gall , and memory , and mirth and teen , 
And passions , and affections of the mind , 
As other Mortals use to be inclined . 
And having all this , wherefore should men doubt 
My wit should be so Crippled with the Gout , 
That it must have assistance to compile , 
Like a lame dog , that 's limping o'er a stile . 
no , no , thou Zoylus , thou detracting else , 
Though thou art insufficient in thyself : 
And hast thy wit and studies in reversion , 
Cast not on me that scandalous aspersion . 
I hate such belladmongring rhyming slaves , 
Such jigging rascals , such audacious knaves . 
The bane of learning , the abuse of Arts , 
The scum of Natures' worst defective parts : 
The scorn of scholars , poison of rewards , 
Regardless vassals of true worths regard , 
The shame of time the canker of deserts , 
The dearth of liberal and heroic hearts . 
That like so many bandogs snatle and snatch , 
And all 's their own they can from others ca●th . 
That lick the scraps of Scholars wits ( like dogs ) 
( A Proverb old ) draffs good enough for hogs . 
Purloining , line by line , and piece by piece , 
And from each place they read , will filch a fleece . 
Me thinks my Muse should piecemeal tear these rogues 
more base and vile then tattered Irish broages . 
Clawkissing rascals , flattering Parasites , 
Sworn vices vassals , virtues opposites . 
't is you damned curs have murdered liberal minds , 
And made best Poets worse esteemed then hinds . 
But wherefore do I take a Scholar's part , 
That have no grounds or Axioms of Art : 
That am in Poesy an artless creature , 
That have no learning but the book of Nature : 
no Academical Poetike strains , 
But homespunne medley of my mottley brains . 
The reason I a Scholars wants bewail , 
And why against base littered whelps I rail , 
Is this , that they long time should time bestow 
In painful study , secret Arts to know , 
And after live in want , contempt and scorn , 
By every dunghill peasant overborne . 
Abused , rejected , doggedly disgraced , 
Despised ragged , lousy , and out faced : 
Whilst Bagpipe-poets stuf with others wind , 
Are graced for wit , they have from them purloinde . 
Now in mine own defence once more I 'll say , 
Their too rash judgements to much runs astray , 
That , cause my name is Tailor I do theeve it , 
I hope their wisdoms will no more believe it . 
Nor let my want of learning be the cause , 
I should be bitten with black envy's jaws : 
For whosoe'er by nature is not a Poet 
By rules of Art he never well can show it . 
there 's many a wealth heir long time at School , 
Doth spend much study , and comes home a fool . 
A Poet needs must be a Poet born , 
Or else his Art procures his greater scorn . 
For why ? if Art alone made men excel , 
Me thinks Tom Coriat should write exc'llent well : 
But he was born be like in some cross year , 
When learning was good cheap , but wit was dear . 
then to conclude , as I before began , 
Though naught by Scholarship or Art I can 
Yet ( if my stock by nature were more bare ) 
I scorn to utter stolen or borrowed ware : 
And therefore Reader now I tell thee plain , 
If thou incredilous dost still remain . 
If yea or nay these reasons do persuade thee , 
I leave thee and thy faith to him that made thee . 
To the Kings most excellent Majesty . 

Anagramma . james Stuart MUSES TARRY AYE . 

Great Sovereign as thy sacred Royal breast 
Is by the Muse's whole and sole possessed : 
So do I know , Rich , precious , peerless gem , 
In witting unto thee , I write to them . 
The Muses tarry at thy name , why so ? 
Because they have no further for to go . 
To the high and mighty Prince , Charles Stuart . 

Anagramma Calls true hearts . 

Brave Prince , thy Name , thy fame , thyself and all , 
With love and service , all true hearts doth call : 
So Royally endued with Princely parts , 
Thy Real virtues always , calls true heart , 
To Anna Queen of Great Britain . 

These backward , and these forward lines I send 
To your right Royal , high Majestic hand : 
And like the guilty prisoner I attend 
Your censure , wherein bliss or bale doth stand . 
If I condemned be , I cannot grudge , 
For never Poet had a juster judge . 
These lines are to be read , the same backward as they are forward . 

Dear Madam Reed 
Deem if I meed . 
Love's labyrinth , with the description of the seven Planets . 

I Travelled through a wilderness of late , 
A shady , dark unhaunted desert grove : 
Whereas a wretch explained his piteous state , 
Whose moans the Tigers unto Ruthe would move : 
Yet though he was a man cast down by Fate : 
Full manly with his miseries he strove , 
And dared false Fortune , to her utmost worst , 
And ere he meant to bend , would bravely burst . 
Yet swelling grief , so much o'er charged his heart , 
In scalding sighs , he needs must vent his woe , 
Where groans , and tears , and sighs all bear a part : 
As partners in their master's overthroe : 
Yet spite of grief , he laughed to scorn his smart , 
And midst his depth of care , demeaned him so , 
As if sweet concord , bore the greatest sway , 
And snarling discord was enforced t' obey . 
thou Saint ( quoth he ) I whilom did adore , 
Think not thy youthful feature still can last , 
In winter's age , thou shalt in vain deplore 
That thou on me such coy disdain didst cast : 
then , then remember old said saws of yore : 
Time was , Time is , but then thy Time is past . 
And in the end , thy bitter torments be , 
Because that causeless , thou torment●●●●● me . 
O you immortal , high Imperious powers , 
Have you in your resistless ●●●●●ess decreed 
To blast with spite and scorn my pleasant hou'res : 
To starve my hopes , and my despair to feed , 
Once more let me attain those sunshine showers : 
Whereby my withered joys , again may breed . 
If Gods no comfort to my cares apply , 
My comfort is , I know the way to die . 
With wits distracted here I make my will , 
I do bequeath to Saturn , all my sadness , 
When Melancholy first my heart did fill 
My senses turn from soberness to madness : 
Since Saturn , thou wast Author of my ill , 
To give me grief , and take away my gladness . 
Malignant Planet , what thou gav'st to me 
I give again , as good a gift to thee . 
I do surrender back to thundering jove , 
All state , which erst my glory did adorn : 
My frothy pomp , and my ambitious love : 
To thee false jupiter I back return , 
All jovial thoughts that first my heart did move , 
In thy Majestic brain was bred and born : 
Which by thy inspiration , caused my wrack , 
And therefore unto thee , I give it back . 
To Mars I give my rough robustious rage , 
My anger , fury , and my scarlet wrath : 
Man-slaughtring murder is thy only page , 
Which to thy bloody guidance I bequeath . 
Thy servants all , from death should have their wage , 
For they are executioners for death , 
Great Mars , all fury , wrath , and rage of mine 
I freely offer to thy Goarye shrine . 
All seeing Sol , thy bright reflecting eye 
Did first with Poet's Art inspire my brains : 
't is thou that me so much didst dignify , 
To rap my soul with sweet Poetike strains , 
And unto thee again before I die 
I give again , a Poets gainelesse gains . 
Though wit and art are blessings most divine 
Yet here , their gems , amongst a heard of swine . 
To thee false goddess , loves adulterous Queen 
My most inconstant thoughts I do surrender : 
For thou alone , alone haste ever been 
True lover's bane , yet seemest love's defender , 
And were thy bastard blind , as fools do ween : 
So right he had not split my heart so tender . 
Fond Vulcan's bride , thou turnest my joy to pain 
Which unto thee I tender back again . 
To Mercury , I give my sharking shifts , 
My two fold false equivocating tricks : 
All cunning sleights , and close deceiving drifts : 
Which to decitfull wrong my humour pricks : 
All my Buzeaka's , my Decoys , and lists : 
no birdlime henceforth to my fingers sticks . 
My thoughts , my words , my actions , that are bad 
To thee I give , for them from thee I had . 
And last , and low'st of all these Planets seven 
My wavering thoughts , I give to Luna ' es guiding : 
My senseless brains , of wit and sense bereaven 
My steadfast change , and my most certain sliding . 
All various alterations under heaven 
All that is mine , o'er moving , or abiding , 
My woes , my joys , my mourning , and my mirth 
I give to thee , from whence they had their birth . 
Thus he against the higher powers contends 
And threats , and bans , and beats his care crazd breast , 
The birds harmonious music to him lends 
Which adds no rest , unto his restless rest : 
Yea every thing in loving sort attends : 
All senceable , and senseless do their best . 
With helpless helps do help to moon his moan 
And her he loves , Remains unkind alone . 
At last he rose from out the place he lay , 
And frantikely ran woodlie through the wood : 
The scratching brambles , in his wails way 
Entreats him stay , but in a harebrained mood 
He fled , till weary he at last did stay , 
To rest him , where a ragged rock there stood , 
With resolution to despair and die 
Whilst Echo to his moans , did thus reply . 
Echo . 

May human mischiefs be compared with mine ? mine . 
thine babbling Echo , would thy tongue told true : rue . 
I rue that I alone must weep and pine pine . 
I pine for her , from whom my cares ensue . sue . 
I sue , I serve a marble hearted fair air . 
And air is all the fruit of fruitless love : love . 
Loves hope is past , then welcome black despair despair . 
Shall there despair my causeless curse remove move . 
O whither shall I move , to joy or pain pain . 
Must pain be my reward for pain for ay ay . 
Ay must my torment feed her scornful vein vain . 
To ease my grief , will she say yea or nay , nay . 
Nay , then from love and all his laws I fly fly . 
I fly , I search , I seek the way to die . die . 
Thus brabbling 'gainst all things he hears or sees 
Impatient as his froward fortunes wrongs . 
no sensu'all object with his sense agrees . 
All pleasures his displeasure more prolongs : 
At length he carves upon the thick barked trees 
These under written sad lamenting songs . 
And as my weak invention understood 
His farewell thus , was graved upon the wood . 
Sonnet . 

Like a decrepit wretch , deformed and lame 
My verse approaches to my dearest Dame 
Whose dire disdain , makes my laments her game , 
Whose scornful eyes adds fuel to my flame . 
But whether she , or I , are most too blame 
I for attempting to exalt her fame 
With fruitless Sonnets ; which my wit did frame : 
Or she whose piercing looks my heart o'er o'er come . 
Her feature can both men and monsters tame 
The gods , and fiends , adore and dread her name , 
Whose matchless form doth Cytherea shame , 
Whose cruel heart remaineth still the same . 
And in a word , I strive against the stream 
My state ' is to low , and hers is too supreme . 
then since so scornful is her high disdain . 
Since all my love is but bestowed in vain , 
Curb fancy then , with true discretions Rhine , 
Let reason cure my tor-tormenting pain . 
Suppose I should at last , my suit attain , 
And then sit down and count my losing gain : 
My harvest would be tares in she 'd of grain . 
then I 'll no longer vex my vexed brain 
To seek her love , who joys when I complain : 
no longer I , loves vassal will remain , 
I 'll be no more of Cupid's witless train , 
Whose partial blindness hath so many slain . 
Proud Dame , whose breast my love didst erst refrain 
Despite love's laws I 'll be no more thy swain . 
Thus like a man , whose answer 〈◊〉 ●erest him , 
I found him mad with love , and so I left him . 
Pluto's Proclamation concerning his Infernal pleasure for the Propagation of Tobacco 

True News and strange my Muse intends to write , 
From horrid concaves of eternal night : 
Whereas a damned Parliament of Devils , 
Enacted laws to fill the world with evils . 
Black Pluto sundry proclamations sends 
Through Barathrum , and summons all the fiends , 
To know how they on earth had spent their times , 
And how they had becloged the world with crimes . 
First spoke an ancient Devil ycleaped Pride , 
Who said he wandered had , both far and wide , 
Dispersing his Ambitious poisonous bane , 
As far as Luna doth both wax or wane . 
Next summoned was , a rakehell furgound cur , 
Called Avarice , ( whose rotten haulking murr ) 
Was like to choke him ere he could declare 
How he had souls possessed with monies care . 
That so they fill their Coffers to the brim , 
all 's one , let sweet salvation sink or swim . 
The third that to the Parliament came in 
Was murder , all inroab'de in scarlet sin , 
Who told great Limboes' monarch he had done 
Such deeds , as thousand souls to hell hath won . 
The fourth that entered to this damned jury , 
Was sweet sin Lechery , a smugfaced fury : 
Said that the world should his great pains approve , 
Where universal lust is counted love . 
The fifth was an ilshaped decrepit Crone 
Called Envy , all consumed to skin and bone : 
And she declared what labour he had spent 
To Honours , and to Virtue's detriment . 
then sixth , did Burst-gut Gluttony appear , 
Whose sole delight is all in belly cheer : 
Who told how he men's greedy minds did serve 
To cram their bodies , whilst their souls did starve . 
The seventh was Sloth , an ugly loathsome wretch , 
Who being called , did gape , and yawn , and stretch : 
I have ( quoth he ) done as your highness wiled , 
I all the world with Idleness have filled , 
In lazy Creatures members I do lurk , 
That thousands will be hanged , before they 'll work . 
then Pluto said , these ills , you have done well , 
In propagation of our kingdom , Hell : 
But yet there 's one thing which I will effect , 
Which too long hath been buried with neglect ; 
And this it is , in Rich America , 
In India , and black Barbaria . 
Whereas the people's superstition show 
they 're mine , because no other God they know , 
In those misguided lands I caus'de to breed 
A foul contagious , stinking Manbane weed : 
Which they ( poor fools ) with diligence do gather 
To sacrifice to me that am their Father : 
Where every one a Furies shape assumes , 
Befog'd and clouded with my hel-hatched fumes . 
But these black Nations that adore my name , 
I 'll leave in pleasure : and my mischiefs frame 
'Gainst those who by the name of Christians go , 
Whose Author was my final overthrow . 
And therefore strait diwlge our great commands , 
That presently throughout all Christian lands , 
Tobacco be dispersed , that they may be 
As Moors and Pagans' are , all like to me . 
That from the Palace to the paltry nook , 
Like hell in Imitation all may look . 
In vice let Christians , pass both jews and Turks , 
And let them outpass Christians in good works . 
Let every Cobbler with his dirty fist , 
Take pride to be a black Tobacconist : 
Let Idiot Coxcombs , sweat 't is excellent gear , 
And with a whiff their reputations rear . 
Let every Idle adle-pated gull 
With stinking sweet Tobacco stuff his skull . 
Let Don fantastic smoke his vasty gorge . 
Let rich and poor , let honest men and knaves , 
Be smoked and stunk unto their timeless graves . 
Thus is our last irrevocable will , 
Which though it damn not man , I know 't will kill . 
And therefore straight , to every Christian Nation 
Diwlge , and publish , this our Proclamation . 
A Proclamation or approbation , from the King of execration , to every Nation , for Tobacoes' propagation . 

Whereas we have been credibly Informed ( by our true and never failing Intelligencers , as the souls of Usurers , Brokers , Knights of the Post , Panders , Bawds , & such like , our well-beloved sons and daughters , by graceless adoption ) that the Herb , ( alias weed ) ycleaped Tobaco , ( alias ) Trinidado , alias , Petun , alias , Necocianun , ( a long time hath been in continual use and motion , amongst the Sunburnt , tanskind Indians , Barbarians and the rest of our black guard inhabiting in America ; which hath been greatly to our contentment to see our execrable servants on the earth , to come so near our infernal Tartarian sulphorous contagious stink , with their terrestrial imitations : we therefore with the full consent of our three Estates , namely our Lords spiritual of our own synagogue , as twelve Turkish Muftyes 66.  Popes & sundry other Cardinals etc. Prelates our four trusty friends . Besides our Temporal Lords , as Heliogabalus , Nero , Sardanapalus , with many more , and our Commonalty or vassals , whereof the chief , we hold to be Guido Faux , Francis Ravillae , and all such as were Naturalised into the line of judas or Achitophel . We with these estates afore said do ( by the Authority of this present Parliament ) straight charge and command that all devils , demydevills , fiends , furies , hags , witches , ghosts , goblins , spirits , elves , fairies , or any other subject or subjects , to our infernal monarchy , by what name or title soever they be called , that they and every of them do forthwith upon the sight hereof , disperse themselves amongst the Christians ( the utter enemies of our mighty Monarchy ) and there by inspirations of witchcrafts , spells , exorcisms , conjurations , incantations , or any other of our Magical devices , do their best endeavours to possess them with the love of Tobaco , make old men dote over it , and young men admire it , make the rich smoke away their wealth in it , make the laborer in one hour in the Eavening puff away his whole day's work , let the decayed bankrupt be always my trusty factor to divulge it , be they never so base let them be accounted Noble that use it , and be they never so noble , let them be thought base that refuse it : let Playhouses , Drinking-schooles , Taverns , Alehouses , Bawdy-houses , be continually haunted with the contaminous vapours of it , nay ( if it be possible ) bring it into their Churches , and there choke up their Preachers , ( my only and my hateful enemies . ) 

And whereas the Indians , and other far remored barbarous Nations were the first that used it , we do straight further charge and command , that you and every of you , do dissuade them from the excessive use of it , and let those Nations that are our continual opposites in manners and Religion be fully possessed with an immoderate desire of it like Horsleeches , the more they drink the more let them thirst , let it be a trade to practise the whiff , the snuff , the gulp , the evaporating or retention . Do this withal expedition as you expect the fruition , of our fatherly execrable Mallevolent mallediction . 

Given at our Palace at Gehenna etc.  



This Proclamation was no sooner done , 
But thousand furies to and from did run , 
TO acomplish what their Master Pluto spoke 
And fully fill the world with stink and smoke : 
And now the man that 's o'ne of feeling rest , 
By reason of his age whose teeth hath left 
The vasty Caverne of his mumping cud , 
Must have Tobaco to revive his blood : 
The glistering Gallant , or the gallant Gull. 
The jeering pander , and the hackney Trull . 
The Roisting Rascal , and the swearing Slave , 
The Ostler , Tapster , all in general crave 
To be a foggy , misty , smoky jury 
Upon this upstart newfound Indian fury . 
Great Captain Graceless , storms , protests , and swears , 
he 'll have the rascal Poet by the ears , 
And beaten him , as a man would beat a dog , 
That dares once speak against this precious fog . 
It is the jewel that he most respects 
It is the gem of joy his heart affects : 
It is the thing his soul doth most adore , 
To live and love Tobaco , and a whore : 
he 'll cram his brains with fumes of Indian grass , 
And grow as fat with 't as an English Ass . 
Some say Tobaco will men's days prolong , 
To whom I answer , they are in the wrong . 
And sure my conscience gives me not the lie 
I think 't will make men rotten ere they die . 
Old Adam lived nine hundred thirty year , 
Yet ne'er drank none , as I could read or hear : 
And some men now lives ninety years and past , 
Who never drank Tobaco , first nor last . 
then since at first it came , from faithless Moors 
( And since 't is now more common far than whores ) 
I see no reason any Christian Nation 
Should follow them , in devilish imitation : 
So farewell pipe , and pudding , snuff and smoke 
My Muse thinks fit to leave , before she choke : 
Certain verses written in the Barbarian tongue , dropped out of a Negro's pocket , which I thought good to insert , because they tend to the honour of Tobaco . 

Vaprosh faugh stinkquash flavorumques fie fominoshte 
Spitterspawlimon , loatherson him halkish spewriboshte 
Mistrum fog smoakrash , choakerumques olifa trish trash 
Dametas durticum belchum , contagioshte vomitroshe : 
Whifferum , puff gulpum , allisnuff huff fleaminon odish , 
Rewmito contaminosh diabollish dungish odorish : 
To the Right Hon : Lord. WILLIAM Earl of Pembroke . WILLIAM HERBET Annagrama . my Heart will bear . 

Right Noble Lord , whose breast doth bear a heart 
Which is a Patron unto Arms and Art : 
In spite of Envy , still thy fame shines clear 
For none but honoured thoughts thy heart will bear . 
Satire . 

When I but think , the days we wander in , 
How most part of the world do live by sin : 
How finely Satan showed his cunning skill , 
That one man gets his goods , from others ill . 
Doth not the Lawyers live like mighty Lords , 
On brawls , on jars , contentions and discords , 
When if men ( as they should ) would but agree , 
A Term would scarcely yield a Lawyer's fee ? 
Let usurers brag of conscience what they can , 
They live like devils , upon the bane of man : 
The racking landlord gets his ill got store , 
By railing rents , which make his tenants poor : 
Clap shoulder sergeants get the devil and all 
By begg'ring and by bringing men in thrall . 
Like gentlemen , the jailors spend their lives 
By keeping men in fetters , bonds and gyves : 
The vintner and the vict'lar get most gains 
From daily drunkards , and distempered brains : 
From whence do justice Clerks get most they have , 
But from the whore , the thief , the bawd , the knave ? 
In what consists the hangman's greatest hope 
But hope of great employment for the rope ? 
The very blewcoate beadles get their trash , 
By whips and rods , and the fine firking lash . 
But leaving these , note but how Corporations 
From others vices , get their reputations : 
The upstart velvet silken fatten gull , 
His own purse empts to fill the Mercer's full : 
When for his birth , or wit more fit agrees , 
A breech of leather , and a coat of freeze . 
The Tailor is a gentleman transformed 
For his inventing fashions new deformed , 
And those that make the Verdingales and bodies , 
Get most the have from idle witless nodies . 
The Tires , the Periwigs , and the Rebates , 
Are made t' adorn Ilshaped Inamoratoes . 
Yea all the world is fallen to such a madness , 
That each man gets his goods from others badness . 
The Chirurgeon and Physician get their stocks , 
From Gouts , from Fevers , Botches , Piles , and Pocks : 
With others pain , they most of all are pleased , 
And best are eased : when others are diseased . 
As Sextons live by dead , and not by quick , 
So they live with the sound , but by the sick . 
Thus each man lives by other men's amiss , 
And one man's meat , another's poison is . 
To the Right honourable john , Lord Viscount Haddington , john Ramsey 

Anagramma I AYMER HONERS . 

Thrice worthy Lord , whose virtues do proclaim , 
How Honours noble mark is still thy Aim , 
To attain the which thou hold'st thy hand so steady . 
That thy deesrts have won the prize already . 
To the Honourable Knight , Sir David Moraye . 

Anagramma You are admired . 

With wisdom and with virtue so inspired , 
That spite of Envy's teeth , you are Admired . 
To King JAMES . 

Anagramma james Stuart Arm at jesus . 

Upon the Powder Treason the fifth of November . 

This day old Demon , and the damned Crew , 
Our King and Kingdom in the air had tossed : 
But that our God their devilish practice crossed , 
And on their treacherous heads the mischief threw . 
no Pagan , Tartar , Turk or faithless jew , 
Or hell's black Monarch with his hateful host : 
Since first amongst them Treason was engrossed , 
no plot like that from their invention flew . 
But when they thought powderblast , a breath 
Should all this Island into totters tear : 
th' almighties mercy freed us from that fear , 
And paid the Traitors with infamous death . 
For which , let King , and all true Subjects sing 
Continual praise unto Heavens gracious King.  
To the Noble Gentleman Mr. john Moraye Gentleman of his Majesty's Honourable Bedchamber . 

Anagramma I aim Honour . 

Industrious Loialty doth daily tell 
thou Aymest at honour , and thou leuel'st well , 
And with thy trusty service shootest so right , 
That in the end thou sure wilt hit the white . 
Twelve Sonnets upon the Sun's entering into the 12.  Celestial Signs . 

The 10. of March , the Sun enters into Aries , or the sign of the Ram March 10.  Aries . 

Diurnal Titans all reviuing Car , 
Through all the heaucus his progress now he takes : 
And now his glistering Rays he doth unbarre , 
And what his absence marred , his presence makes : 
Now he begins dame Tellus face to parch , 
With blustering Boreas and with Eurus breath , 
Thick clouds of dust in March , through air doth march 
And Plants dead seeming Re-reviues from death . 
Now at the heavy-headed horned Ram , 
Aeous , Aethon , Phlegon , and Pyrois , 
On sweet Ambrosya sweetly feed and cram , 
And drinking Nectar's gods carousing juice , 
Thus yearly , one and thirty days at least , 
In Aries , Titan deigns to be a guest . 
To the Noble Gentleman and my approved good friend Sr. james Moray Knight . james Muraye 

Anagramma I am Ay Sure.  

The worst of fortune thou canst well endure , 
Thy Anagram includes , thu Ay art sure . 
The 11. of April he comes into Taurus , or the Sign of the Bull. Taurus . 

Hiperion now 's removed unto the Bull , 
And seems all hid in Mists and watery bowers : 
Till woolsacke seeming clouds are bursting full , 
And then he glides the Air with golden showers . 
He shines , he hides , he smiles and then he lours , 
Now glorious glowing , and strait darkened dim : 
he 's now obscured and now his beams out-powres , 
As skies are clear , or thicketwixt us and him . 
Thus all the April , at bopecpe he plays , 
Encircling daily the Rotundious sphere . 
And at the Bull he hides his glistering rays , 
Till air is purged of clouds , and skies are clear . 
then he the headstrong Taurus soon forsakes , 
And to his Summer progress haste he makes . 
To the Right worshipful the Recorder of London , and Sergeant to the King's Majesties : Sir HENRY MONTAGVE 

Anagramma Governeth Many . 

amongst a Million there is hardly Any , 
That like yourself so well doth govern Many . 
The 12. of May the Sun enters into Gemini , or the Twins . Gemini , May.  

Now bright faced Sminthus , with fair Flora meets , 
Adorning her with Nature's best attire : 
Trees , plants , herbs , flowers , and odoriferous sweets , 
With Birds all chanting in their feathered choir . 
Now country Tom and Tyb have their desire , 
And roll and tumble freely on the grass , 
The Milkmaid gets a green gown for her hire , 
And all in sport the time away do pass . 
The bird , the beast , the lusty jad , the lass 
Do sing , do frisk , do clip , do coll , do kiss : 
Not thinking how the time must be , or was , 
But making pleasant ufe of time as 't is . 
Till Sminthus leaves his lodging at the twins , 
And to a hotter race his course begins . 
To my approved good friend Mr. Robert Branthwayte . 

Anagramma . You Bear a heart true bend . 

Let fortune smile or frown you are content , 
At all Assays you bear a heart true bend . 
The 12. of june the Sun enters into Cancer or the Crab . Cancer . june . 

OF Fall the Inns where Sol doth use to lie , 
With crabbed Cancer none may make compare : 
It is the highest in the lofty sky , 
All other signs to it Inferior are . 
When Sol is once ascended and come there , 
He scalds and scorches with his heavenly heat : 
Makes fields of grass , and flowery meadows bare , 
And though the Idleworke not yet they sweat . 
Thus like an all-commanding Lord he sways , 
High mounted in his chief solstician pride : 
For when in Cancer he immures his rays , 
Unto the height his glories amplifide . 
And when he goes from thence , he doth begin 
By shorter journeys to attain his Inn . 
To my especial friend Master SAMUEL CALVERTA . 

Anagramma . Virtue Calmes All.  

The flesh , the world , the devil , and all entice , 
Yet still thy honest virtue calms all vice . 
The thirteenth of july the sun enters into Leo , or the Lion. Leo , july . 

The world's eye daz'ler in his fiery race , 
Doth at the Lion lodge his untamed steeds : 
And now the ripening year begins apace 
To show Dame Tellus , procreative seeds . 
For as from man , man's generation breeds , 
So by manuring of our Grandam Earth , 
Are brought forth fruits , and flowers , and herbs , & weeds 
To shield ingrateful man from pining dearth . 
The dogged dog days now with heat doth swealt , 
And now 's the season , of th'vnseasned air : 
When burning fevers make the patient melt , 
Whose heat the Doctors hardly can repair : 
For why these currish days are fatal still , 
And where they chance to bite , they use to kill . 
To the Right worshipful Sir john Swinarton , late Lord Mayor of London . JOHN SVVIN'ARTONE . 

Anagramma . Waitss in honour . 

The man that Nobly serves , with wisdom's skill 
And good direction , waits in honour still . 
The foureteenth of August the sun enters into Virgo . Or the Virgin. Virgo . August . 

Unhappy Phaeton's , splendidious Sire 
Left amorous bussing beauteous Glim●ns' lips , 
And all inspired with Love's celestial fires 
His Globe surrounding steeds a main he whips : 
And to the Virgin Virgo down doth glide , 
Where for she entertained him to his pleasure . 
He his Exchequer coffers opens wide , 
And fills the world with harvests wished for treasure : 
Now country hinds unto their tools betake 
The fork , the rake , the scythe , the hook , the cart , 
And all a general expedition make , 
Till Nature be left naked by their art . 
At last the Virgin when these things are done , 
Till that time twelve mouth leaves her love the sun . 
To the worthy Gentleman Master SAMVEL DANIEL . 

Anagramma . jesu Amend all . 

How ever my poor lines are understood 
Yet I am sure thy Anagram is good . 
The thirteenth of September the sun enters into Libra , Or the Balance . Libra . September . 

The Great allseeing burning eye of day , 
In Libraes Balance restless comes to rest , 
Where equally his way he seems to way : 
And day , and night with equal hours are dressed : 
By these just soles , true justice is expressed , 
Which doth to times and places tender right 
Where wealth insults not , nor the poor oppressed , 
But all 's e'en poyzed , like the day and night . 
And now this lamp of light doth here alight 
Making this Sign , his Equinoctial Inn , 
Whilst fruitful trees are over-laden quite : 
( Too great a gracious guerdon for man's sin ) 
And as in March he 'gan to do us grace , 
So to th' Antipodes he now 'gins show her face . 
To the divine Poet and my worthy friend Mr. JOSHVAH SYLLVESTER . 

Anagramma . Thuss he serus loyaly . 

Thus he serves loialy , in place of trust , 
And therefore well deserves a master just . 
The foureteenth of October the sun enters into Scorpio . Scorpio . October . 

Illustrious Phoebus now declines amain , 
His golden head within the Scorpion dwells , 
Now boisterous blasts of wind , and showers of rain 
Of raging winters nigh approach foretells 
From trees sharp Autumn , all the leaes expels 
For Phoebus now hath left his pleasant Inns , 
Now Merchants Bacchus blood , both buy and sells 
And Michalls Term , law's harvest now begins 
Where many losers are , and few that wins : 
For law may well be called contentions whip , 
When for a scratch , a cuff , for points or pins : 
Will witless gets his neighbour on the hip . 
then tone the tother unto law will urge , 
And up they come to give their purse a purge . 
To the Noble Gentleman , and my much honoured friend , Robert Caluert Esquire , of Mount Caluert in Ireland . 

Had I as many several mouths as fame , 
I could not ever honour thy good Name : 
Did Maroes Muse my weak invention move , 
I should want Art to express engaged love . 
Yet hope persuades me , as these lines you read 
you 'll take my good endeavour for a deed : 
Although I know to write I am unfit 
In Words , in Muse , in Method , and in Wit.  
The eleventh of November , the sun enters into Sagittarius , Or the Archer . Sagittarius ; November . 

Thus Luna's brother lower doth descend , 
And at the Archer rests his radiant wain , 
Now winter's bitter blasting storms contend 
TO assault our hemisphere , with might and main . 
The fields and trees disrobed all again , 
Stark naked stripped of herbs , of flowers , of fruits , 
And now the Lord , the Loon , the Sir , the Swain 
Against the freeze , of freeze make winter suits . 
Now chirping birds are all turned tongueless mutes , 
And Shepherd swains to sheephouse drives their sheep . 
Hot controversies now are in disputes 
At Westminster , where such a coil they keep ; 
Where man , doth man within the law be toss , 
Till some go crosselesse home by woodcocks cross . 
To the honourable Gentleman Master William Ramsaye , one his of Majesty's Bedchamber . WILLIAM RAMSAYE . 

Anagramma . I am always merry . 

Your Name doth with your Anagram agree , 
And Heavens confirm my wish acomplisht be , 
That you in Noble Actions never be weary , 
But as your Name Includes be Always merry . 
The eleventh of December , the sun enters into Capricorn , Or the Goat . Capricornus . December . 

Apollo hath atained his lowest seat , 
And now the shortness of his race is such , 
That though his Glory for a time be great : 
He gives his sister Cynthia twice as much . 
Now is the welcom'st time of all the year , 
Now die the oxen and the fatted hogs , 
Now merry Christmas fills the world with cheer , 
And chimney's smoke with burning log , on logs . 
He that 's a miser all the year beside 
Will revel now , and for no cost will spare , 
A pox hang sorrow , let the world go slide : 
le 's eat and drink , and cast away all care . 
Thus when Apollo's at the horned Goat , 
He makes all Christendom with mirth to float . 
To the Noble Gentleman my especial good friends Sir William Moray , Lord of Aberca●ny . WILLIAM MORAY . 

Anagramma . I Amm Royal Wil  

Let all the world to changing be inclined , 
Yet you will always bear A Royal mind . 
The tenth of january the sun enters into Aquarius , Or the sign of the Waterbearer . Aquarius . january . 

The Glorious Great Extinguisher of Night 
Immures his bright translucent golden head , 
And from his Radiant seem he doth alight . 
To rest his steeds in cold Aquarius bed . 
Now hoary frost , hath Tellus sat or'espread , 
And chilling numbness whets the shaving air , 
All vegetable creatures now seem dead 
Like cureless cures past and repast repair : 
Frigidius janus twofold frozen face 
Turns moist Aquarius into congealed ice : 
Though by the fires warm side the pot have place : 
Of winter's wrath it needs must know the price . 
At last day's burning torch , again takes horse , 
And into wetter weather makes his course . 
To the Noble Gentleman Master Robert Haye , one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's honourable bedchamber . 

Right worthy Sir , if aught that I have written 
Were worth your reading , ' were some sign of wit. 
I have a few friends , and amongst the rest 
You being one , the best will judge the best . 
The ninth of February , the sun enters into Pisces , Or the sign of the two fishes . Pisces . February . 

Now snow , and rain , and hail , and slavering fleet , 
( The Delphean God hath sucked from sea and land . 
With exhalations ) on the earth they greet : 
Poured down by Iris liberal hand , 
If foul faced February keep 〈◊〉 touch . 
He makes the toiling Ploughman's proverb right ; 
By night , by day , by little and by much , 
It fills the ditch , with either black or white 
And as the hard co●●●●●ed butting Ram 
At setting forth was Titan's dayntiest dish : 
So to conclude his feasting with a mess of fish . 
And long in Pisces he doth not remain , 
But leaves the fish , and falls to flesh again . 
To the Honourable Sir Thomas Ridgewaye Knight Baronet , Treasurer at Wars in Ireland , etc.  Thomas Ridgewaye . Anagramma . God Arms thy way . Again , Age is made worthy . 

Though sin and Hell work mortals to betray , 
Yet 'gainst their malice still , God Arms thy way . 
when life and lands , and all away must fade , 
By Noble actions , Age is worthy made . 
Certain Sonnets made in the form of Aequivoques : on the destruction of Troy.  

When Helen was for Priam's son a mate . 
From Greece bereft , by Paris and his Band : 
Which caused the greeks , the Trojan minds amate , 
Some cursed the boy ; and other some they band 
The strumpet Queen , which brought the burning brand , 
That Illium fired , and wracked old Priam's Race : 
And on their Names long living shame did brand , 
( For headstrong lust runs an unbounded Race . ) 
This beauteous piece , whose features radiant blaze , 
Made Menelaus horn-mad war to wage : 
And set all Troy in a combustious blaze , 
Whose ten years' triumphs scarce was worth their wage . 
For all their Conquests , and their battering Rams , 
Their leaders , most returned , with heads like Rams . 
To the noble Gentleman Sir Oliver Saint-iohn . 

Anagramma Harts join in love . 

Thy loyal service to thy King , doth prove , 
That to thy Country thy Hart joyns in love . 
With raging madness and with fury fell , 
Great Diomedes , and Aiax left their Tents , 
And in the throat of death , to blows they fell , 
To make more work for plasters , and for tents . 
With blood imbruing all the Phrygian Clime , 
Whilst men like Autumn leaves drop dying down : 
Where some through blood , and wounds to honour clime 
And some their mangled limbs bestrowes the down : 
Whilst Paris , with his Helen in his Arms 
Embraces her about the wasteful waste : 
saw many a Gallant Knight in burnished Arms , 
Who from their Tents made haste to make more waste : 
Who to their Tents did ne'er return again , 
Thus wars makes gain a loss , and loss a gain . 
To the noble Gentleman , Sir EDWARD BLAINEYE Knight , Governor of Monnaahan in the North of Ireland . EDWARD BLAYNEY 

Anagramma Live and Abide ever . 

Thy trusty service hath so oft been tried , 
For which thy fame , live ever and Abide . 
Had Priam's Queen in Cradle slain her Son 
The lust full Paris ( hapless boy ) I mean : 
then Illion's Towers might still have braved the Sun : 
His death to save their lives had been the mean . 
Unlucky luck , when , juno , Venus , Pallas 
Did crave his censure upon Ida Mount : 
Whence sprung the cause that Troy and Priam's Palace 
Were burned , which erst the skies did seem to mount . 
Had he been drowned , or strangled with a cord , 
He had not robbed Oenone of her heart : 
Or had he died , ere Helen did accord 
With him , to h●●d her husband like a Heart . 
But Troy it is thy fate , this knave and Baggage , 
Confounds thy state , and fires thy bag , and baggage . 
To the worthy Gentleman , Sir HENRY FOLIOT Governor of Balishannon in the North of Ireland . HENRYE FOLIOTT . 

Anagramma . Honour Fit lie . 

Thy Honour Fitly to thy worth is fit , 
It Honours thee , and thou dost honour it . 
Troyes' fruitful Queen did many Children bare , 
So brave , heroic , and so slout a Crew : 
Who all in noble actions did accrue , 
When age had made their Parents bald and bare , 
They made their daintlesse courage to appear , 
Amid the throngs of danger and debate : 
Where wars remorseless stroke killed many a Peer , 
Whilst swords , not words , their counsels did debate : 
But blood on blood , their fury could not sat , 
For fierce Achilles did brave Hector gore : 
To guerdon which , the Grecian in his gore 
Did wallow , whilst the Troyans' laughing sat . 
Thus did Achilles bid the world adiewe 
For Hector's death , Revenge did claim a due . 
To the Right worshipful and worthy Gentleman , Sir Simon Weaston of Litchfield in the County of Stafford Knight . SIMON WESTON . 

Anagramma Mowntes Zion . 

Mownts Zion figure's that surmounting place , 
Where virtue 's Mownt unto the throne of grace . 
Ten weary years these bloody broils did last , 
Until the Greeks had formed a wooden steed : 
Which they on Priam would bestow at last , 
( When force prevails not , falsehood stands in steed . ) 
False Simon ( who so well could forge a lie , 
Whose traitorous eyes shed many a treacherous tear ) 
knew well that in the horse's womb did lie 
The wolves that Troy did all in pieces tear . 
Polyxena , Achilles' dear bought dear 
Was hew'de in gobbets on her lover's grave : 
King , Queen , and Troy , for Helen paid too dear , 
All felt the Grecian Rage , both young and grave . 
To Kings , and Commons , death's alike , all one , 
Except Aeneas who escaped alone . 
To the truly virtuous Lady , MARRY WESTON wife to Sir Simon Weston Knight . MARRY WESTON . 

Anagramma . I won Me a Rest.  

Where true born worths Innated in the breast , 
There always goodness wins Eternal rest . 
Certain Sonnets : variously composed upon diverse subjects . 

Sonnet . 1.  True Nobility . 

Great is the glory of the Noble mind 
Where life and death , are equal in respect : 
If fates be good or bad , unkind or kind , 
Not proud in freedom , nor in thrall deject ; 
With courage scorning fortune's worst effect , 
And spitting in foul Envy's cankered face . 
True honour thus doth base thoughts subject 
Esteeming life a slave , that serves disgrace . 
Fowl abject thoughts , become the mind that 's base , 
That deems there is no better life than this , 
Or after death doth fear a worse place , 
Where guilt is paid the guerdon of Amiss . 
But let swollen envy swell until she burst , 
The Noble mind defies her to her worst . 
To the Noble Gentleman , Sir ROBERT RIDGEWAY Knight , son and Heir to Sir Thomas Ridgeway Knight Baronet . ROBERT RIDGEWAYE . 

Anagramma . I Regard , obey virtue . 

Though thousands vainly pass their time away , 
Time I Regard , and Virtue I obey . 
LO thus the burden of Adulterous guilt , 
I showering vengeance , Troy and Troyans' saw : 
no Age , no sex , no beauty , Gold or guilt 
Withstood , foretold Cassandra's saced saw . 
She often said , false Helen's beauties blast 
Should be the cause the mighty Grecian power , 
Their names , and fames , with infamy should blast , 
And how the Gods on them would vengeance power . 
But poor Cassandra , prophesied in vain , 
She clam'rous cries , ( as 't were ) to senseless Rocks . 
The youths of Troy , in merry scornful vein . 
Securely slept , whilst lust the cradle rocks . 
Till bloody burning Indignation came , 
And all their mirth with mourning overcame . 
To the worthy and virtuous Lady , the Lady Elizabeth Ridgeway , wife to Sir Rob. Ridgewaye . ELIZABETH RIDGEWAYE . 

Anagramma . I bide , agree with Zeal . 

The Subjects of th' Almighty's Commonweal , 
They all in one Abide , agree with zeal . 
Sonnet . 2.  Envy and Honour . 

Could Envy die , if Honour were deceased , 
She could not live , for Honour's Envy's food : 
She lives by sucking of the Noble blood , 
And scales the lofty top of Fame's high Crest . 
Base thoughts compacted in the Abject breast , 
The Meager Monster doth nor harm , nor good : 
But like the wane , or wax , of ebb or flood , 
She shuns as what her gorge doth most detest ; 
Where heaven bred honour in the Noble mind , 
From out the Caverns of the breast proceeds : 
There helborne Envy shows her hellish kind , 
And Vulturlike upon their actions feeds , 
But here 's the ode , that Honour's tree shall grow , 
When Envies rotten stump shall burn in woe . 
To the noble Knight , Sir Francis Willoughby , son and heir to Sir Percivall Willoughby , Knight of Wollerton in the County of Nottinghame . FRANCIS WILLOUGHBYE . 

Anagramma . Lou Will Banish Grief . 

Sad sorrow may assault men , like a thief , 
But spite of Envy ( love will Banish Grief . ) 
Sonnet . 3.  Beauty's lustre . 

Due drinking Phoebus hid his golden head , 
Balm-breathing Zephyrus lay close immured : 
The silly Lambs and Kyds , lay all as dead 
Skies , earth and seas , all solace had abjured . 
Poor men , and beasts , to toilsome tasks enured 
In drooping manner spent the drowsy day : 
All but the Owl , whose safety night assured , 
She gladly cuts the air with whooting lay . 
When lo the blossom of my blooming May 
From out her Couch maiestickly doth rise : 
then Titan doth his radiant beams display . 
And clouds are vanished from the vaulty skies . 
Sweet Zephirs gales reviveth beasts and men , 
Madge Owlet scuds unto her nest again . 
To the Virtuous Lady , and wife to Sir Francis Willoughby Knight . CASSANDRAE WILLOUGHBYE . 

Anagramma . Wish Grace Above All ends . 

The power of Heaven to me such favour sends 
That I wish Grace Above all other ends . 
Sonnet . 4.  Hope and Despair . 

Domestic broils my tortured heart invades 
'twixt wavering Hope , and desperate black Despair : 
To prosecute my suit the one persuades , 
The other frustrates all my hopes with cares 
Hope sets me on , infer's she 's fairest fair , 
How deire disdain doth dwell in foulest Cells , 
And fell despair , calls beauty Envy's heir : 
Which torment's me more than ten thousand hells . 
Lo thus my former hope , despair expels 
Midst which extremes what 's best for me to do : 
In open arms , despair 'gainst me rebels , 
Hope traytorlike gives free consent thereto . 
And till these traitors twain consume my city 
I restless rest , to rest upon her pity . 
To the Right worshipful Master George Caluert Esquire , one of the Clerks of his Majesty's privy Counsel . GEORG CALVERT . 

Anagramma . Grace got rule . 

Wit , Wisdom , Learning , Virtue , all agree 
That in thy breast their Mansiion house shall be . 
Sonnet . 5.  Three blind Commanders . 

Blind fortune , sightless love , and eyeless death 
Like Great Triumue'rs sways this earthly room , 
Man's actions , affections , and very breath : 
Are in subjection to their fatal doom . 
there 's nothing past , or present , or to come 
That in their purblind power is not comprizd , 
From crown , to cart , from cradle to the tomb 
All are by them defamed , or eternized : 
Why should we then esteem this doting life 
( that 's in the guideance of such blindfold rule ) 
Whose chiefest peace , is a continual strife 
Whose gaudy pomps the pack , and man the Mule , 
Which lives long day , he bears , as he is able , 
Till deaths black night , doth make the grave his stable ? 
To the worthy Gentleman Captain Arthur Basset in Ireland . ARTHUR BASSET . 

Anagramma . Be as true hearts . 

True virtue mixed with valour , Arms with Arts 
And all Innate in thee , be as true hearts . 
Sonnet . 6.  Another of the praise of music . 

' was Music fetched Eurydice from hell , 
And raped grim Pluto with harmonious strains : 
Renowned Orpheus did with Music quell 
The fiends , and ease the tortured of their pains . 
The Dolphin did accounted it wondrous gains 
To hear Arion play as he did ride : 
Gods , fiends , fish , fowls , and sheapherds on the plains 
Melodious Music still hath magnifide : 
And ancient records plainly do decide , 
How brave Orlando Palatine of France , 
When he was raging mad for Meadors bride 
Sweet Music cured his crazed wits mischance . 
For Music's only fit for Heavens high choir , 
Which though men cannot praise enough , admire . 
To the worshipful Master Francis Ansleye of Dublinne in Ireland Esquire . FRANCIS ANSLEYE . 

Anagramma . Life's Cares Vaynn . 

HE that to Life Eternal will Attain 
Must ever here esteem , this , Life's Cares Vainn . 
Sonnet . 7.  The Map of Misery . 

Like to the stone that 's cast in deepest wave , 
That rests not till the bottom it hath sound , 
So I ( a wretch ) enthralled in sorrow's cave , 
With woe and desperations fetters bound : 
The captive slave imprisoned under ground 
Doom'b , there by fates to expire his woeful days : 
With care o'erwhelmed , with grief and sorrow drowned , 
Makes mournful moning , and lamenting lays , 
Accusing , and accursing fortunes plays , 
Whose withered Autumn leavelesse leaves his tree , 
And banning death for his to long delays , 
Remains the only poor despised he . 
If such a one as this , the world confine , 
His mischiefs are a sport , compared with mine . 
To the Right worshipful and worthy Gentleman Master Henry Cooley of Carbye in the County of Kiluare , in Ireland . 

Right worthy Sir , I pray the powers above , 
To make thy fortunes equal to my love . 
To the Noble and virtuous Lady , the Lady Cecillia Ridgeway , wife to the honourable Knight Sir Thomas Ridgeway Knight Baronet . 

More happy , and more worthy scarce is any 
Wife to a worthy mother unto many : 
Whose actions shows , they from a stock did spring , 
Which taught them serve their heaven and earthly King.  
Sonnet . 8.  In praise of music . 

no Poet crowned with everliving bays 
( Though Art like floods should from his knowledge flow ) 
He could not write enough in Music's praise : 
To which both man and Angels love do own 
If my bare knowledge ten times more did know , 
And had engrossed all art from Pernas hill : 
If all the Muses should their skills bestow 
On me to amplify my barren skill : 
I might attempt in show of my good will , 
In Music's praise some idle lines to write : 
But wanting judgement and my accent ill , 
I still should be unworthy to indite . 
And run my wit on ground , like ship on shealfe 
For Music's praise consisteth in itself . 
To the worthy Gentleman , and my very good friend , Master john Blencowe , of Greies' Inn . Anagramma . Noble in each wo.  

Let fortune when she dares but prove thy foe , 
In spite of fate , th' art Noble in each woe . 
A Cataplasmicall Satire , composed and compacted of sundry simples , as salt , vinegar , wormwood , and a little gall , very profitable to cure the imposlumes of vice . 

A Savage rough haired Satire , needs no guide , 
where 's no way , from the way he cannot slide : 
then have amongst you , through the brakes and bries , 
From those who to the Ceders top aspires 
Unto the lowest shrub , or branch of broom , 
That hath his breeding from earth's teeming womb . 
And now I talk of broom , of shrubs and ceadars 
Me thinks a world of trees are now my leaders : 
To prosecute this travail of my pen , 
And make comparison 'twixt trees and men , 
The Ceadars , and the high cloud kissing Pines , 
Fecundious olives , and the crooked Vines : 
The Elm , the Ash , the Oak , the Masty Beech , 
The Pear , the Apple , and the rug gownd Peache : 
And many more , for it would tedious be 
To name each fruitful and unfruitful tree . 
But to proceed , to show how men , and trees 
In birth , in breed , in life , and death agrees : 
In their beginnings they have all one birth , 
Both have their natural being from the earth , 
And heavens high hand , ( where he doth please to bless 
Makes trees , or men , or fruitful , or fruitless . 
In sundry uses trees do serve man's turn 
To build , to adorn , to feed , or else to burn . 
Thus is man's state in all degrees like theirs , 
Some are got up to th' top of honour's stairs , 
Securely sleeping on opinions pillow , 
Yet as unfruitful , as the fruitless willow . 
And fill up rooms , ( like worthless trees in woods ) 
Whose goodness all consists in ill got goods : 
He like the Cedar makes a goodly show , 
But no good fruit will from his greatness grow 
Until he die , and from his goods departed , 
And then gives all away , despite his heart . 
then must his friends , with mourning cloth be clad 
With insides merry , and with outsides sad : 
What though by daily grinding of the poor 
By bribry and extortion got his store : 
Yet at his death he gowns some four score men , 
And 't is no doubt he was a good man then ? 
Though in his life he thousands hath undone 
To make wealth to his cursed coffers run : 
If at his burial groats a piece be given , 
I 'll warrant you his souls in hell , or heaven : 
And for this dole perhaps the beggars strives 
That in the throng seventeen do lose their lives : 
Let no man tax me here with writing lies 
For what is written I saw with mine own eyes . 
Thus men like barren trees are felled and lopped , 
And in the fire to burn are quickly popped : 
Some man perhaps whilst he on earth doth live , 
Part of his vain superfluous wealth will give : 
To build of Almshouses some twelve or ten , 
Or more or less , to harbour aged men : 
Yet this may nothing be to that proportion , 
Of wealth which he hath gotten by extortion . 
What is (null) for man ( his greedy mind to serve ) 
To be the cause that thousands die and starve : 
And in the end , like a vain glorious thief , 
Will give some ten or twelve a poor relief ? 
Like robbers on the way , that take a purse , 
And give the poor a mite to scape God's curse . 
But know this thou , whose goods are badly gotten , 
When thou art in thy grave consumed and rotten , 
thine heir ( perhaps ) will feast with his sweet punk , 
And dice , and Drabe , and every day be drunk , 
Carousing Indian Trinidado smoke , 
Whilst thou with Sulphurous flames art like to choke . 
See , se yond gallant in the Cloak-bag breech , 
he 's nothing but a trunk crammed full of speech : 
he 'll swear as if 'gainst heaven he wars would wage , 
And meant to pluck down Phoebus in his rage : 
When let a man but try him , he 's all oaths , 
And odious lies , wrapped in unpaid for clothes . 
And this Lad is a Roaring boy forsooth . 
An exc'llent morsel for the hangman's tooth . 
He carelessly consumes his golden pelf , 
In getting which his Father damned himself . 
Whose soul , ( perhaps ) in quenchless fire doth broil , 
Whilst on the earth his son keeps level coil . 
't is strange to Church what numbers daily flock 
To drink the spring of the eternal Rock : 
The great soul saving , Satan slaying word , 
'Gainst sin , death , hell , th' alconquering sacred sword , 
Where high jehovahs' Trumpeters sound forth 
From East to West , from South unto the North : 
( For through all lands their Embasseyes are born , 
And never doth again in vain return : ) 
Which either is of life to life the savour , 
Or death to death , exiled from God's sweet favour : 
Which bliss or bane there 's many daily hairs , 
Who leave their hearts at home , and bring their ears , 
And lest their reckless heads , the word should smother , 
As soon as 't enters one , it 's out at tother . 
For let a Preacher preach until he sweats , 
Denouncing heavens great wrath in thundering threats 
'Gainst sin and sinners : 'Gainst high hearted pride , 
'Gainst murder which hath oft for vengeance cried , 
Or envy , lechery , Avarice , or swearing , 
Or any other vice they 'll give the hearing , 
And say the Preacher wondrous pains did take , 
And did a very learned Sermon make : 
But what good Reformation hence proceeds , 
Are Mountain words , and little Mole hill deeds . 
Tell Vsrers they are banished from God's hill , 
Yet they 'll continue in extortion still . 
Tell the proud Courtier , that he is but earth , 
he 'll o'er the poor insult and brag of birth . 
Expostulate the great Almighty's Ire , 
And tell the murderer , hell shall be his hire , 
Yet ever he 'll pocket up the least disgrace , 
His enemies' guts shall be his Rapier's case . 
Tell daily drunkard's hell shall be their lot , 
they 'll knock and call to have the t'other pot . 
Tell Panders , Bawds , knaves , and adulteous whores 
How they in hell must pay their cursed scores . 
Tell Miser chuffs who charity do banish , 
How they from heaven , eternally must vanish . 
Tell all in general of their lives amiss , 
And tell them that hell's bottomless Abyss 
Must be their portions if they not repent , 
Till true repentance heavens just wrath prevent . 
Yet when the Preacher all he can hath told , 
Souls unto sin are daily bought and sold. 
The Miser with his lechery of Chink , 
On earth will give his dropsy soul to drink , 
And though the word beaten on his Anvile heart , 
From Usury and Extortion he 'll not part , 
The piebald Gallant to the Church will come 
To hear his soul's salvations total sum . 
Yet his high pride is in such haughty dotage , 
Forgets he 's sprung from a poor country Cottage . 
The murderer hears how reprobated Cain 
Was cursed of God , that had his brother slain , 
Yet when he 's from the Church , forgets it all , 
And stabs a man for taking of the wall . 
Should I through all men's several actions run , 
I know my business never would be done . 
The rich man hate's the poor man , and the poor 
Doth ewie 'gainst the rich man for his store . 
Thus is the blessed souls everliving bread , 
In bounteous measure all the earth or'espread : 
Some on the high way fall and takes no root , 
But is of no esteem trodden under foot : 
Some falls on stones , and some alights on thorns , 
Devoured with fowls , or choked with scoffs or scorns . 
Some little portion falls in fruitful ground , 
th' increase of which is to be seldom found . 
For let men weigh their good deeds with their bad , 
For thousand ills , one good will scarce be had . 
And yet no doubt but God in store doth keep 
His near dear children , his best flock of sheep . 
For though unto the world they are not known , 
Yet 't is sufficient God doth know his own . 
For though Elias thought himself was all 
That had not offered sacrifice to Ball : 
jehovah answered him , seven thousand more , 
In Israel , did this Idol not Adore . 
But who so much in this vile life are hated , 
As those which to salvation are created . 
For let a man resraine to drabe or dice , 
Out fie upon him then , he 's too precise . 
Let him forbear to lie , to swear , or ban , 
OH hang him rascal , he 's a Puritan . 
And sure I think the Devil by that false name 
Hath added thousands souls unto his flame . 
Some man ere he 'll be called a Puritan 
Will turn a damned Machiavilian , 
A Libertine , Papist , or else what not , 
To keep his name from so impure a blot . 
I speak not this regarding their estate , 
Who from our Church themselves do separate , 
For good indifferent Ceremonious rites , 
And 'gainst our Church's government backbites . 
Nor do I praise the loving Sister's love , 
Who often makes the Brethren's spirits move , 
And if ' were lawful ( they would gladly know ) 
To dress their meat the Sabbath day or no. 
And wherefore now the Churchmen of these days , 
Ride too and from , to preach so many ways , 
When Christ to his Apostles gave in charge 
That they should seek and teach all nations large , 
The way , that in his Laws they might abide , 
Christ bade them go , he bade them not to ride . 
These Idle questionists , these scismatickes , 
I hold no better than rank heretics : 
But this I think not well , when honest hearts 
Shall have this impure name without deserts . 
How then can my comparing be gainstood , 
For men are like to trees , some bad , some good . 
But tarry Satire , thou too fast dost troth , 
There is one thing more I had almost forgot , 
And this is it , of Alehouses , and Inns , 
Wine Merchants , Vintners , Brewers , who much wins 
By others losing , I say more or less 
Who sail of hufcap lick or do profess , 
Should never be to any office called . 
Or in no place of justice be installed : 
The reason is they gain by men's excess 
Of devilish quafting and damned drunkenness . 
For why , should men be moderate in their drink . 
Much Beer , and bottle Ale should stand and stink : 
And Mounseir Claret , and sweet Signior Sack 
Would sour and turn unto the Merchant's wrack ? 
The Vintners then within their sellers deep 
Such conjuring at midnight would not keep . 
This swinish sin hath man of sense bereaven , 
To bandy balls of blasphemy 'gainst heaven . 
It is the way , the door , the porch , the gate , 
All other vices enter in thereat . 
A drunken man in rage will stab his brother , 
he 'll Cuckolded his own father , whore his mother , 
Revile and curse , swear , and speak dangerous treason , 
And when he 's sober , hangs for 't by the weasand . 
How then should men a reformation give , 
To mend those crimes , that by those Crimes do live . 
The Patriarch Noah first did plant the Vine , 
And first did feel the powerful force of wine . 
And righteous Lot , by wine deprived of wit , 
Fowl Incest with his daughter did commit . 
And Holophernes drunken lay in bed 
Whilst strong faithed , weak armed judith cut of 's head . 
Great Alexander out his Falchion drew 
Andrea being drunk , his best friend Clitus slew . 
If every hair upon the heads of men 
Were quills , and every quill were made a pen : 
Were Earth to paper turned ; and Seas to Ink 
And all the world were writers , yet I think , 
They could not write the mischiefs done by drink . 
And such a custom men hath ta'en therein , 
That to be drunk , is scarce accounted sin , 
But hovest recrearive merriment 
The time is termed that is in tippling spent . 
A Merchant's ship is richly fraught , arrives 
And for thanksgiving that so well he thrives , 
He makes a feast , and store of money spends , 
Invites his kinsfolk , creditors , and friends : 
Where storms , and Rocks , and Pirates , are forgot , 
And triumphs made to Bacchus , and the Pot. 
A Rich man's wife 's delivered of a boy , 
And all the household must be drunk for joy . 
The prisoner that 's condemned to die and hang , 
And by reprieve hath scaped that bitter pang , 
Will presently his old acquaintance call , 
And ere he gives God thanks to drinking fall . 
Why drunkards common are , as lies , or stealing , 
And sober men are scarce , like honest dealing . 
When men do meet , the second word that 's spoken , 
Is where 's good liquor , and a pipe of smoke . 
The labouring man that for his hire doth serve , 
Let Landlord tarry , wife and children starve 
With not a bit of bread within the house , 
Yet he 'll sit on the Alebench and carows . 
Thus like an Inundation drink doth drown 
The Rich , the Poor , the Courtier , and the Clown . 
Since then to be a drunkard , is to be 
The sink of Incest , and Sodomitry , 
Of Treason , swearing , fight , beg'ry , murder , 
And diverse more , I then will go no further : 
But here my Satyrs stinging whip I 'll waste 
In lashing dropsy drunkards out of taste . 
How then can it be possible that such 
Who sell Wine , Beer , or Ale , do gain so much , 
Should punish drunkards , as the Law commands , 
In whose vain spending , their most gaining stands . 
It were all one as if a Mercer did 
To wear Silk , Velvet , Cloth of Gold forbid . 
And Victuallers may as wisely punish those 
From whom their daily drinks , great gettings grows . 
I would have all old drunkards to consent 
To put a Bill up to the Parliament : 
That those by quaffing that have spent their wealth , 
Consumed their times , their memory , their health , 
And by excessive spending now are bare , 
That Merchants , Brewers , Vintners , should prepare 
Some Hospitals to keep them in their age , 
And cloth , and feed them , from fierce famine's rage , 
For every one whose hard unlucky lots , 
Hath been to be undone by empting pots , 
I hold it fit that those the pots that filled , 
Should contribute those Almshouses to build . 
Yet one objection would this bill debar , 
Too many drunkards there already are ; 
And rather than this law would bate their store , 
I feare'twould make them twice as many more . 
For why , to drink most men would be too bold , 
Because they would have pentions being old . 
And men ( of purpose to this vice would fall , 
To be true beadsmen to this hospital . 
then let it be as it already is , 
But yet I hold it not to be amiss ) 
Those Drinkesellers , from office to exclude 
And so for that my Satyr doth conclude . 
I could rip up a Catalogue of things , 
Which thousand thousands to damnation flings , 
But all my pains at last would be but idle . 
It is not man , can men's Affections bridle . 
Sin cannot be put down with ink and paper , 
no more than Sol is lightened with a Taper . 
To the right Worshipful and my ever good friend , Sr. ROWLAND COSTON Knight . 

TO Read , to like , to laugh , I send you this , 
Desiring pardon where there 's aught amiss . 
When Graner matters trouble not your head , 
With former favour let my lines be read . 
To my very good Friends Master Alexander Glover , Mr. john Rowdon , and Mr. john Burges . 

Though Rich Pecunia ( that all states commands ) 
In Numbers numberless runs through your hands : 
Yet this I know , it never moves the mind 
From goodness , that to goodness is inclined . 
And though it makes most men dishonest prove , 
It cannot make your honest minds remove . 
then as your kindness unto me assures 
Your love , so I remain for ever yours . 
To Mistress Rose . Anagramma SORE . 

Sound Rose , though Sore thy Anagram doth mean , 
Mistake it not , it means no sore unclean : 
But it Alludes unto the lofty sky 
In which thy virtue shall both Sore and sly . 
To my approved good friend Mr. ROBARTE CUDDNER . 

Anagramma : Record and be true . 

MY thoughts Record , and their account is true , 
I scarce have better friends alive than you . 
A nest of Epigrams . 

Fortune . 1.  

't is Fortune's glory to keep Poets poor , 
And cram weak witted Idiots with her store : 
And 't is concluded in the wisest schools 
The blinded drab , shall ever favour fools . 
Epigram 2.  Love.  

Love is a dying life , a living death . 
A vapour , shadow , bubble , and a breath : 
An idle babble , and a paltry toy , 
Whose greatest Patron is a blinded boy : 
But pardon love , my judgement is unjust , 
For what I spoke of love , I meant of lust . 
Epigram 3.  Death . 

Those that scape fortune , and th' extremes of love , 
Unto their longest homes , by death are driven : 
Where Caesar's , Kaesars' , Subjects , Abjects must 
Be all alike , consumed to dirt and dust : 
Death endeth all our cares , or cares increase 
It sends us unto lasting pain , or peace . 
Epigram 4.  Fame . 

When Fortune , Love & Death their tasks have done 
Fame makes our lives through many ages run : 
For be our living actions , good or ill 
Fame keeps a record of our doings still , 
By Fame Great julius Caesar ever lives ; 
And Fame , infamous life to Nero gives . 
Epigram 5.  Time.  

ALL making , marring , never turning Time 
To all that is , is period , and is prime : 
Time wears out Fortune , Love , and Death and Fame 
And makes the world forget there proper name . 
there 's nothing that so long on earth can last , 
But in conclusion Time will lay it waste . 
Epigram . 6.  Kame , kathee . 

MY Muse hath vowed , revenge shall have her swinge 
To catch a Parrot in the Woodcock's springe . 
Epigram 7.  Solus . 

The land yields many Poets , were I gone 
The water sure ( I durst be sworn ) had none . 
Epigram 8.  Self conceit . 

Some Poets are , whose high pitch lofty strains 
Are passed the reach of every vulgar wight : 
To understand which 't will amaze weak brains , 
So mystical , sophistical they write : 
no marvel others understand them not , 
For they scarce understand themselves , I wot , 
Epigram 9  A couple . 

One read my book , and said it wanted wit , 
I wonder if he meant himself , or it : 
Or both : if both , two fools were met I trow 
That wanted wit , and every fool doth so . 
Epigram 10.  Bacchus and Apollo . 

The thigh-borne bastard of the thrundring jove 
( When men's inventions , are of wit most hollow ) 
He with his spiteful juice their spirits doth move , 
Unto the harmonious music of Apollo : 
And in a word , I would have all men know it , 
He must drink wine , that means to be a Poet.  
Epigram 11.  Of translation . 

I Understand or know no foreign tongue , 
But their translations I do much admire : 
Much art , much pains , much study doth belong , 
And ( at the least ) regard should be their hire . 
But yet I would the French had held together 
And kept their pox , and not translate them hither . 
Epigram 12.  Nature's counterfeit . 

When Adam was in Paradise first placed , 
And with the rule of mortal things was graced , 
then roses , pinks and fragrant gillyflowers , 
Adorned and decked forth Eden's blessed bowers : 
But now each Gill wears flowers , each Punk hath pinks , 
And roses garnish Gallants shoes me thinks : 
When rugged Winter , robs fairy Flora's treasure , 
Punks can have pinks and roses at their pleasure . 
Epigram 13.  The devil take bribery . 

A Man atached for murdering of a man 
Unto the foreman of his jury sent , 
Two score angels , begging what he can , 
He would his conscience strain , law to prevent : 
That his offences judge , might judge no further 
But make man slaughter of his wilful murder : 
The verduict was manslaughter to the judge , 
The judge demanded how it could be so ? 
The foreman said his conscience much did grudge : 
But forty angels did persuade him no , 
Well quoth the judge this case shall murder be , 
If half those angels , not appear to me . 
Thus when the law men to confusion drives , 
The godless angels will preserve their lives . 
Epigram 14.  The devil is a knave . 

I Shell dislikes the surplus and the cope , 
And calls them idle vestments of the Pope : 
And mistress Maude would go to Church full feign 
But that the corner cap makes her refrain : 
And Madam Idle is offended deep , 
The Preacher speaks so loud , she cannot sleep : 
Lo thus the devil sows contentious seed , 
Whence sects , and schisms , and heresies do breed . 
Epigram 15.  Kissing goes by favour . 

Bembus the Burgomaster lives in pain 
With the Sciatica , and the Catarrh . 
Rich Grundo of the dropsy doth complain , 
And with the Gout these miser's troubled are . 
If Tinkers , Cobblers , Butchers be infected 
With Bembus Lameness , or with Grundoes' Gout : 
Like pocky fellows they must be rejected , 
And as infectious rascals be kept out , 
And not come near where wholesome people flocks , 
Thus rich men's sicknesses , are poor men's pocks . 
Epigram 16.  Dear , no Venison . 

Precilla always calls her husband Dear , 
Belike she bought him at too dear a rate , 
Or else to make the case more plain appear , 
Like to a Deer she hath adorned his pate ; 
If it be so god Vulcan send her luck 
That she may live to make her Deer a Buck.  
Epigram 17.  Euerything is pretty when it is little . 

There is a saying old , ( but not so witty ) 
That when a thing is little , it is pretty : 
This doting age of ours it finely fits 
Where many men thought wise , have pretty wies . 
Epigram 18. ●●●e●ne somewhat . 

One asked me , what my Melancholy means , 
I answered ' was because I wanted means : 
He asked what I did by my answer mean , 
I told him still my means were too too mean . 
He offered me to lend me pounds a score , 
I answered him I was to much in score . 
He finding me in this cross answ'ring vain , 
Left me in want to wish for wealth in vain . 
Epigram 19  Faith without works . 

Ammongst the pure reform Amsterdamers , 
( Those faithful friday feasting capon cranmers ) 
Only in them ( they say ) true faith doth lurk : 
But 't is a lazy faith , 't will do no work . 
OH should it work , there 's many thousand fears , 
'T would set the world together by the ears . 
Epigram 20.  Partiality . 

Strato the Gallant reels alongst the street , 
His addle head 's too heavy for his feet : 
What though he swear and swagger spurn and kick , 
Yet men will say the Gentleman is sick ? 
And that ' were good to learn where he doth dwell , 
And help him home because he is not well . 
Straight staggers by a Porter , or a Carman 
As bumsie as a foxed flap-dragon German : 
And though the Gentleman's disease and theirs , 
Are parted only with a pair of shears : 
Yet they are drunken knaves and must to 'th stocks , 
And there endure a world of flouts and mocks . 
Thus when brave Strato's wits with wine are shrunk , 
The same disease will make a beggar drunk . 
Epigram 21.  A keeper of honesty . 

Deliro should of honesty be full , 
And store of wisdom surely is within him . 
What though he dally with a painted trull : 
And she to folly daily seems to win him , 
Yet in him sure is honesty good store , 
He utters but his knavery with a whore ? 
For he that spends too free , shall surely want , 
Whilst he that spares will live in wealth state : 
So wit and honesty , with such are scant , 
Who part with it at every idle rate : 
But men must needs have honesty and wit , 
That like Deliro never utter it . 
Epigram 22.  all 's one , but on 's not all . 

TO wonder and admire is all one thing , 
If as Sinonymies the words be taken , 
But if a double meaning from them spring : 
For double sense your judgement then must look . 
As once a man all soiled with dirt and mire 
fell down , and wondered not , but did admire . 
Epigram 23.  Mistress fine bones . 

Fine Rarnell wonderfully likes her choice 
In having got a husband so complete , 
Whose shape and mind doth wholly her rejoice : 
At bed , board , and abroad , he 's always neat : 
Neat can he talk , and feed , and neatly tread , 
Neat are his feet , but most neat is his head . 
Epigram 24.  A supposed Construction . 

Marry and Mare , Anagramatized 
The one is Army , and the other Arm 
In both their names is danger Moralised 
And both alike , doth sometimes good , or harm 
mere 's the sea and mere 's arm 's a river 
And Marye's army 's all for whatl'ye give her . 
Epigram 25.  Death is a juggler . 

A Rich man sick would needs go make his will 
And in the same he doth command and will 
One hundred pound unto his man called Will , 
Because he always served him with good will : 
But all these wills , did prove to Will but vain , 
His master lives and hath his health again . 
Epigram 26.  Mistress Grace only by name . 

Grace graceless , why art thou ungracious Grace , 
Why dost thou run so lewdly in the race ? 
The cause wherefore thy goodness is so scant 
Is cause , what most thou hast , thou most dost want . 
Epigram 27.  Prudence . 

't is strange that Prudence should be wild and rude , 
Whose very name doth Modesty include : 
The reason is , for aught that I can see , 
Her name and nature doth not well agree . 
Epigram 28.  Mercy . 

MY Mercy hate's me , what 's the cause I pray , 
't is cause I have no money , she doth say . 
OH cruel Mercy now I plainly see 
Without a see no mercy comes from thee . 
Yet in conclusion , every idle gull 
Perceives Mercy is unmerciful . 
Epigram 29.  Faith.  

OH Faith thou always unbelieving art , 
Faith in thy name , and faithless in thy hart . 
thou credidst all , but what is true and good , 
In virtue rude , in vice well understood . 
Epigram 30.  Upon myself . 

Myself I liken to an vntun'de Viol , 
For Like a Viol I am in a Case ; 
And who so of my fortunes makes a trial 
Shall ( like to me ) be strung and tuned base . 
And Treables Trouble's he shall never want , 
But here 's the Period of my mischiefs All , 
Though Base and Trebles , fortune did me grant 
And Means , but yet alas they are too small . 
Yet to make up the Monk & I must look 
The Tenor in the cursed Counter book . 
Epigram 31.  A Rope for Parrot . 

Why doth the Parrot cry a Rope , a rope , 
Because he 's cagde in prison out of hope . 
Why doth the Parrot call a Boat , a Boat ? 
It is the humour of his idle note . 
OH pretty Pall , take heed , beware the Cat , 
( Let Watermen alone , no more of that . ) 
Since I so idly heard the Parrot talk , 
In his own language , I say , walk knave walk . 
Epigram 32 Constants . 

Inconstant Constants albewitching feature , 
Hath made fair Constance an inconstant Creature , 
Her Godmother was very much to blame , 
To give Inconstancy a constant name . 
But was a woman named her so contrary , 
And woman's tongues and hearts do ever vary . 
Epigram 33 Upon the burning of the Globe . 

Aspiring Phaeton with pride inspired , 
Misguiding Phoebus' Car , the world the fired : 
But Ovid did with fiction serve his turn , 
And I in action saw the Globe to burn . 
Epigram 34.  Late Repentance . 

A Greedy wretch did on the Scriptures look , 
And found recorded in that Sacred book , 
How such a man with God should sure prevail 
Who clad the naked , and visit those in jail . 
And then he found how he had long mistaked , 
And oftentimes had made the clothed naked : 
In steed of visiting th' oppressed in moans , 
He had consumed them to the very bones . 
Yet one day he at leisure would Repent , 
But sudden death Repentance did prevent . 
Epigram 35.  Not so strange as true . 

The stately Stag when he his horns hath shed , 
In sullen sadness he deplores his loss : 
But when a wife cornutes her husband's head , 
His gains in horns he holds an extreme Crosse. 
The Stag by loasing doth his loss complain , 
The man by gaining doth lament his gain . 
Thus whether horns be either lost or found , 
They both the loser and the winner wound . 
Epigram 36.  A Wordmonger . 

Man's Vnderstanding's so obnubilate , 
That when thereon I do excogitate , 
Intrinsicall and querimonious pains , 
Doth puluerise the concave of my brains , 
That I could wish man were unfabricate , 
His faults he doth so much exaggerate . 
Epigram 37.  Plain dunstable . 

Your words pass my capatchity , good zur , 
But ich to prove need never to go vur : 
Cha known men live in honest exclamation , 
Who now God wot , lives in a worse fashion . 
The poor man grumbles at the rich man's store , 
And rich men daily do express the poor . 
Epigram 38.  Reason . 

Knowest thou a Traitor , plotting damned Treason , 
Reveal him , 't is both loialty and Reason . 
Knowest thou a thief will steal at any season , 
To shun his company thou hast good reason , 
Seest thou a villain hang up by the weasand , 
He hangs by reason , that he wanted reason . 
Good men are scarce , and honest men are geason , 
To love them therefore 't is both right and reason , 
Mere I could say , but all 's not worth two peason , 
And therefore to conclude I hold it reason . 
Epigram 39  Out of the pan into the fire . 

Tom senseless , to the death doth hate a play : 
But yet he 'll play the drunkard every day , 
He rails at plays , and yet doth ten times worse , 
he 'll dice , he 'll bowl , he 'll whore , he 'll swear , he 'll curse , 
When for one two pence ( if this humour please ) 
He might go see a play , and scape all these : 
But 't is man's use in these pestiferous times 
To hate the least , and love the greatest crimes . 
Epigram 40.  A Poet's similitude . 

A Poet Rightly may be termed fit 
An abstract , or Epitome of wit : 
Or like a Lute that others pleasures breed , 
Is fret and strung , their curious ears to feed , 
That scornfully distaste it , yet 't is known 
It makes the hearers sport , but in self none . 
A poet 's like a taper , burned by night 
That wastes itself , in giving others light . 
A poet 's the most fool beneath the skies , 
He spends his wits in making Idiots wise , 
Who when they should their thankfulness return 
They pay him with disdain , contempt and scorn . 
A Puritan is like , a Poet's purse , 
For both do hate the cross ( what cross is worse ? ) 
Epigram 41.  Macanas Epitaph . 

Here lies the Steward of the Poet's God , 
Who whilst on earth his loved life abode , 
Apollo's Daughters , and the heirs of jove 
His memorable bounty did approve : 
His life , was life to Poets , and his Death 
Bereaved the Muses of celestial breath . 
Had Phoebus fired him from the lofty skies , 
That Phoenix like another might arise 
From our his odoriff'rus sacred embers , 
Whose loved lives loss , poor Poetry remembers . 
This line is the same backward , as it is forward , and I will give any man five shillings a piece for as many as they can make in English.  

Lewd did I live and evil I did dwell . 

An Apology for Watermen . 

Dedicated to Master Richard WARNER the Master of his Majesty's Barge , and to the rest of the Masters and Assistants of the Company . 

Such imputations , and such daily wrongs 
Are laid on Watermen , by Envious tongues . 
To clear the which , if I should silent be 
'T were baseness , and stupidity in me . 
Nor do I purpose now with ink and pen , 
To write of them , as they are watermen , 
But this I speak , defending their vocation 
From slanders false , and idle imputation . 
Yet should I only of the men but speak 
I could the top of Envy's Coxcomb break . 
For I would have all men to understand 
A Waterman's a man by Sea or land 
And on the land and sea , can service do 
To serve his King , as well as other two : 
he 'll guard his Country both on seas and shore 
And what ( a God's name ) can a man do more . 
Like double men they well can play indeed 
The Soldiers , and the Sailors for a need . 
If they did yearly use to scour the Main , 
As erst they did , in wars 'twixt us and Spain , 
I then to speak , would boldly seem to dare 
One Sailer with two Soldiers should compare . 
But now sweet peace their skill at Sea so dulls , 
That many are more sit to use their skulls 
then for the sea , for why ! the want of use 
Is Art's confusion , and best skills abuse . 
And not to be too partial in my words , 
I think no Company more knaves affords : 
And this must be the reason , because far 
Above all Companies their numbers are : 
And where the multitude of men most is , 
By consequence there must be most amiss . 
And sure of honest men it hath as many , 
As any other Company hath any . 
Though not of wealth they have super fluous store , 
Contents is a Kingdom , and they seek no more . 
Of Mercers , Grocers , Drapers , men shall find 
Men that to loose babaviour are inclined . 
Of Goldsmiths , Silkemen , Clothworkers , and Skinners , 
When they are at the best they all are sinners . 
And drunken rascals are of every Trade , 
Should I name all , I o'er the boots should wade ? 
If Watermen be only knaves alone , 
Let all that 's faultless cast at them a stone . 
Some may reply to my Apology : 
How they in plying are unmannerly , 
And one from tother , hale , and pull , and tear , 
And raise , and brawl , and curse , and ban , and swear . 
In this I 'll not defend them with excuses , 
I always did , and do hate those abuses . 
The honest use , of this true trade I sing , 
And not the abuses that from thence do spring . 
And sure no Company hath Laws more strict , 
then Watermen , which weekly they inflict 
Upon offenders , who are made pay duly 
Their fines , or prisoned , cause they plied unruly . 
They keep no shops , nor sell deceitful wares , 
But like to Pilgrim's travel for their fares , 
And they must ask the question where they go . 
If men will go by water yea or no 
Which being spoken aright , the fault 's not such , 
But any Tradesman ( sure ) will do as much . 
The Mercer as ye pass along the way 
Will ask what d' ye lack , come near I pray . 
The Draper whose warm ware doth clad the back , 
Will be so bold as ask ye what d' ye lack . 
The Goldsmith midst his silver and his gold 
To ask you , what d' ye lack he will be bold . 
Through Birchin lane , who ever often goes , 
Says , Watermen are honest men to those , 
And if your Coat be torn , before you go , 
Of every rent , with rending they 'll make two . 
This being granted , as none can deny , 
Most Trades aswell as Watermen do ply , 
If in their plying they do chance to jar , 
They do but like the Lawyers at the Bar . 
Who pled as if they meant by the'ares to fall , 
And when the Court doth rise , to friendship fall . 
So Watermen , that for a fare contends 
The fare once gone , the Watermen are friends . 
And this I know , and therefore dare maintain , 
That he that truly labours and takes pain , 
May with a better Conscience sleep in bed , 
then he that is with ill got thousands sped . 
So well I like it , and such love I owe 
Unto it , that I 'll fall again to Row : 
't will keep my health from falling to decay , 
Get money , and chase Idleness away . 
I 'm sure it for Antiqnity hath stood , 
Since the world's drowning universal flood , 
And howsoever now it rise or fall . 
The Boat in Noah's Del 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 
And though our wits , be like our purses bare , 
With any Company we 'll make compare 
To write a Verse , provided that they be 
no better skilled in Scholarship than we . 
And then come one , come thousands , nay , come all , 
And for a wager well to Versing fall . 
My unwilling farewell to POETRY . 

Adieu thou two topped Cloud surmounting Mount , 
Adieu thou sacred sweet Pegasean fount , 
Adieu you rarest Sisters , three times three , 
Take all in general this farewell of me . 
Full low ( alas ) lies good Maecenas head , 
And Bounty from the miser world is fled . 
I find the Thames can yield me more ( by proof ) 
then can the Well made with the Horse's hose : 
then since 't is so that Poets must be poor 
( For any thing I know ) I 'll verse no more , 
And therefore to Conclude , let all men know 
I 'll cease to write , and fall again to Rome . 
Epilogue to those that knows what they have read , and how to censure . 

TO you whose ears and eyes have heard and seen 
This little pamphlet , an●●● an judge between 
That which is good , or tol'rable , or ill , 
If I with Artless Nature wanting skill 
Have written but aught , that may your thoughts content . 
My Muse hath then accomplished her intent . 
Your favours can preserve me , but your frowns 
My poor inventions in oblivion drowns . 
With tolerable friendship let me crave 
You will not seek to spill , what you may save . 
But for the wrimouthed Critic that hath read 
That mews , and puhs and shakes h●●●●●●inelesse head : 
And says my education or my sta●●● 
Doth make my verse esteemed at lower rate , 
To such a one this answer I do send 
And bid him mend before he discommend , 
His Envy unto me , will favours prove , 
The hatred of a fool breeds wise men's love . 
My Muse is jocund that her labours merits 
To be maligned and scorned by Envious spirits : 
Thus humbly I cra●e ●●rd●●●●●●the best , 
Which being gained , Sir reverence for the rest . 
FINIS . 

