TAILOR'S REVENGE OR THE RYMER WILLIAM FENNOR Firked , Feritted , and finely fetched over the Coals . WHEREIN His Rhyming Ragamuffin Rascality , without Partiality , or fear of Principallity , is Anagramatized , Anotomized , & Stigmatised . The occasion of which Inuective , is briefly set down in the Preface to the Reader . 

Revenge doth Gallop when it seems to creep , 
For though my wrong did wink , it did not sleep . 
PRINTED At Rotterdam , at the sign of the blue Bitch in Dog-lane , and are to be sold , almost any where . AND Transported over sea in A Cod's belly , and cast up at Cuckold's Haven the last Springtide . 1615.  

To Any that can Read.  

BE thou either Friend or Foe or indiferent , all 's one , Read , Laugh , like or dislike , all the care is taken : The chiefest cause why I wrote this , was on set purpose to please myself . Yet to show thee the meaning of this little Building , Imagine this Epistle to be the door , and if thou please come in and see what stuff the whole Frame is made off . Be it therefore known unto all men , that I john Taylor Waterman , did agree with William Fennor , ( who Arrogantly and falsely entitles himself the King's Majesty's Rhyming Poet ) to Answer me at a trial off Wit on the seaventh of October last 1614 on the Hope stage on the Bankside , and the said Fennor Received of me ten shillings in earnest of his coming to meet me , whereupon I caused 1000 bills to be Printed , and douulged my name 1000 ways and more , giving my Friends and diverse of my acquaintance notice of this Bear-garden banquet of dainty Conceits , and when the day came that the Play should have been performed , the house being filled with a great Audience , who had all spent their monies extraordinarily : then this Companion for an Ass , ran away & left me for a Fool , amongst thousands of critical Censurers : where I was ill thought of by my friends , scorned by my foes , and in conclusion , in a greater puzzle than the blind Bear in the midst of all her whip broth ; Besides the some of twenty pounds in money , I lost my Reputation amongst many , and gained disgrace in stead of my better expectations . In Revenge of which wrongs done unto me by the said Rhyming Rascal , I have written this I●●ective against him , chiefly because the ill looking Hound doth not confess he hath injured me , nor hath not so much honesty as to bring or send me my money that he took for earnest of me : but on the contrary part , he Rails and Abuses me with his calumnious tongue , and scandalizet● me in all Companies where he hears me nominated . But in a word , Reader when thou hast read this that follows , I think thou wilt judge me clear ●f the many false Imputations that are laid upon me . So I leave thee to thy Considerations , and I proceed to my Exclamations . 

thine as thou art mine , JOHN TAYLOR . 

WILLIAM FENNOR . 

Annagrama . NV VILLAINY For me OR For me NV VILLAINY . 

NV VILLAINY For me , Nue fresh and New , 
Or Form NV VILLAINY , Come Turk , come jew , 
Come who dares come , for I have found a Theme , 
That overflows with matter like a stream . 
And now stand clear my masters , beware your shins , 
For now to kick and fling my Muse begins . 
How fit his name is Annagrammatized , 
And how his Nature is Annotomized , 
'T would make a horse with laughing break his bridle 
But to the purpose , long delays are idle . 
Tailor's Revenge . 

TO WILLIAM FENNOR . 

Come Sirrah , Rascal , off your clothes , Sr. strip , 
For my Satyrrick whip shall make you skip : 
Thou'dst better to have dealt with all the Devils , 
They could not plague thee with so many evils . 
Nay come man , never whine , or crouch or kneel , 
My heart cannot one jot of pity feel , 
I've squeezed the Gall from out the Lernaean Snake 
With which , Revengeful Ink I mean to make , 
Which I with Aquafortis will Commix , 
Yblended with the loathsome Lake of styx , 
And with that Marrow-eating hateful Ink 
I 'll make the● ( more than any Aiax ) stink , 
A Screech-owl's quill shall be my fatal pen , 
That shall emblaze thee basest slave of men . 
So that when as the purblind world shall see 
How vildley thou hast played the Rogue with me , 
They shall perceive I wronged them not ●or pelf 
And thou shalt ( like a Rascal ) hang thyself . 
What damned Villain would forswear & swears 
As thou didst , 'gainst my Challenge to appear , 
To Answer me at Hope , upon the stage 
And thereupon my word I did engage , 
And to the world did publish printed Bills 
With promise that we both would show our skills . 
And then your Rogue-ship durst not show your face 
But ran away , and left me in disgrace . 
To thee , ten shillings I for earnest gau● 
To bind thee that thou shouldst not play the Kna●● . 
Cur , hadst thou no man's Credit to betray 
But mine , or couldst tho●●●nde no other way , 
To Shark , or Shift , or Coney-catch for money 
But to make me thy Ass , thy Fool , thy Coney ? 
could not thy Squire and thee , ( a brace of Varlets ) 
Ri●de , Fooled , & Piped , amongst pocky Whores & Harlots 
For twopences in some drunken Bawdy-booth 
To please thy Doxy-dells sweet stinking tooth , 
Whereas thou mightst ( as thou hast often done ) 
Some scraps and broken beer , for wages won , 
Which to maintain thy state had been some means 
amongst thy fellows , Rascals , Rogues , & Queans . 
thou scurvy squint-eyed brazenfaced Baboon 
thou damned Stiggmaticall fowl Pantaloonss , 
thou Tavern , Alehouse Whoorehouse , Gig of time 
That for a Groat wilt amongst Tinker's Rhyme . 
I 'll hale from Hell Grim visaged Nemesis 
Whom I will Scull o'er silver Thamesis , 
Which to & from , shall still torment and touse thee 
And none but Runagates ( like thee ) shall howze thee . 
thine own ●●gue ( trumpet like ) each where proclaime● 
Thyself a servant to my Sovereign james , 
When as thy service to the King is such 
As Atheists unto God , and scarce so much . 
It may be ( Graceless ) thou hast Graced been 
And in the Presence didst Admittance win , 
Where some stolen Rhymes , & some things of thine own 
To please the ears of Greatness thou hast shown . 
Which ( at the first hath won thee some Applawse 
Although perhaps not worth 3 barley straws , ) 
And you forsooth , must presently give out 
Amonnst your Kitchenstuff whoor-hedge bird rout , 
What Nobleman your scuruines did bring 
Into the Court , and how our Gracious King 
( As on a man most worthy to bestow it ) 
Entitled you his Highness' Riming-poet . 
How dares thy overweening saucy tongue 
Presume to do a Poet's name that wrong ? 
How dar'st thou ( being altogether vile ) 
Attribute to thyself that Sacred stile ? 
Shall that Rare Art ( which Gods and 〈◊〉 admire 
Polluted be by such a scurvy Squire ? 
Shall Heau'n-bred Poesy that so long hath lasted 
With thy contagious breath be Bussard-blasted ? 
then Homer from thy Toomb , with speed return 
And Maro Rouse thee from thy peaceful Urn . 
Brave Naso to the world again Retire , 
And Repossess that Rare Promethean fire 
Which erst inspired you , here you may behold 
The face of Impudence overbold , 
That dares put on that sweet Poetic name 
Which hath eternised your Immortal fame . 
Revenge you Muses , up , awake , awake , 
Or ever sink to the Lethean Lake . 
And you brave Modern Poets whose sweet lines 
All Heavenly earthly Harmony combines , 
Can you , O'can your Senses be stupidious 
And see yourselves abused thus perfidious . 
O if the Case were mine , as it is yours 
I would Rain vengeance in revengeful showers , 
Which furi●●s storm for ever should disperse 
And dash to pieces these base Grooms in verse . 
An Ass in Cloth of Gold is but an Ass , 
And Rhyming Rascals may for Poets pass , 
amongst misjudging and illiterate Hinds 
But judgement knows to use them in their kinds . 
Myself knows how ( sometimes ) a verse to frame 
Yet dare I not put on a Poet's name , 
And I dare write with thee at any time 
For what thou darest in either Prose or Rhyme , 
For thou of Poesy art the very Scum 
Of Riff-raff-rubish wit the total sum , 
The loathsome Glanders of all base abuse 
The only Filch-line of each labouring Muse , 
The Knave , the Ass , the Coxcomb and the Fool 
The scorn of Poets , and true wits Csose-stoole . 
But all your Tavern and your Alehouse prate 
Is how your entertainment was in State , 
With this Great Lord and that embroidered Knight , 
With that fair Countess , and that Lady bright , 
Though where thou come thou shifted & lie & lurch 
As welcome as a Dog into a Church . 
Dost think the King and 's Courtiers doth not see 
And know that nothing good Can come from thee ! 
Can Swine yield sweet perfumes , 
( can Swans breed Crows ? 
Can flattering Rogues have but dissembling shows ? 
Can health be hidden in the plague or pox ? 
Can men take pride in fetters , bonds or stocks ? 
And more impossible than are all these 
It is that thou shouldst any wise man please , 
Except it be a flash , a spark , a spurt , 
Soon in , soon out , and then as sweet as dirt , 
Or like a candl's snuff , for pleasing scent 
thou leav'st them deeply pleased with discontent , 
For thou ( like stinking Fish ) art grown so stale , 
A whole days Rhyme not worth a pot of Ale. 
But shortly I do hope to see brave sport , 
To have thee sound whipped from out the Court , 
For well I know my King will not allow 
His house to harbour such a Rogue as thou . 
I vow to G●d , my Inkhorn I 'll not shut , 
Or sleep shall not mine eyes together put 
Before each night I write some scourging verse 
That in Revenge thy jadish heart shall pierce . 
For I whose creddt ne'er before was tainted , 
Nor ever was with Cheating tricks acquainted , 
To be by thee thus basely used and crossed 
And in the world my Reputation lost , 
And all by thee , that meritest naught but banging 
For sure I think , thou 'lt ne'er be worth the hanging . 
Yet rather than thou shouldst a Hanging want 
I 'd truss thee up for naught , were Hangmen scant , 
Nay I Would do it freely , and for nothing , 
And give thy Wife again my fee and clothing : 
Which Courtesy of mine , no doubt would move 
The creatures kindness to require my love . 
On her thou laidst the fault : thou saidst that she 
Did force thee basely Run away from me . 
thou Dolt , thou Dunce , more blockish than a M●le , 
None but a Wittol gives his wife the Rule . 
no 't was thy Coward heart , full fraught with fear 
'T was nothing else that made thee not appear . 
Hadst thou the Conquest got , I had not cared 
So thou-unto thy word hadst had regard , 
then sure the Players had not played a play 
But thou or I had born away the day . 
And now to give the world a little taste 
Of the strange brunts and puzzells that I passed , 
I will not write a word shall be untrue 
That men may know , thou used me like a 〈◊〉 
And that I do not Rail on the so fore 
But that my wrongs doth urge me to do more . 
The house was filled with Newters , Foes , and Freind● 
And every one their money frankly spends , 
But when I saw the day away did ●ade 
And thy looked for Appearance was not made , 
I then stepped out their angers to appease 
But they all Raging like tempestuous Seas : 
Cried out their expectations were defeated 
And how the wall were Coney catched & Cheated , 
Some laughed , some swore , some stared & stamped and cursed 
And in confused humours all out burst . 
I ( as I could ) did stand the desperate shock , 
And bid the brunt of many dangerous knock . 
For now the stinkards , in their Ireful wraths 
Bepelted me with Lome , with Stones , and Lath● , 
One madly fits like bottle - Ale , and hisses , 
Another throws a stone , and cause he misses 
He yawns and baules , and cries away , Away : 
Another cries out john begin the Play , 
I think this Baebell of confused Action 
Would sure have made thee stink with fears distraction , 
One swears and storms , another laughs & smiles , 
Another madly would pluck off the tiles . 
Some Runs to'the door to get again their Coin 
And some do shifts and some again purloin , 
One valiantly stepped out upon the Stage 
And would tear down the hangings in his rage . 
( God grant he may have hanging at his end 
That with me for the hangings did contend , ) 
Such clapping , hissing , swearing , stamping , smiling , 
Applauding , scorning , li●ing , and Reviling , 
Did more torment me then a Purgatory , 
Yet I ( in scorn of windy pomp stage glory ) 
Did stand it out , unconquered , unsubdude , 
Despite the Hydraheaded multitude . 
Now Goodman dog a halter catch your muzzle , 
Your not Appearance brought me in this puzzle , 
But I ( to give the Audience some content ) 
began to Act what I before had meant : 
And first I played A maundering Roguish creature 
( a part thou could have Acted well by nature ) 
Which act did pass , and please , and filled their jaweds 
With wrinkled laughter , and with good Aplawse . 
then came the Players , and they played an Act 
Which greatly from my Action did detract . 
For 't is not possible for any one 
To play against a Company alone , 
And such a Company ( I 'll boldly say ) 
That better ( nor the like ) ever played a Play. 
In brief , the Play my Action did Eclipse 
And in a manner sealed up both my lips . 
Suppose it were a black Cimmerian night 
And that some 12 or 16 Torches light 
Should make night seem an Artificial day , 
And them suppose these torches past away , 
Whilst dismal darkness strait resumes the place , 
then after all comes in with Glimm'ring pace 
A silly ●aper . How would that alone 
Show when the flaming torches all were gone ? 
Eued so seemed I , amid the Guarded troop 
Of Gold laced Actors , yet all could not droop 
My fixed mind , for where true Courage roots : 
The Proverb says , once over shoes or ● boots . 
'T were easier to subdue wild Bears or Boars , 
Or row to Highgate with a pair of Oars , 
Or to make thee an upright honest man 
( Which sure God will not , nor the Devil can ) 
'T were lesser labour to blow down Paules-steeple 
then to Appease , or please the raging people . 
The Play made me as sweet in their opinions 
As Tripes well fried in Tarr , or Eggs with Onions . 
ay , like a Bear unto the stake was tie , 
And what they said , or did , I must abide . 
A pox upon him for a Rogue says one 
And with that word he throws at me a stone , 
A second my estate doth seem to pity , 
And says my Action's good , my speeches witty . 
A third doth screw his chaps awry , and mew , 
His self conceited wisdom so to show . 
Thus doth the Third , the Fourth , the fifth and Six 
Most G●lliemawfrey-like their humours mix . 
Such Motley , Medley , Linsey Wolsey speeche● 
Would sure have made thee vilify thy breeches . 
What I endured , upon that earthly hell 
My tongue or pen cannot describe it well . 
And rather than I 'll do the like once more 
I would be married to an Arrant Whore. 
And that 's a Plague , I could wish well to thee 
For it would worse than a Hanging be . 
And let ●e say my best in my excuse , 
The Audience all were wronged with great abuse , 
Great cause they had to take it in offence , 
To come from their Affairs with such expense 
By Land and Water , and then at the Play 
So extraordinarily to pay , 
And when th● thing should be which they expected 
then nothing to their like was effected . 
Their mirth to Madness , liking turned to Loathing 
For when all came to all , all came to nothing . 
Thus hast thou had a little slender taste 
Of my designs , and ●ow I was disgraced , 
For which I am beholding to you Sir , 
For had you come , there had been no such stir , 
Not cause the people longed thyself to see 
But that they looked thou shouldst disgraced be , 
To see us two the people did repair , 
And not to see or hear , or Play or Player . 
Why what a faithless Rascal art thou then 
dar'st thou to look● upon me once ag●n , 
Which if thou dost , were 't not for ●ear of Laws 
I 'd stab my Dagger thorough both thy laws . 
But much I scorn my fingers should be fowl 
With beating such a durry 〈◊〉 - Owl . 
But I 'll Rib-roast thee , and bombast thee still 
With my enraged Muse , and angry Quill . 
And so I leave thy Carcase and Apparel 
Unto the Hangman , who shall end our quarrel , 
My full opinion of thee sure is this 
In no Church-book thy name Recorded is ▪ 
But that thou wast begotten in some ditch 
Betwixt a Tinker and a 〈◊〉 Witch , 
And sure thy birth did equal thy begetting , 
I think thy Mother in the Sunshine sitting . 
Basking herself close to ●ome hedge of Thorn 
And so without a Midwife thou wa●t born . 
And there the Sun with his Illustrious Light 
Screwed quite Awry the Windows of thy sight . 
then afterwards the Ma●●o●e thought it meet 
To wrap thee up within some hedg-stolne sheet . 
And making thee his sweet unchristian pack 
Some six or seau'n year bore thee on her back , 
Instructing thee in the brave Canting tongue 
And how in Pedlars French to sing a song . 
And Rhyme for Buttermilk for Curds and Whey 
And in a Barn at night thy bones to lay . 
This I do think of thee , I 'll not say so ▪ 
thou know'st it best if it be so or no. 
This ( by thine own Report ) some few years since 
thou Rym'st at Gr●●●send for so●e fourteen pence 
I' the street , from seaventeen people unrespected 
This Grand Collection , justly was Collected . 
As I do hope for bliss , I hate thee not 
For any Goods or Credit thou hast got 
In Court or City . But thy praise I 'll sing 
If any way thou didst delight the King. 
So many tedious Cares are daily thrown 
Upon the Royall-head that wears a Crown , 
That into Action I would melt my spirit 
Thereby to give my Sovereign some delight . 
For such things I do love and wish thee well 
But that I think no such in thee doth dwell . 
Therefore I hate the● , as thou dost be●ave 
Thyself like to a cozening paltry Knave . 
What here I write , upon thee I 'll make good 
And in the hazard I 'll engage my blood . 
But as I said before , again I 'll say 
I scorn on such a Rascal , hands to lay , 
For the old Proverb is Authentical 
( Who touches pitch shall be defiled withal . 
thou hast a pate can forge a Mint of lies , 
Else how is (null) possible thou couldst devose 
At once to flap me and the world i' th' mouth 
That thou wast Rid , East , West , and North , & South . 
That day thou shouldst have met me on the Stage 
thou went'st three me ways at once on pilgrimage , 
thou sentest ●e word tho'wast sent for to the Court , 
Thy wife said thou with speed must make resort 
To fetch her portion out of Warwickeshire , 
And the day after 't was my chance to hear , 
How thou for begging of a Felon's pardon 
wast Rid down into Kent to fetch thy Guer●●●n . 
So that the Portion that thou went'st to fet 
thou from the Gallows ( thy best friend ) didst get . 
But though thou rob the Gallows of his fee , 
It will ( at last ) for principal catch thee . 
Where ( for thou Guld'st me at t●e Hope ) I hope 
thou wilt conclude thy Rogu'ry in a Rope , 
Three Trees , two Rampant , and the other Crossant , 
One halter Pendant , and a ladder Pass●●t , 
In a field Azure , ( clouded like the sky ) 
Because betwixt Earth and Air I hope thou'●t d●e . 
These Arms for thee , my Muse hath Heralldized , 
And to exalt thee , them she hath devisd . 
then when thou bidst the world thy last good-night 
Squi●t upward , and cry Gallows claim thy right . 
To whose protection , thy Estate I tender , 
And all thy Rights and Titles I surrender , 
Thy Carcase and thy Manners ( that are ●uill ) 
To Tyburn , Hangman , and ( thy ●ire ) the Devil . 
thine as thou hast deserved , john Taylor . 

To the Reader . 

Now honest Reader , ( if thou be so ) tell 
Have I not Ca●uased this same Rascal well ? 
Me thinks I hear some say I am to bitter 
And if I were more mild they hold it fitter . 
Let such men Truly but conceive my wrong , 
And think the Case did to themselves belong . 
When such a F●llow with me shall agree 
And take my money for an earnest see , 
And make me Print a thousand Bills and more , 
And daily on the Posts to clap up store , 
For thousand Readers as they pass the way 
To see my name engaged to play a Play 
'Gainst William Fennor my Antagonist , 
And then , fo● me each hour to persist 
( Upon his word ) to study and to write 
And scarce in six week's rest or day or night . 
And when the time is Come the play should be 
My opposite should Run away from me . 
And leave me to be made a wondering ●●ock 
A scorn , a Bye-word , for the world to mock . 
To make me lose my Credit , and my name 
To be or'c●ouded with perpetual shame . 
judge if this would not move a man to spleen● 
To be thus basely used as I have been . 
Thus to the Censure of the World I send 
This sharp invective , which my Anger penned . 
And as my wrong was public , so will I 
Revenged ●e upon him Publicly . 
And for him I have worse Rodd● in piss 
If he but dare to write and Answer this . 
But if he durst no better play the Knave 
then Answer me , he would not Go so bra●e . 
But yet here 's one thing was almost forgot 
Which till this time my Muse remembered not , 
And sure it must his Fool● ship needs , molest , 
This hath been Read and Laughed at by the best , 
That when he dares but to the Court to come 
His entertainment will be like I●ck Drum.  
To my spiteful Foes . 

Like Guests unbid , you might have brought your stools 
For as you came , you went away like Fools . 
The purpose which my study did intend 
Was by no means any to offend , 
And therefore whatsoever that they be 
That enviously do Rail and snarl at me , 
I can no less do , but with word and pen 
Inform them that they are malicious men . 
'Gainst no man in particular I write 
But gen'rally to all that bear me spite . 
I pray for them , ( to make their fury madder ) 
Good turn their hearts , or Hangman turn the ladder 
Which turning sure will either mend or end them 
To one of which my daily Prayers commend them . 
FINIS . 

