A reply as true as steel , to a rusty , railing , ridiculous , lying libel ; which was lately written by an impudent unsodered ironmonger and called by the name of an answer to a foolish pamphlet entitled , a swarm of secta•ieses and schismatics . By John Taylour . 

The devil is hard bound and did hardly strain , 
To shit a libeler a knave in grain . 


Printed anno dom 1641.  

A reply as true as steel , to a rusty , railng , ridiculous , lying libel . 

What dogs infernal snaps and snarleth thus ? 
( Begot by tripleheaded Cerberus ) 
No 't is a pretty puppy , with one head , 
A red haired whelp , that can both write and read . 
Sprung from the devil and a mad dun cow , 
Nurse in a dunghill where he sucked a sow , 
This amsterdamed cur , hath strange libels flirted 
And much foul ink besquitterid and besquirted 
That everywhere his roguish pamphlets flies 
That England's all embroidered o'er with lies . 
And late this cankered viperous hound of hell 
His toadlike malice did against me swell , 
And did a poisonous lying libel frame 
Against me , but durst never set his name . 
An annagram denominotes him well 
Three scurvy words , a knav , reviler , hell , 
These show his name , his nature and his end 
( Except before he 's hanged he means to mend . ) 
For who is fit for black hell to have 
Then a reviler and a railing knave , 
And not to hold you in suspense much longer 
This fellow is a quondam iron-monger 
And now his copies changed , cracked like a shell 
In gracious street , doth graceless libels sell . 
If i would be an idle babbling talker 
Perhaps i then should name him Henry Wallker . 
But 't is no matter , I 'll a while forbear 
he 'll hang himself if i should name him here ; 
He in his title page , six times sets down 
My name , but never once , durst write his own 
And though his libel be one sheet ( No more ) 
And prose and verse the lines are but eightscore , 
Ye fifty of these roguish lines ( Pray know it ) 
He stole from Fenner , the dead rimcing poet . 
And yet the mongrel Dogg's wits was to seek 
That he was fain to pump above a week . 
To answer me , but this reply was soon 
Unwrit and writ in half an Afternon . 
And what sweet stuff his giant muse brought forth 
Those that wi•l read May quickly know the worth . 
He lays about him bravely with his ink 
And taxes me with drabs and to much drink 
But those that know me well , do know me so 
That i to both those vices am a foe , 
But were i given to the venereal crime 
I would have seen his wife before this time , 
If he be jellious , he deserves for that 
To wear a fair ox-feather in his hat ; 
Th' Archbishop nor his men did me invite 
Nor for a meal did i the book indite 
For 't is to sundry gentlemen well known 
That i did write that book three years agone . 
Let trencher knaves ( Like Walker ) scrape for scraps 
And with the snuffs of great-men rinse their chaps , 
No Bishops not in England living be 
That i have cause to thank for gifts to me . 
He that takes part with Rome , let him have hell 
And there is room enough , there let him dwell : 
But though those lines May show sincerity 
Yet they are far from Christian charity , ) 
I hate no person , ( Layman , or divine ) 
Nor against misguided souls do i repine , 
i hate men's crimes , nor do i love mine own , 
( And charity begins at home 't is known ) 
As men transgress , so punish the offender 
As men are men so men should pity tender ; 
This shallow pated fool that rails and raves 
I pity him and all his brother knaves 
Sure if they had wit they would descry 
Good manners must not be idolatry , 
That popery is not rails , though too much railing 
Hath showed Rome's mingle mangle wrangling failing . 
Thou filthv fellow , dost thou make no odds 
Between a stable and a house of gods , 
I think the devil fears that doom's day's near 
And therefore he those adverse sects doth rear 
And buzzeth sundry forms of strange religions 
That he May catch the most of them like widgeons ; 
For what a lamentable case is this 
When such mad fools ( Whom wisemen scorn and hiss ) 
Dares take upon them to reform and teach 
Various rell•gionss , all beyond their reach . 
And this rare rascal , ( In his zeal discreet ) 
Went lately to the owl that 's in King's street 
There was his bible pawned ( For what i pray ) 
For one quart of metheglin left to pay . 
Was not this rogue raped with some spirit divine 
To pawn God's word for poor Welsh muscadine . 
He talks of whipping , and of jails to me 
Of gallows , and things called pillory , 
And such odd whimsyes , which the gentleman 
Doth hammer in his Perricranian , 
Yet late great-men of government thought fit 
To clap him in the fleet with all his wit , 
And being thence released , he afterward 
Was kept in wood-street-counter with good guard 
For why it was a matter most unmeet 
His precisous pamphlets should bestrow the street . 
And make some old men , that for got almost 
To ride a horse , to ride each pissing post , 
And all his patience could not be content 
To stay for order from the parliament , 
I hold it manners to forbear a while 
Till that high court our wrongs can reconcile 
To wait with patience , and with prayers desire 
That God that blessed senate would inspire 
With grace , true wisdom , courage , saving health 
For heaven's great-service , King and common wealth . 
But Master Walker and such knaves as he 
To wait their leisures cannot quiet be : 
But they must libel rail , and keep a rut , 
And ( As they please their own ways out to cut , 
And like unmaunaged wild untoward jades 
Lay by their laudable and lawful trades , 
And saucily to preach , prate , roar , and lie 
Against all order rule and decency ; 
And all such as are not seditious 
To call them Papists , and idollatrous , 
As frogs and toads do breed from putrid slime 
So do these vermin feed upon men's crime 
Like swine ith'mire , they love to wallow in 
The sordid loathsome excrements of sin . 
And though offenders suffer worthily 
Yet will these varlet's malice never die , 
For though unhappy Strafford be struck dead 
They mount him up a cockhorse sans a head . 
And this most precious youth , with tongue and pen 
Is chief amongst the devils serving men , 
For with his serpent's tongue and poisoned breath 
He doth his worst to torture after death , 
And sure because thou canst do ill so well 
Thou must expect to have thy hire in hell , 
This stinking vermin ( Mounseir overthwart ) 
Quite oposite to nature , law and art , 
holds it not fit he should be kept in awe 
Within the rules and limmi•ss of the law , 
And therefore if the law should bid him stand 
Then he would kneel , ( Contrary to command ) 
And when to kneel , good manners holds it fit 
In opposi•ion he would stand or sit ; 
For nothing his rebellious mind contents 
That is not mixed with disobedience 
A sister as she chanced to set her eye on 
The King's arms in the church , the rampant lion , 
She said his priap moved unlawful motions 
Which did disturb and hinder her devotions , 
But when her husband came to be churchwarden 
He caused some forms of flowers from field or garden 
Or sedge and flags , 'twixt the beast legs be painted 
To hide his whim-wham , which her mind had tainted . 
This was done really , and 't is no fable 
To prove it so i quickly can be able , 
And now thou poisoned pickthank pestilent 
That writ'st and rimest so poor so violent 
Me think this my reply May answer thee , 
If not , thou 'rt like to have no more of me 
I scorn and loath , that ere my pen or tongue 
Should write or speak to such a lump of dung ; 
Yet thou , ( Well skilled in foolish impudence ) 
Against these retorting lines will take offence 
And with mockado mouth and judgement rash , 
And tongue of Saye , thou 'lt say all is but trash , 
And that 't is pity , i should thus disperse 
A business of such consequence in verse , 
Indeed , with thee it cannot stand for good 
Nor can it well by thee be understood , 
Thou hatest the muses , yet dost love to muse 
In railing terms thy betters to abuse , 
Verse must have method , measure , order , feet , 
Proportion , cadence , weight and number , sweet 
but thou that hatest good verse , and libels make 
Dost with the devil's cloven foot thy measure take 
And where thou hast no power thou dost deride 
( So will all rogues that verse cannot abide ) 
But let such know , that heaven bred poetry 
Despiseth mundane poor fellicity , 
Nor for vaust air will like a magpie chatter , 
Or for the crumbs of greatness lie and flatter , 
I could write lines , ( Thou fowl ill looking elf ) 
Should make thee ( In iambics ) hang thyself , 
thou 'rt foul within , and my sharp lancing quill 
Can make incision , and with art and skill 
Search deep for dead flesh and corroded cores 
And from corruptions clear and cleanse thy sores . 
thou 'rt almost gangrened , and i surely think 
No Balls•m's' better than a poet's ink , 
My pen can lash detraction and i can 
Be valiantly bold , and wrong no man , 
But wherefore ( Like a mountebank ) do i 
Spend time and ink upon such rascal fry 
As is this gadfly . 't is not sergeons' art 
Can help him , it perhaps May make him smart . 
But he will be uncured , as he hath been 
Except he first be cleansed and purged within : 
So , Walker , walk knave and more roguery brew 
And farewell and be hanged , that 's twice adieu . 
Finis . 





look into the tenth line following , and there in capital letters you shall find that these three wicked words are his anagram . the rascal says that i was invited to dinner , a• the tower it is know i was a servant there 14. years . 

















