

A FAMOUS Fight at Sea. WERE FOUR English Ships under the command of Captain john Weddell , and four Dutch Ships fought three days in the Gulf of Persia near Ormus , against 8.  Portugal Galleons , and 3.  Friggots . 

AS ALSO The memorable fight and loss of the good Ship called the Lion , with the barbarous cruelty of the Enemy truly declared . 

LONDON , ¶ Printed by john Haviland for Henry Gosson . 

TO THE RIGHT Worthy , Generous , and well experienced Commander Captain JOHN WEDDELL , late General of the East-india Fleet.  

Worthy Sir , having written the true manner of your late famous , perilous , and fortunate fight with the Portugalls in the Persian Gulf , and knowing that Books without Patrons are like fatherless Children , I imagined that it was better to send it to you for succour and protection , than to any other whomsoever ; for the most part which is herein by Relation , I am assured that you do know to be true by action , and my pen hath but only superficially prattled of those things which you saw , did , and suffered . I therefore humbly entreat you to accept this poor fish out of your own Ocean , this sheep of your own fold , this cloth of your own weaving , and this deserved memory of part of your worthy wone reputation . Thus not doubting but your affability is correspondent to your approved knowledge and known sufficiency , I commit both myself and this Relation to your acceptance and good censure , my best wishes still attending on you , that your fortunes be ever equal to the goodness of your mind . 

Ever at your command to be employed , JOHN TAYLOR . 

A famous fight at Sea in the Gulf of Persia.  

The Eternal providence having divided mankind into many Kingdoms , Climates , People , and Nations , yet to the end there should be a unity or mutual society amongst all men , he hath permitted traffic and Commerce betwixt Nation and Nation . Realm and Realm . Navigation and Shipping being as it were the fleeting bridges , for the transportation and exportation of men & Merchandise , from Country to Country , that though God hath not enriched any one Kingdom or Country with all things , ( the one having what the other hath not : ) yet to maintain human society ( but chiefly for his own glory in dispersing his gifts ) Commerce and traffic hath been used at all times , and in all ages ; for the which noble employments our Kingdom of England hath not been inferior to any Nation for the ability and worthiness of Merchants , and I think not equalled by any for goodness and sufficiency of skilful Navigators , and Mariners , and strength of shipping , and munition . 

So that neither the parching heat of Libya and Ethiopia , or the benumbing frigidity of Groenland , or the Hiperborean Icle Regions , neither the far remoteness of China Eastwards , or the uttermost bounds of the new world America Westwards , the dangers Storms , Gusts , Flaws , Tempests , Spouts , and Tornadoes , or Monsoones , the hazard of Shoales , Rocks , Leaks , Enemies , Pirates , barbirous and cruel Nations , unwholesome and untemperate Airs and Climates , Sea or Land Monsters , or what perils may be named or thought upon , hath ever daunted or hindered our Merchants and Mariners to prosecute and accomplish their continual , laudable , and profitable undertake . 

amongst whom our noble , worshipful , and worthy East-india Merchants , and Adventurers , may in these later times be held as superlative to those of former ages , their inestimable charge , their mighty force , their valuable returns , and their adventurous hazards rightly considered . All which being no part of my purpose to treas of , I refer the Reader only to the description of two famous Sea-fights , performed betwixt the English and the Portugals ; which , though the news of it could not be brought hither so soon as if it had been done upon the Coast of Zealand or Flanders ; yet , as soon as wind and weather could bring it , I had it , and with what time I could well spare I have written it , assuring myself of what I dare assure my Reader , which is , that all is true . In which regard , I thought it unfit to let it lie buried in oblivion , or the hateful and ingrateful grave of forgetfulness . In it is valour described , and manifested in the lives and deaths of many of our English , and extreme cruelty and inhumanity in the Enemy . But to the matter . 

A brave Sea-fight in the Gulf of Persia.  

4 English Ships . 

1 The Royal james , Admiral . 
2 The jonas , Vice-admiral . 
3 The Star , Rear-admiral . 
4 The Eagle , fourth Ship. john Weddell chief Commander of the English Fleet.  
4 Dutch Ships . 

1 The South-holland Admiral . 
2 The Bantam Vice-admiral . 
3 The Maid of Dort , Rear-admiral . 
4 The Wesope , fourth Ship. Albert Becker , chief Commander of the Dutch Fleet.  
The 30. of january 1624. being Friday , the English and Dutch Ships being in the Road of Gombroone , there arrived a small Frigate belonging to a place near Chowle , ( which is in war with the Portugals ) she came in between the Main and Ormus , to whom the General of the English , Capt. john Weddell , sent Mr. Andrew Euans , in a little Boat called a Gellywat , to know from whence he came , and whether he could give us any intelligence of the Portugal Armado ; his answer was , that he came from a place some eight or ten leagues to the Southwards of Chowle , laden with Pepper and other Merchandise , and withal he said , that on the Saturday before , being the 24. of january , he was of the Cape called Cape Gordell , half way betwixt the Coast of India , and Cape jaques , where to Seaward of him he saw eight great Galleons , and certain Frigates , which Frigates gave him chase , but he kept himself so near the shore , that they could not fetch him up ; and this was the first information of the near approach of the Enemy . 

The 31. of january in the morning , the English and Dutch Fleet heard three pieces of Ordnance go off from Kishme Castle , ( a strong hold , and in war with the Portugals ) the Captain of the said Castle having before promised the General ( Captain Weddell ) that if he descried any Cross Sails or Ships in sight of the Castle , that then he would discharge those Pieces as a warning unto him , which accordingly he did . 

Whereupon a man was sent up to the topmast head in the English Admiral , to look abroad , who being up , presently cried a sail , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8. with many Frigates in their company , than the General commanded the Gunner to shoot off a Piece of Ordnance , to give warning to all the Fleet to put themselves in readiness for the entertainment of the Enemy , putting also the bloody Colours out , as likewise the Dutch Admiral did the like , with all speed getting their men and boats from the shore , weighing their Anchors of all hands , and getting under sail with all possible celerity , with courage and resolution they stood towards the Enemy , ( whose drift was to have taken the English and Dutch at Anchor unprepared ) but their expectations were frustrate . 

Towards 8. of the clock at night it fell calm , so that our ships came to an Anchor , when the Commander of the Dutch Fleet ( named Albert Becker ) sent his Master of his ship , accompanied with some other Merchants , and Masters aboard the Royal james , informing Captain Weddell that their Commander had sent them to see how he did , and what he thought the ships and Frigates to be that they had descried . The Commander Weddell answered , that they could be no other than the Portugal Armado , which had been two years preparing to meet with the English and Dutch , and that now they were come in search of them , from Goa , unto this place , hoping first to conquer both our and their Nation , and afterwards to fall to work upon Ormus , Kishme , and Gombroone , to destroy our settled trade , and to extirp and root us out with all hostility and dishonour . then the Dutch demanded Captain Weddells' Resolution , concerning so common and open an Enemy , he told them that his resolution was , for the glory of God , the honour of his Nation , the profit of worthy Employers , & the safeguard of lives , ships , & goods , he would fight it out as long as a man was living in his ship to wear a Sword , and that he doubted not but the other three ships under his Command were all of the same mind and courage ; to whom the Dutchmen answered , that they were of the like resolution , and would stick as close to the English as their shirts to their backs , and so in friendly manner each took leave of other for that night . 

The first of February , being Sunday , the Dutch Admiral weighed Anchor an hour before daylight , and the English presently after him , but the Dutch got the start of us all , though we made all the sail we could ; at last the English came up to him with their whole Fleet , but he discharged the first shot at the Portugal Admiral , who presently answered him with three for one . The friends and foes being now within Musket shot of each other , it fell calm , whereby our ships would not work but as the Tide did set them , that when the Portugalls were Board and Board , they had a great advantage of us with their Frigates that towed them clear one off another often , which help we wanted , thus we lay some four or five hours pelting and beating one another with our Ordnance , the whilst the Frigates plied us with small shot , as fast as they could , the Royal james being forced to keep the Barge a head to pull the ships head to and from ; but towards the afternoon there arose a fine gale , but the Enemy had the wind of us , whereupon the Admiral and Vice-admiral of the Portugalls bore up room upon us , making account to lay the Royal james aboard , the one on the Starboard , the other on the Larboard side , which Captain Weddell perceiving , scarce being able to eat it , he called to the Master , and told him the purpose of the Enemy , to avoid which danger , he commanded the Master to bear a little lasking to separate them further each from other , that he might have more room to go between them , the Vice-admiral of the Enemy seeing the james bear up so lasking , she likewise bore up with her , when suddenly Captain Weddell perceived there was hope to weather him , caused his Mizzen and Mizzen topsail to be set , and so presently got the wind of him , edging close up with the Admiral , being within Musket-shot of them both ; the Portugal Admiral put to stay , by which means the james gate the wind of him also , having much ado to get out a weather of him , coming so close under his stern , that his Boats were close at our ships side as she sheared by , when presently we gave him a whole broadside , every shot taking him fore and after , tacking forth with , and standing after him . Thus the first days fight lasted till five at night , wherein the Royal james lost eight men , and some others which had some small hurts : Also this day the Dutch lost their chief Commander , a brave valiant fellow , who lived and died nobly in the bed of honour . This fight was terrible and fierce for the time , for the Royal james alone spent near 700. great shot , and all the other ships English and Dutch , did proportionably do the like . The Sun being set , the Enemy fell off , and came to an Anchor at the East end of Kishme , the English being Northnorthwest from them two leagues , thus was concluded the first days fight . 

Monday the 2. of February , being Candlemas day , the wind being very little which blew off from Kishme , so that the Enemy had the advantage of it , but never offered to make use of it , to make room towards us ; the English and Dutch being employed busily to fit up their torn rigging and tackling , and stopping such dangerous shot as they had received in the fight betwixt wind and water . 

Also the same day in the afternoon there was a meeting aboard the Royal james , where both the English and Dutch concluded , that they would give the Enemy fight the next morning , and that the Royal james should be the leading ship , and the Admiral of the Dutch should second her , and that they should go directly to the Enemy's Admiral , not striking higher or lower till the james came side by side with her . So the third of February being Tuesday , both the Fleets weighed Anchors at break of day , having the weather gage of the Enemy , the great james stood right with the Admiral of the Portugalls , which was head-most but one ; but coming near them , they woven to Leeward with their bright arming Swords , and we the like to them , they saluted us with a whole broad side ; but Captain Weddell commanded his men not to answer them , till they were brought nearer within danger , which charge was obeyed ; but being come near the Admiral , and another of their ships , the great james bestowed upon each of them a whole broad side , making them both to bear up , the one a port , and the other a starboard , by which means one of their ships was cut off and sundered from them , and was chased three or four hours by the Eagle , and Weasope ; the hope of the English and Dutch being that she should no more return to her Fleets Company ; the james following still the Admiral and Vice-admiral , got upon the Admiral's side , having the Vice-admiral on his Starboard bow ; insomuch that this day's fight grew very hot , for often the james was in thickest of the Enemy , being at one time all round about us ; but our men so plied their Ordnance upon them , that they all refused to stand by us , but fled all before us as chaff , dust , or smoke before the wind . In this fight the james got between one of their Fleet , and singled her out , lying by her sides with foresail , and fore-topsaile a back stays , so near as a man might quoit a Biscuit Cake into her , when strait Master johnson came up in the stern of the james , so near as he could hardly keep clear , to whom Captain Weddell called , willing him to clap the Portugal aboard on the Larboard quarter , ( whilst the james lay thundering upon him with her great Ordnance ) he promised to do it , but after he refused it , this Vessel had not so few as 500 shot thorough her Hull , Masts , Sails , and Yards , before she got clear . This third day the fight was very violent , for the Royal james only spent 2000 and odd shot upon the enemy , four men being slain in her , and three others their legs shot off . In her Masts , Yards , Rigging and Hull , she had received above 400. great shot ; both parties at Sunset being so faint and weary , that they all left off , the Portugalls came to an Anchor under Ormus , and the other near Gombroone Road , this fight last near eight hours . 

Note , that the morning Captain Weddell had fitted a Portugal Vessel ( which had been formerly taken with some Cokernuts ) and purposed to have fired her thwart the Admiral's Hawse , she being appointed to come between the Dutch Admiral , and the jonas , but through disaster , or rather negligence in Derby the Master , who came not up according to his appointed place , she was chased by the Frigates ( she having but ten men in her ) being of no defence , they were forced to set her on fire far from the Fleet , and so the men betook themselves to a Barge , which was left them for their safety , by which means the General's project was disappointed . 

All this third day at night this Vessel burned , & two hours before daylight , whether she was towed by some of the Enemy's Boats , or no , is unknown , but she came burning amongst the English and Dutch Fleets , and forced them from their Anchors by slipping their Cables , which Anchors they took up some three days after . 

The 4. of February in the morning , both Fleets made towards the Enemies , who were under sail , and made all the haste they could to get under the Island of Lowracke , which lieth some eight or nine miles from Ormus , unto which Island their Frigates went ahead , conducting them in over a Bar , whom the English and Dutch followed as far as with safety they durst , having neither the help of Pilots to eat the dangers of the place , or Frigates to go a head as conductors , as the Enemy had . Besides , there might have been Ordnance planted a shore by the Enemy , which would have been greatly to their advantage , or otherwise in the dark night they might have chained two or three Frigates together , and turning them upon them , upon the Ebb thwart their hawse , might much have endangered them , they knowing the Enemy to be implacable , malicious , and politic ; these reasons caused them to follow them no further at this time , but to come to an Anchor a League from them , when Captain Weddell sent for the chief of the Dutch , whose resolution was to go back again for Gombroone , there to dispatch our Merchant's affairs . So Anchors were weighed , the james giving them a shot for a farewell , and they answered her with the like , they all getting into Gombroone Road that night , where they speedily fell to work to repair the ruins of wars , in sitting of Masts , Yards , Sailes , rigging and stopping breaches , all which in three days , was accomplished , leaving the Portugal like a Thief in his Mill , or a Fox in his hole , not minding to try as yet the hazard of another bout . 

In this fight their Reare-admiralls main Mast was shot by the board , their Vice-admiralls main topmast was likewise shot by the board , their Admiral's Mizzen-mast , Flag , and flag staff shot by the board , and her Hull much rend and torn . Their fourth ship had the head of her main Mast shot by the board . Another of their ships had all her top-masts shot by the board . In conclusion , all their eight ships were so torn and tattered , that they had neither good Masts , Sails , or Yards to help themselves with , nor tied sides to bear sail upon . Thus it pleased the Almighty to give the victory of the day unto those that rely upon his promise ; to that great God be all glory for ever , and let all true Christians say Amen . 

The 13. of February being Friday , the English and Dutch Fleets set sail at daylight from the Road of Gombroone , having also with them four junks , other vessels of lading , under the conduct and charge of the Dutch , which as soon as the Enemy perceived , they let slip their Cables and slipped from their harbour at the Island of Lawracke , which is four or five Leagues from the Road of Gombroone , the Enemy making all the sail he could to seaboord of the English and Dutch all the day till Sunset ; when they were got within Saker-shot of each other , and a good bearing gale , they all kept company together all night . 

This 13. at night it blew so hard at West-south-west , that one of their great Galleons bore overboard the head of her main Mast , close under the hounds , not being able to hoist up her main sail , she was forced to steer alongst with her foresail , fore-top-saile , her Spritsail , and Mizzen , the wind being at West-south-west , they steered away South and by East . 

The 14. in the morning the Dutch Fleet staying , and bearing up unto the junke , the night past was a storm so far , that the English Fleet could scarce descry them ; so the james laid her foresail a backe-staies , stayed for them , the Portugal never offering to alter his course , but kept on still . 

The same day about noon the Dutch being come up with the English , it was agreed between them , that the Royal james should give the first onset upon their Admiral , and the rest of the Fleet to second her ; so about two of the clock that afternoon the two Fleets came to weather of the Enemy's Admiral , receiving the first shot from their Vice-admiral , and presently a whole broad side from their Admiral , both sides coming as near each other as they could but well keep clean of each other , they fell to it of all hands pell mell , the Ordnance going off as fast as small shot , the james for her part giving them two broad sides , she then edged up in the wind , laying her foresail and fore-top-saile a back stays , as well to give leave to the jonas , ( who was second to the james ) as also to suffer the Portugal Admiral to shoot a head , which she suddenly did , than the james filling her topsail the second time , bore upright with the Enemy Admiral , plying her whole broad side so fast upon him , that he had scarce leisure to return any shot back , whilst the English and Portugal Admirals were so near each other , that they could hardly clear themselves . In this time whilst our ships plied the Enemy's Admiral , ( not so much looking after , or heeding the other ships ) the Vice Admiral , with the rest of their Fleet , were left a stern , their Admiral plied very hard upon the james , giving and receiving many dangerous shots , the james being shot between wind and water often , and had more spoil in her Sails and Rigging than she had done any of the two days fight before , than the third time coming side by side with each others Fleet , they let drive one at another like Thunder in the air , the james coming up with the Admiral ( the great ship of Damon , who the first days fight lost her main Mast ) crept in betwixt the james and the Portugal Admiral , lying as a Bulwark to weather of her , to receive all that might be put upon her , and indeed all that was meant to have been bestowed upon the Admiral , was still plied upon that great Hulk ; as likewise the james , and Dutch , did continue this third days fight till daylight was shut in , the Portugalls edging up to get near the Arabian shore , in so much that at eight at night both English and Dutch were fair by it , chase them in . 

This night the English and Dutch steered away their course for Surat , the Portugalls steering for Swar , a place where they have a Castle . 

The Royal james with the rest , were forced to give even the Chase for these reasons . 

First , for that the time of year was so far spent , that they should not have time enough to deliver their goods at Surat , and so to go clear off the coast before the Westerly Monsoone , which is a wind that blows at west six months together , beginning in April , would be come , and so endanger the ships in getting off again . 

A second reason was , that the Royal james had but 31.  Barrels , and some 500  Cartregos filled with Powder , and some 600. shot all which was not above three quarters of a days fight for her use , for in her former days work the third of February she alone spent 1000 great shot upon the Enemy , so that now through want of Powder she was not able to maintain such another fight according to that rate . And this last day's fight she lost but one man , having spent upon the Enemy more than three hundred great shot . To the Lord of hosts the only giver of victory , the mighty God of battles , be all honour , glory , praise and dominion for ever , Amen . 

A note of the men's names slain in these three several fights with the Portugalls , out of the English Fleet.  

Slain in the Royal james.  

Richard Davis' quarter Masters . 
Nicholas Burton quarter Masters . 
Robert Skalfe , Gunners Mate . 
joseph Wright Carpenters . 
Thomas Bland Carpenters . 
john Bircham Carpenters . 
Godfrey Howton Carpenters . 
Richard Davis' junior Sailors . 
Richard Walker Sailors . 
john Masters Sailors . 
William Wilcockes Sailors . 
William Clarke dismembered in their legs , and died . 
William Surnam dismembered in their legs , and died . 
Slain in the jonas . 

Robert Nodding , Master's Mate . 
John Beedam , mid shipman . 
William Adams . 
Robert Sancie . 
Edward Wilkinson . 
Robert Lark . 
Richard Hergell . 
Francis Blow . 
Thomas Page . 
Thomas Wilkinson . 
Thomas William's . 
Slain in Star . 

james Wanderion . 
William Carter . 
Reignold Sanderson . 
Charles Robinson . 
Slain in the Eagle . 

john Sares.  
The Dutch lost near the like number , amongst whom their chief Commander Albert Beaker slain the first days fight . 

A Relation by Peter Hillion a Frenchman , of the force of eight Portugal Galleons , which fought with the English and Dutch Fleet , in the Gulf of Persia ; as also the spoil they received by them , with their number of men slain , on the 1.3 . and 14. of February 1624. himself being then in the Admiral ; which afterwards riding with three more of her fleet at the River's mouth of Surat , he escaped from her , and ran to the English , which were then riding in the Bar of Surat . 

Their Admiral named S. Francisco Sanuer , wherein was General Non Alva Basellia , had 48. pieces of Brass Ordnance of whose Cannon , Demi-canon , Cannon Pethrow , whose Culvering , and Demy-culuering , and 350. men , of which were slain 38 , whereof three were chief Captains under the aforesaid General , named Lorenzo Luis , jeronimo Botella , and Brossa Cousin , who all three were killed with one shot , the ships Foremast , Bospreer , and main Mast were so torn with shot , that they were unseruiceable , her Mizzen-mast , Flag and Flag-staffe shot by the board , with the head of her main topmast , and her Rigging much rend and torn . 

Their Vice-admiral named likewise S. Francisco , wherein was Commander Francisco Burge , had 32. pieces of Ordnance as the former , and 250. men , of which were slain 31. the aforesaid Commander being one of the number , her main top mast shot by the board , her main Mast , foremast , and Bospreet so torn , that they were unseruiceable . 

Their Rear-admiral named S. Sebastian , ( their biggest ship ) wherein was Commander Don Antonio tela , who was lamed of an arm , had 40. pieces of Brass Ordnance as the former , and 400. men , whereof 20. were slain , her main Mast , foretopmast , fore-yard , and Spritsaile-top-mast shot by the board , and her foremast so unseruiceable , that she could bear no more sail but her Spritsail . 

Their fourth ship named S. Saluador , wherein was Commander Don Francisco de Tuar , had 24. pieces of Brass Ordnance , and 250. men , 41. whereof were slain , the aforesaid Commander being one of the number , his masts were so rend and torn , that they were all unseruiceable . 

Their fifth ship named S. jago , wherein was Commander Simon de Kintalle , had 22. pieces of Brass Ordnance , and 200. men , whereof were slain 83. her Masts were all standing , but she so leaked between wind and water , by shot received , that they had much to do to free her , so that she was cast away upon the Coast of India seven days after . 

Their sixth ship named Trinidada , wherein was Commander Pedro Alva Botelia , had 22. pieces of Brass Ordnance , and 250. men , 243. whereof were slain , his Top-masts were all shot by the board , and her other so torn , that she could bear no sail thereon , but was towed by the Great Hulk Rear-admiral , from Muscas to Goa . 

Their seventh ship named S. Antonio , wherein was Commander Antonio Burallia , had 22. pieces of Brass Ordnance , and 200. men , whereof 22. were slain , her Masts were all standing , but she very leak by shot received betwixt wind and water , and the seventh day after she was cast away upon the Coast of India . 

Their eighth ship named Miserere-cordium , wherein was Commander Emanuel Rodreeges Chava , had 22. pieces of Brass Ordnance , and 200. men , whereof three were slain , her foretopmast , mainyard , fore-yard , and maine-top-saile-yard shot by the board , and her foremast so torn that it was unseruiceable . 

A Table containing the former numbers . 

  Ordnance . Men.  Men slain The Admiral had 48 350 38 The Vice-admiral had 32 250 31 The Rear-admiral had 40 400 20 The fourth Ship had 24 250 41 The fifth Ship had 22 200 83 The sixth Ship had 22 250 243 The seventh Ship had 22 200 22 The eighth Ship had 22 200 3 The sum 232 2100 481 

Thus it pleased God in mercy that the English and Dutch , not being half the numbers of the Enemy , neither in men or Ordnance , that with only the loss of 58. or 60. men , they should kill 481. of the Portugals , and with all so to beaten them , ( notwithstanding the help of 16.  Frigates ) being so torn that they were cast away seven days after , and the rest all unseruiceable , and not daring to stand to the hazard of another conflict . 

A brief description of the Disaster of the good ship called the Lion , one of our English ships , trading to the East India , who was lost in fight with the Portugalls , near Gombroone in the Gulf of Persia , on the eighth of November 1625.  

The seventh of October 1625. about 4. in the morning , the Palsgrane , Dolphin , and Lion anchored about three Leagues to the Southwards of Surat Bar , and when it grew light ( men being in the top ) espied certain Roaders , riding against Surat River , which some supposed to be English or Hollanders , others affirmed to be a Fleet of Frigates ; but in fine , about an hour after they set sail and steered after us , and in short space we made them to be four Portugal Galleons , and fifteen Frigates , the wind being then of shore , they could not come to us that tide , but anchored about a League from us , our Captain perceiving their intents , put forth an Ensign for Counsel , and the Master of each Ship presently repaired aboard . 

At which consultation , as it was reported by our Master M. Richard Swanley , Captain Blithe propounded that he thought it expedient to set sail , and stand off to Sea again , and by that means to abate the force of the Frigates , and if it fell out so that our Ships sailed better than the Portugalls , we should stand direct for Ormus ; the reasons he gave for it were these , viz. first , he doubred that the Portugal had a great force of shipping in Swalley Road.  

Secondly , he feared whether our Merchants had friendship with the Country people , or not , by reason of the discord which was between them at the Dolphin's preparations for England , which was the last news he heard from thence . 

Thirdly , he doubted that the Portugalls had made peace with the Gazerats , and had planted Ordnance a shore on Swalley sands . He also doubted what was become of Captain Weddells' Fleet , for he assured himself , if there were any friends at that time in Swalley Road , they would not suffer the Portugal to ride there , for he supposed that the Portugal had been in fight with them the year past , and had either put them to the worst , or else for want of munition to effect another fight , they were forced to repair to Ormus Castle for succour until supply came out of England . 

All which being propounded , and the unreadinesle and great charge of all three ships well considered , it was concluded to set sail , the which we did , the wind being Northerly , and the tide of stoud come , we stood for Sea , and the Portugal Admiral and Vice-admiral sailing better than the rest , fetched us up about four in the afternoon , at which time the Lion being foremost of our Fleet , the enemy Admiral shot one piece of Ordnance at her , for the which she answered three of four , but could hardly reach further than half way : the Portugal finding his Ordnance better than ours , both Admiral and Vice-admiral plied upon the Lion for the space of half an hour , in which time she received diverse shot both in her Hull and Rigging . 

Our Master Richard Swanley , seeing their advantage , caused to bruile mainsail , and edge within Musket-shot of them both , and there maintained fight with them until Sunset , and received no hurt at all . 

All which time , and an hour after , being calm , the other two ships of the Enemy were at least a League a starne . The Palsgrane , and Dolphin all this time being right a head , kept on their course , only plying their starne pieces . The Portugals seeing them still stand away , came both aboard of us , the one in the one quarter , and the other in the other , and entered at least 100 of their men , heaving fire-pots , and diverse sorts of fireworks upon our decks , the Frigates ( as many as could lie about us ) threw firepots in at the ports , and stuck firepikes in her sides ; all which ( by the great mercy and assistance of God ) we still put out . Our Admiral and Vice-admiral , in this our misery were quickly out of our sight , the cause whereof is best known to themselves . 

This conflict remained from 8. at night till about 11. in which space our Master Richard Swanley was slain , and 4. more of our men were also slain , 3. of our Master's Mates , and 20. more were exceedingly burned , the rest almost wearied , and more discomforted , by reason our Fleet had left us , and in brief we were in that case that the word was given to blow up the ship , had not God in his wisdom stayed it , by putting it in the mind of some of our men to let fall an Anchor , which being done ( the tide running very strong ) brought our ship to so strong a bitter , that the fast which the Portugals had upon us broke , whose unexpected ▪ sudden departure from us left 50 or 60 of their men upon our Poop , who still maintained the fire in such sort , that we were forced to blow them up , which blast tore all the Starne of our ship in pieces , from the middle-decke upwards . 

The Portugals being all repulsed , and the fire put out , we used all diligence for the clearing our ship , and getting up our maine-top-saile-yard , which then lay upon our Deck , likewise bringing new sails to Yard , the former being all burned and torn , all which being as well done as haste would give leave , we expected their coming again the next tide , but they hoping we would either have burned or sunk , only left five Frigates without shot of us , and themselves with the other two ships that were formerly a starne stood after the Palsgrave and Dolphin , and in short space fetched them up , and fought with them all that night , they standing still off to Sea , were but off our sight the next morning . 

The 8. day in the morning , ( all the ships being out of our sight ) it was agreed upon by the Officers of our ship , that Henry Crosbey our Master's chief Mate should succeed as our Commander , until such time as it pleased God we should meet with our Commander . 

This being done , we being not able to weigh our Anchor , by reason our men were most of them hurt , cut Cable in the hawse , and set as much sail as we durst bear , ( our foremast having received three shot , in such wise , as it had but four inches hold ) and stood off to Sea , and being fair weather , praised be God , in short time our foremast was made serviceable . 

The Frigates aforesaid that were left by us , stood four of them after the Fleet , and the other in for the shore , all that day we heard them in sight , but saw them not , likewise the next night we could see the light of their Ordnance at our topmast head ; but they being to windward of us , we could not get to them , nor indeed were not in case if we could , for our ship was so open , and all our chief men killed and hurt . 

The ninth in the morning , we could neither see them , nor hear them , than it was thought fitting by our Master , that according to the consultation held aboard the Palsgrave the seventh day we should stand for Ormus , the which ( by the assistance of God ) we did , having fair weather all the way ; in which time of our sailing , our Carpenters had got up all the stern of our ship again , as well as his store would give him leave , our men also were all well recovered of their hurts . 

The fourth of November we arrived at Gombroone , where we had intelligence by our Merchants there resident , that Rufrero was riding under Ormus Island , with 18. or 20.  Frigates , the which when our Master understood , ( the Merchants being then aboard ) it was concluded by consultation , that to prevent any ensuing danger that might happen , and also for the clearing of our ship , whereby to mount our lower Tier , all the Cloth , and Coral , and four Chests of money should be sent a shore with as much speed as possible , the other our Master refused to send out of the ship , alleging , that if it should please God they were forced to leave the Port by any disaster , there was no stock to buy any refreshing for our men which then did want it ; the rest of our Carriages or Goods lying low in Hold , could not then be come by , without much time which then we wanted . It was also appointed that we should with all speed take in water , and stand for Ormus , the which was assayed to do , and partly effected , for upon the fifth day the Merchants and our Purser road with all speed to the Sultan , ( who was then out of Town ) to entreat for Boats to land the goods , and to water our ships , the which he granted , and also gave us a Boat to make us a Longboat , by reason we had lost both our Skiffe and Longboat the last fight . 

The sixth there came Boot-hailers aboard , and took all the goods aforesaid , and carried them a shore , and also took in Cask to fill with water . 

The seventh of November there came twelve Tun of water aboard , which was presently taken in , and more Cask sent a shore , also in this short time our Lower orlope was almost made Priddie , and our two Chase pieces were mounted , and we were in good hope the next day to take in water enough to serve until the Fleet came to stand over for Ormus ; but God having otherwise appointed , it fell out contrary . 

The eighth day , about seven in the morning , Rufrero with his Frigates came rowing towards the ship , and being then calm that the ship could not work , he came in such sort , that she could have none but her Chase piece to bear upon them , which lay so well to pass , that they sunk two of their Frigates before they could board her , and two more after they were by her sides . But after they were a board they plied their small shot in such wise , that they were not able to open a Port in the ship , but were forced to shoot away Ports , and all . 

They also maintained such abundance of fireworks round about her , that in a moment all her Masts and Sails were on fire , her upper Deck was also on fire , the which for all their heaving much water upon it , in less than half an hour fell down upon their heads , and put them from their Ordnance , who seeing death on each side , some leapt overboard , and put themselves to the mercy of their enemies , the rest gave fire to the Powder-roome , and blew up the ship . Those men which leapt overboard were all received into the Frigates , and carried unto Ormus Island , and the next morning Rufrero gave order to cut off all their heads but one , namely , Thomas Winterborne , whom he sent with a letter to the Merchants at Gambroone , the rest being 26. persons were immediately beheaded . 

Those that were blown up in the ship drove a shore , and were buried at Gombroone , being in number 42. there were also 9 men a shore about the Companies affairs , and one that Rufrero sent with a letter makes 10. whom God grant never worse fortune . 

Thus was this good ship and men unfortunately and lamentably lost , yet as much courage and manly resolution as possibly could be was performed by the Engligh , nor can it be imagined how more industry or truer valour could have been showed ; on the other side the cruel and bloodthirsty Enemy gained nothing but knocks , loss of lives and limbs , having his Frigates sunk and torn in pieces , his main purchase being dishonour and infamy , for after all our men had fought so long , and so manfully , being besieged round with death , as the Sea to swallow them , the fire to consume them , or the Portugals swords to cut their throats , not being possible to escape one of these ways of eminent danger , that then in that extremity 27. men leaping into the Sea , were all alive taken up by the Enemy , whom had he then killed in heat of blood , when war , rage , death and fury were up , it had been then but the effect and fortune of war ; but to give them harbour all night , and the next day in cold blood to cause them to be beheaded , it was one of the ignoblest , inhuman , and barbarous parts of murder that could be committed . But Rufrero being a Portugal or Spaniard , could do no other ( for the honour of his Country ) but show his bloody nature , especially to our Nation : a Barbarian , a Turk , or a jew should have found more kindness , for indeed they all are of one disposition . And I am sure no Record or Chronicle can show , no History can report , no tradition can declare ; nor any memory relate , that ever any Englishman , or almost any other Nation ( except the Spaniard ) did murder so many disarmed naked men , having had them all a whole night in their custody . 

A farewell and hearty wellwishing to the noble attempts of our English Sea and Land forces , with their Allies and Confederates . 

You Sons of Mars , that surrow Neptune's brow , 
And o'er the dangerous Deep ( undaunted ) plough ; 
You who esteem your Country's honour more 
Than life , or pelse , ( which Peasants do adore , ) 
Your noble Ancestors , whose memories 
Are born by fame as far as Titan's Rise , 
And universally divulged from thence 
The Circle of the World's circumferenoe , 
Let their example be a Spur to you , 
That you their worthy virtues may pursue : 
They were but men , and you are each so much , 
They were victorious , may you each be such ; 
They had good courage , guided with good skill , 
Which Skill and Courage , Fortune , Grace , and Will , 
I do implore th' Almighty to bestow 
On you in general , All , both high and low . 
Time doth record , our Britain's matchless force 
By Sea and Land , with valiant foot or horse , 
Hath made France tremble , and proud Spain to quake , 
And great jerusulems' foundations shake : 
And as true valour did inspire their breasts , 
So Victory and Conquest crowned their Crests . 
OH may your good intendments fall out right , 
The God of Battles still your battle's fight ; 
That as your Fathers were , so you may be 
Rare Patterns unto your posterity : 
That all our Foes with terror now may know 
They have been beaten , and they must be so . 
True Honour , Fame , and Victory attend you , 
And high jehovah in your cause defend you : 
That Immortality your fames may Crown , 
And GOD may have the Glory and Renown . 
JOHN TAYLOR . FINIS . 

