FAIR AND fowl weather : OR A SEA AND LAND Storm , between two Calms . 

WITH An Apology in defence of the painful life , and needful use of Sailors . 

By john Tailor . 

LONDON , Printed for W : B. and are to be sold by Edward Wright at Christ-church gate . 1615.  

To the judicious understanding gentleman , and my much approved and esteemed good friend , Master ROBERT BRANTHWAITE , Gentleman Taylor of the King's Majesty's Tower of London . john Taylor Dedicates this his Poetical Weatherworke , with his best wishes , for your heart's contentment . 

Kind Sir , my love to you's engaged so deep , 
That were I Idle , I were much ingrateful : 
Or should my thanks , forgetful , ever sleep 
In me , 't were base , unmannerly and hateful . 
then though I cannot pay you half my score , 
Vouchsafe to take this trifle as a part , 
As time enables me you shall have more , 
And therefore now accept my willing heart . 
I know , you well do understand and know 
The weak defects of my defective Muse , 
Yet do I hope you will this favour show 
That love may her unwilling faults excuse . 
And so to your protection I commend 
This Pamphlet , as unto my dearest friend . 
Yours in my best employments to be commended . JOHN TAYLOR . Briefly to you that will Read.  

NOT unto every one can Read , I write ; 
But only unto those that can Read right . 
And therefore if thou canst not Read it well , 
I pray thee lay it down , and learn to spell . 
But if thou wilt be hewing , ( like a drudge ) 
Hew on , and spare not , but forbear to judge . 
thine if thou be'st mine , john Taylor . To his friend and neighbour Master JOHN TAYLOR . 

Fierce Neptune's wrath , and Eol's angry spleen 
Full many a time I have both felt and seen , 
In leaking ship , and which hath grieved me more , 
In a long night a dark Moon , and lee shore : 
But such a storm as thou describest h●ere , 
Amazeth me with wonder and with fear 
And wert thou not both Waterman and Poet 
thou never couldst half so plainly show it , 
I much rejoice thou safe on shore art come , 
And bid thee very kindly welcome home . 
Thomas Smith . To his friend john Tailor . 

I Cannot tell , how other men may praise 
The pleasing Method , thy Minerva lays 
In whatsoever it works on , but to me 
It offers much desired variety , 
To pass dull hours withal : with that , affords 
Much useful matter , which with Phrase , and Words . 
And all the aptest ornament of writ 
Thy pen doth furnish : This last birth of wit 
Is witness , worth believing . Like the Glass 
Great Artsmen use , in showing things that pass 
In parts far from us. This presents a Flaw , 
Or Storm at Sea : for what I red , I saw . 
I so may speak . Me thought I had in sight , 
A Cloud , as black as the dark Robe of Night : 
saw that dissolve , and fall in such a shower , 
As ( mixed with lightning , and that voice of power , 
Makes Towers and Castles totter ) made an hour 
Full of confounding horror . then again , 
Mine eyes sad object , was the troubled Main : 
Swelled up , and curled , with that impetuous breath , 
Makes Land-men quake , and Seamen oft see death . 
On this , me thought , I saw a vessel tossed , 
Higher than ken , and in minute , lost 
Between the Mountaine-billowes : At whose rise 
I saw pale looks , and heard the heavy ayes . 
Of those sad men that maned her : After all , 
I saw this Storm into a Calmness fall , 
As plain , and smooth as Crystal . In thy Book 
All this is seen , as on thy lines we look . 
If where such life is , there can want delight , 
Though oft I read , I 'll never dare to write . 
Tho : B.  FAIR AND FOWL WETHER . 

YOU triple-treble , thrice three Nymphs Divine , 
Inspire this weak capacity of mine , 
O let me quaff of your Pegassian bowl , 
That I may write of Wether Fair and Fowl . 
That to the life , my lines may here inform , 
Description of a Calm , and then a Storm : 
Give me that power that my unlearned Verse , 
The Readers apprehension so may pierce , 
That though the Wether be exceeding fair , 
They may suppose a fowl and troublous Air . 
And when they come to read tempestuous lines 
then though the wind sleep , and Hyperion shines , 
Yet let them think Heaven's Axletree doth crack , 
And Atlas throws his burden from his back 
I wish my Verse should such Impression strike , 
That what men Read off , they should think the like . 
For apprehension must be quick and you're , 
Imagination must be here , and there , 
For if a Tempest be but smoothly read , 
It shows the Readers judgement dull and dead . 
Or else to seem to make the Welkin split , 
In thundering out a Calm shows want of wit. 
'Gainst Heaven bread Poesy 't is the worst offence , 
To have it hacked , and read with senseless sense . 
Then first I will describe Fair weather , cheerful , 
To make Fowl weather after seem more fearful . 
Upon an Evening when Apollo's beams 
Declined unto the occidental streams , 
As of the day he took his kind adieu , 
The Clouds , vermilion , purple , red , and blue , 
Put on the radiant liveries of the Sun , 
( As quickly lost , as they were lightly won . ) 
To th'under world in hast he took his flight . 
And left th' horizon all in darkness dight : 
Yet as he stooped he glanced his glorious eye , 
And stained the Welkin with a Crimson dye , 
Which did betoken , ( as old saws do say ) 
An Evening red , foretells a cheerful day . 
Sweet Philomella , 'gainst a therne did sing , 
Exclaiming 'gainst the lustful Thracian King , 
Whilst Progne in the Chimneys top doth keep 
And for her selfe-borne self slain son doth weep . 
Madge-how let whooting cuts the empty skies , 
The light she flees , and in the night she flies . 
Bright Cynthia rises from her watery bed , 
And shows her pale faced silver horned head : 
Belighted and attended from her porch 
With many an hundred thousand , thousand torch . 
She light doth run , and as she runs doth light , 
The universal Arch of pitchy night . 
Hushed silence , ( mortal foe to women kind , 
In snoring sleep did living senses bind , 
That ( but for Routing , and for drawing breath ) 
It seemed that all-devouring grisly death ) 
Without respect of person , Sex , or Laws , 
Had grasped the world in his insatiate paws . 
At last the Cock proclaimed the day's approach , 
And Titan called for his Diurnal Coach. 
He kissed Aurora , and she blushing red , 
Ashamed , hid her shamefaced Maidenhead . 
Pale Leina is obscured , her race is run , 
Her light 's extinguished by the flaming Sun . 
The buxom day , robed in a silken Calm , 
With Zephers downy breath , as sweet as balm 
Perfumed the vausty verge of the whole world , 
When golden Sel his glistering beams had hurled . 
And guilded tops of proud Clowd-kissing hills , 
And all the world with radiant brightness fills . 
Fair Flora had embroidered o'er the field , 
Whose various colours , various scents did yield . 
The gentle wind amongst the leaves did whisk , 
The Goats did skip , the pretty Lambs did frisk . 
The brooks did warble , birds did sweetly sing , 
With joy to entertain the gladsome Spring . 
Like herds of Kids the Porpoises 'gan leap , 
The Seals and Scollopendraes' , on a heap 
Do vault and caper in such active sort 
That Neptune took delight to see the sport . 
The Mountain Whale , in his wide yawning chaps , 
Made shoals of smaller fishes fragment scraps , 
To fill his endless , bowndlesse , greedy gut , 
( For multitudes of littles hardly glut 
Th'unbottomed gorge of gaping thirst for more , 
That pines in plenty , starves in midst of store ) 
Stern Nereus slept , raped in a pleasant dump , 
Whilst Triton piped levaltoes with his Trump . 
Old Oceanus nimbly skipped and praunced , 
And turncoat Proteus with fair Thetis danced . 
The scaly Dolphins mounted on the waves , 
And sportive Sturgeons one another laves . 
The Seahorse did curvet , and kick , and fling , 
And without rider , mounts and runs the ring . 
Yea all the watery squandrons took delight , 
To see the Sea so still , the day so bright . 
Was never gentler Calm on Neptune's face , 
All Elements in friendly sort embrace , 
As if in love they were combined together , 
To give poor mortal creatures pleasant weather . 
But what is 't that continues permanent , 
That bides below the spacious firmament 
Not any thing at all . Our sweet with sour 
Is mixed and pain our pleasures do devour . 
The pleasant fowntaines toads and aspics breeds , 
In fairest fields are most contagious weeds . 
A minute's joy , foreruns a month of troubles , 
And under calmest Sea a tempest bubbles . 
We ( in a merry , humour ) Ankers weighed ; 
And in a trice our winged sails displayed . 
And with a fresh and friendly welcome gale , 
Into the Main amain we mainly sail . 
Our steadfast course , right North North East we keep , 
We found and found the Sea ten fathom deep . 
We had not sailed above a league or twain , 
But Aeolus began to mount the Main 
Of Neptune's Monarchy , and with a troop 
Of full mouthed winds , that made great oaks to stoop . 
With Ceders , Pines , and tall welrooted Elmes , 
And topsy turvy lofty towers o'erwhelms . 
Resplendent Phoebus hid his glorious light , 
And day inuelloped in a Robe of night 
Attired the world in a black mourning town , 
As all things had been turned upside down . 
jove's lightning flames , and dire amazing flashing , 
At whom the Sea-god hills of water dashing . 
Against the Heavens did seem in a age t' aspire , 
T' extinguish jove's Celestia 1 dreadful fire . 
The spongy Clouds 'gainst one another crushed , 
And bursting , violent floods of Rain out gashed . 
Orion glared like a tempestuous Comet . 
Whilst Skies , and Seas , did fire and water vomet . 
The rattling Thunder through the Air did rumble , 
As if Heaven's frame into the Sea would tumble : 
Whole gusts of Sea ascends and fronts the Rain , 
And storms of rain in fury falls again , 
As if the Cloud contending water strove , 
Great Neptune from his Palace to remove . 
Big blustering Eoll blue confounding breath , 
And thunders dreadful alarms , threatened death . 
Down powers whole floods of Rain and driu'ling sleet , 
As if Heaven , Eath , and Sea had meant to meet 
In desperate opposition , to expire 
The World , and unto Chaos back retire . 
The rolling ruthless Billows rage and roar , 
And battered fiercely 'gainst the rocky shore : 
Who by the rugged Crags repulsed back . 
With repercussive anger threats our wrack . 
Thus whilst the Wind and Seas contending gods , 
In rough robustious fury were at odds , 
Our beaten Bark , tossed like a forceless feather 
'twixt winds and waves , now hither and now thither , 
The topmast sometimes tilting at the Moon , 
And being up so soon , doth fall as soon , 
With such precipitating low descent , 
As if to Hell's black Kingdom down she went. 
The uncontroled Hipperboroean blasts 
Tears all to tatters , tackle , sails and masts . 
And boystrus gusts of Eurus breath did hizze , 
And amongst our shrowds and Cordage wildly whizz . 
Our Ship no Rudder , or no steerage feels , 
But like a Drunkard to and from she reels , 
Vnmanaged , guidlesse , up and down she wallowed , 
And of the foaming waves looks to be swallowed . 
Midst darkness , lightning , thunder , fleet , and rain , 
Remorseless winds and mercie-wanting Maine , 
Amazement , horror , dread , from each man's face , 
Had chased away life's blood , and in the place 
Was black despair , with hair heaved up upright , 
With A shy visage , and with sad affright , 
As if grim death with his all-murdring Dart , 
Had aiming been at each man's bloodless heart . 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 s the Boteswaine , lower , the topsail low●● 
then up aloft runs scrambling three or fewer , 
But yet for all their hurly burly haste , 
E'er they got up , down tumbles Sail and Mast. 
Veare the main sheate there , than the Master cried . 
Let rise the foretacke on the larboard side . 
Take in the foresail , you are good fellows , you're , 
Aluffe at helm there , beware no more beware . 
Steere South-south-east there , I say ware no more , 
We are in danger of the Leeward shore . 
Clear your main brace , let go the hollin there , 
Porte porte the helm hard , Romer , come no near . 
then with a whiff the wind amain doth puff , 
And then our Master cried aluffe , aluffe , 
Clap hard the helm a Lee , yea , yea , done , done , 
Down , down alow into the bold quick , run . 
The main bend snackes , the planks and timbers break , 
Pump bullies , Carpenters quick , at up the look . 
Well pumped my hearts of gold , who says ammends . 
The careful Master thus his throat he reads , 
Contending 'gainst the wind and weathers force , 
Till he with gaping and with toil grows hoarse . 
But since the Thund'rens' high imperious bride , 
Against Aeneaes had her anger tried , 
( Excepting this ) a Storm so full of rage , 
Was never seen or heard in any age . 
But when our loss of lives we most expected , 
then powerful power of powers us all protected , 
The winds grew gentle that had blown so stiff , 
Stern Eurus hied him Eastward with a whiff . 
And Rugged Boreas , Northward trudged a pace , 
Hamidious Auster , to the South did trace . 
Sweet breathing Zephyrus cried Westward ho , 
Thus homeward all the furious winds did go . 
And as they scud they swept th'an even Main 
From gusts , and flaws , and leaves it smooth and plain . 
Like as the grass in field , some short , some long . 
Some green , some dead , with withered flowers among , 
Unequally in height some high some low . 
Until the Mower equal all doth mow , 
Where long and short cut down together lies , 
And as it lives so it together dies . 
Wherewith the scythe ( all sharp and barbing keen ) 
The lab'rer shaves all even , plain and clean . 
So are the billows , blue , and green , and white , 
By the winds home retreat all shaved quite . 
That Neptune's angry brow , looked mild and even , 
For Storms and flaws before the winds were driven : 
Or as a measure filled with Oats or Rye 
Vnstrooke and heaped doth lie confusedly , 
Till at one stroke the Meater strikes it plain , 
And makes the measure equal with the grain . 
So at one blow , the blowing of each , wind , 
Stooke Storms before them , and left Calmes behind . 
That as bright Titan in his Course did pass , 
He made the Sea his amomours looking glass . 
And as himself had of himself a sight , 
His shadow seemed t'eclips his substance quite , 
That he amazed run , and ran amazed . 
And gazed and winked , and winked again and gazed , 
That as Narsissus died by his own error 
So Titan was entangled in this mirror . 
Until at last a curled woolsacke cloud 
His glorious substance from his shade did shroud 
Great Neptune to his Court descended deep , 
And laid his head in Thetis lap to sleep 
We presently let no advantage slip , 
But nimbly we reriged our unrigged ship , 
Our Courses , Bonnets , Drabblers , Malts , and all 
With speed we merrily to mending fall . 
And by Heaven's favour , and our willing pain , 
Into the wished haven we gain a chain . 
Where at an Anchor we in safety ride , 
Secured from storms and tempests , wind , and tide . 
An Apology for Seamen , or the Description of a Mariners pains and adventures . 

UP sluggard Muse from Leathe's lazy Lake , 
And in plain terms , a true Description make , 
Of toils , of dangers , and excessive pains , 
That Seamen suffer for the Land men's gains . 
The one doth live : Shore , in wealth and ease , 
The other surrowes through th' uncertain Seas . 
The one in pleasure lives , and lies at home , 
The other cuts the raging salt-sea foam . 
The one adventures only but his goods , 
The other hazards all , both goods and bloods . 
Amongst Pirates , tempests , rocks , fogs , gulfs , and shelves , 
The Seamen ventures all , and that 's themselves . 
The Land-man ( dangerless ) doth-eate and sleep , 
The Seaman slems and ploughs the Ocean deep . 
The one fares hard , and harder he doth lie , 
The other lies and fairs , soft , sweet , and dry . 
The one with dauntless unrebated courage , 
Through greatest perils valliently doth forage , 
And brings home jewels , Silver Gold , and Pearls , 
Tadorne both Court and City Dames , and Girls . 
They set whole Kingdoms both at wars or peace , 
They make wealth flow , and plenty to increase . 
The Countries far remote , they do unite , 
They make us sharers in the world's delight : 
And what they get with pain , they spend in pleasure . 
They are no Miser's , borders up of treasure . 
The oldest man alive , did never see 
A Sailer and a Niggard's mind agree . 
no , if their pains at Sea were ten times more , 
't is all forgotten when they come a shore . 
And this much I dare publish with my pen , 
They are the best of Serviceable men , 
The walls of Kingdoms , Castles of defence , 
Against Invasion of each foreign Prince . 
A torch lights not itself , yet wastes and burns , 
So they their lives spend , serving others turns . 
The Merchant sits at home , and casts up sums , 
And reckons gains and loss , what goes , what comes : 
To what his whole adventures may amount , 
He Ciphers , numbers , and he casts Account . 
And every angy boisterous gust he hears 
Disturbs his sleep , and fills his heart with fears . 
His goods at Sea awakes and startles him , 
For with them , his estate doth sink or swim . 
But yet for all this heart tormenting strife , 
he 's in no danger of the loss of life 
By cut throat Sea-theeves , or a world of woes , 
Which many a Sailor's life and state or'throwes . 
The Mariner abides the desperate shocks 
Of wind and weather , Pirates , sands and rocks 
And what they get , they freely spend away , 
A whole month's wages , in a night , or day . 
Their labours on the Sea , they leave a shore 
And when all 's spent then to 't again for more : 
And pity 't is there should be such neglect 
Of such , whose service merit's such respect . 
Whole spawns of Land-sharks , and of guilded Gulls , 
Of painted Mammets , and ill-favoured trulls , 
Will hold their noses and cry sogh and sye , 
When serviceable Mariners pass by : 
And then ( their stomaches somewhat more to ease ) 
What stinking tarlubbers ( quoth they ) are these . 
then Mistress Fumpe troubled with the stitch , 
she 's poisoned with the smell of tar and pitch . 
Some Frankincense , or juniper , o quick , 
Make haste I say , the Gentlewoman's sick . 
And Mounsier Puff-paste with the satin slop , 
That sits in a Tobacco-sellers shop , 
And makes a stink worse than a brace of Bears : 
When with a whiff his witless worship swears , 
How Sailors are Rude fellows , and do smell , 
Of pitch and tar worse than the smoke of hell . 
But were the case now , as I erst have known , 
That use of men should have their service shown , 
One Mariner would then do much more good , 
then twenty of these Satin Milksop brood 
Of all men than the Navigator can , 
For King and Country's cause , best play the man : 
And howe'er they smell of tar and pitch , 
Their painful toils do make great Kingdoms rich . 
I we by soraine War should be annoyed , 
then chiefly Mariners must be employed , 
They on the Sea must bide the fiercest brunt , 
Grim death and danger they must first affront . 
One fight at Sea , with Ships courageous manned , 
Is more than three great battles on the land 
There men must stand to 't , there 's no way to fly , 
There must they Conquerors live or Conquered die . 
And if they die not by some launching wound . 
They are in hazard to be sunk and drowned . 
The murdering bullets , and the brinish waves , 
Are many a valiant Seaman's death and graves . 
And 't is a lamentable case to think , 
How these men's serviceable number shrink , 
Decreasing and consuming every day , 
Where one doth breed , at least sour do decay , 
Some the Sea swallows , but that which most grieves . 
Some turn Sea-monsters , Pirates , roving thieves : 
Employing their best skill in Navigation , 
'Gainst their own Prince , and kin , and native Nation , 
By which means many a Merchant is undone , 
And Pirates ne'er the better for what 's wone . 
For if ( like Moss his Mare ) they be caught napping . 
They bid the world their last farewell at Wapping . 
Which fatal Haven , hath as many slain , 
As could disturb and shake the power of Spain : 
And want of means , but ( chiefly want of grace ) 
Hath made so many perish in that place . 
But to conclude my Rhyme , with heart and speech . 
I do my God ( for jesus sake ) beseech , 
That he for Sailors will vouchsafe to please , 
To grant them good employment on the Seas . 
So honest salt-sea-watermen adiewe , 
I have been , am , and will be still for you . 
Whilst I live , JOHN TAYLOR . FINIS . 

