tailor 's MOTTO . 

Et habeo , Et Careo , Et Curo . 

London Printed for IT & HG . 1621.  



The Emblem Explained . 

First on a Rock , with raging waves embraced , 
My ( seeming fixed ) fleeting feet are placed : 
The one 's like steadfast hope , the other than 
Presents temptations which encompass men , 
Which he that can resist with Constancy , 
Is a most happy man in Misery . 
The world , which I betwixt my legs do stride , 
Upon the which a book doth seem to ride , 
Shows that in scorn of spite , or envy's force , 
My book doth make the world a Hobby horse . 
Riding the jadish Hackneys of this age , 
In ● plain dealing Satyrs Equipage . 
The Badge upon my breast , shows plainly this , 
I have a Master , just , and who he is . 
I have a Muse to write , A Boat to row , 
Which both the book and Oar doth plainly show . 
So much for what I have , now that I want , 
The empty purse proclaims , that money 's scant , 
Vows my fee simple , or my simple fee , 
And ( as I am a Poet , ) dwells with me . 
Thus I have want , and with want , I have care , 
That hell's suggestions , not my soul ensnare . 
Whilst what I have , and want , neglected lies , 
I to the way I care for , fix mine eyes . 
My looking on the Sun , doth here express , 
I care to see the Son of righteousness ; 
And Reader , in the book , if you inquire for , 
there 's more of what I have , and want , and care for . 
john Taylor . To Every BODY . 

Yet not to every Reader , do I write , 
But only unto such as can Read right : 
And with unpartial censures , can declare , 
As they find things ▪ to judge them as they are . 
For in this age of Crittickes , are such store , 
That of a B. will make a Battledore . 
Swallow down Camels , & at Gnatts will strain , 
Make Mountains of small Molehills , & again 
Extenuat faults , or else faults amplify , 
According as their carping censures fly . 
Such are within the Motto of I have , 
But though the gallant Gulls , be never so brave : 
And in their own esteem are deemed wise , 
I have a mind , their follies to despise . 
There are some few that will their judgement season ▪ 
With mature understanding , and with reason : 
And call a spade a spade , a Sichophant , 
A flattering Knave , and those are th●se I want . 
For those that seem to read , and scarce can spell , 
Who nei●her point nor keep their pe●iodss well : 
Who do a man's invention so be martyr ▪ 
So hanging , drawing , and so cut and quarter , 
Making good lines contemptible thread bare , 
To keep my book from such as those I care . 
Adieu : john Taylor TAILOR'S MOTTO . 

Et habeo , Et Careo , Et Curo . 

I have , I want , I care . 

IS any man offended ? marry gep 
With a horse nightcap , doth your iadeship skip ? 
Although you kick , & fling , & wince & spurn , 
Yet all your Coltes-tricks will not serve your turn . 
Vice hath infected you , against virtue's force , 
With more diseases than an aged horse ; 
For some of you are hidebound greedily , 
Some have the yellows , of fal●e jellousie , 
Some with the staggers , cannot stand upright : 
Some blind with Babe's , can see to do no right . 
Some foundered ▪ that to Church they cannot go , 
broke wound some , corrupted breath do blow , 
Some hoof bound , some surbated , and some gravelled , 
With travelling , where the● shuuld not have travelled . 
Some are crest fallen , through th●immoderate vice , 
Of gorgeous outsides , smoke , and drink , and dice. 
And some are full of mallenders and scratches , 
The neck-cricke , sp●uinss , shouldersplat , and aches . 
The ring-bone , quitterbone , bots , botch , and scab , 
And navelgall , with coursing of the Drab . 
The back-gall , lightgall , wind-gall , shacklegall , 
And last , the spurgall , the worst gall of all . 
A good sound horse , needs not my whip to fear , 
For none but jades are wrung i' th' witherss here . 
And do these hackneys think to run on still 
( Without a bit or snaffle ) as they will , 
And headstrong prancing through abuses , dash , 
And scape without a Satyr's jerking lash ? 
no , they must know the Muses have the might , 
The unjust justly to correct and smite , 
To memorise victorious virtue's praise , 
To make men's fame or shame , out live their days , 
To force injustice ( though it do look big ) 
With his own nails his cursed grave to dig : 
T'emblaze the goodness of a man that 's poor , 
And tell the vices of an Emperor . 
All this the Muses dares , and will , and can , 
Not sparing , fearing flattering any man 
And so dare I , ( if I just cause do see ) 
To write , from fear , or hate , or flattery free , 
Or taxing any in particulere , 
But general at all , is written here . 
For had I meant the Satire to have played , 
In Aquafortis , I would whips have jayd , 
And mixed my ink ( to make it sharp with all ) 
With sublimate , and Cockatrice's gall , 
Which , with a Satyr's spleen , and fury fierce , 
With the least jerk would to the entrailss pierce , 
And with a lash that 's ●ustily laid on , 
Would strip and whip the world , unto the bone , 
I know that none at me , will spurn or kick , 
Whose consciences no villainy doth prick : 
And such as those will in their kennels lie , 
And gnar , and snarl , and grumble secretly , 
But with full mouth , they dare not bark or bite , 
But fret within , with rancour and despite . 
For why ( before the world ) I make a vow ; 
There doth not live that male , or female now , 
Against whom I have so much as is a thought , 
Much less , against them are my Verses wrought , 
This Motto in my head , at first I took , 
In imitation of a better book : 
And to good minds I no offence can give , 
To follow good examples , whilst I live . 
For I had rather to abide detraction , 
And be an Ape , in any honest action : 
then wilfully , into a fault to run , 
Though it before , had by a King been done . 
I have not here reviled against my betters , 
Which makes me fear no dungeon , bolts , or fetters : 
For be he near so great , that doth apply 
My lines unto himself , is worse than I 
Smooth is my stile , my method mean and plain , 
Free from a railing , or invective strain ▪ 
In harmless fashion here I do declare , 
Mine own rich wants , poor riches , and my care , 
And therefore at my wants let no man grieve , 
Except his charges will the same relieve : 
And for my Wealth ( except a rotten Boat ) 
I never feared the cutting of my throat . 
And those that for my cares do envy me , 
Shall in them ( if they list ) great sharers be . 
All my taxations are in general , 
Not any personal , or national : 
The trouble's now in France , I touch not here 
Nor of the Britain fleet before Argiere . 
Nor of the forces that the Turk doth bring , 
Against the Poland Kingdom and their King. 
Of Count Buckoy , of Beth'lem Gabor , or 
Of Spinnola , or any Ambassador . 
Nor Denmark's King nor of the Emperor , 
Nor Netherlands great Navigable power . 
Nor of Religious points my Muse doth chant , 
Of Romish Catholic , or Protesta●t : 
Of Brownist , H●ssite , or of Caluinist , 
Arminian , Puritan , or Familist , 
Nor against Corporation , trade , or Art , 
My poor inventions speaks in any part . 
And therefore Critic snarl , and snap , and hang , 
If inwardly thou feel my Satyr's fang : 
't is wisdom in thee , if thy spleen thou hide , 
And mend thyself , before thy faults be spied . 
Thus as I boldly have begun to enter 
Courageously , I 'll through the business venture . 
I have . 

I Ha●e a Soul which through it be not good , 
'T was bought at a dear rate , my Saviour's Blood : 
And though the Devil continually do crave it , 
Yet he that bought it hath most right to have it . 
I ( with my soul ) have power to understand , 
The sum of my Creator's great Command : 
And yet I have a Law , within me still , 
That doth rebel against his Sacred William 
But though ( through merit ) I have Hell deserved , 
Through Mercy yet I have a Heaven reserved , 
I have a reason , which can difference make 
Betwixt good and bad , to choose , and to forsake : 
I have a working , forward , and free will , 
Wherewith I have inclynded to do ill . 
I have a Conscience , which doth tell me true ▪ 
That for my sins the wrath of God is due . 
And to relieve that Conscience terrified , 
I have a Faith , in je●us Crucified . 
I have a judgement , by the which I see , 
And judge , how good and bad things different be : 
And with just Censure , I distinguish can , 
The odds between a monster and a man 
But when with judgement on myself I look , 
I strait ways am with fear and horror struck : 
And finding my afflicted Conscience grudged , 
I judge myself , for fear of being judged . 
I have a Knowledge , by the which I know , 
That all that 's good in me , God did bestow : 
And all my thoughts , and words , and actions evil , 
I have them ( like my neighbours ) from the Devil . 
By this my Knowledge , sometimes skill I have , 
To know an honest man , and know a knave : 
To know where I fare well , to come again , 
Where Friends for love , do only entertain . 
To know that Envy , Pride and Lechery , 
Sloth , Wrath , and Avarice , and Gluttony , 
Doth make the world dance Antique in a string , 
And all their Followers to confusion bring . 
I know that gripping base Extortion , 
As it gets wealth without proportion , 
e'en so , without proportion , rule or measure , 
Shall be consumed , that most accursed Treasure . 
I know a swearer , when I hear his Oaths , 
I know a Gull although he wear good clothes , 
I know a Prodigal , by 's lavish spending , 
I know a Fool ( my self ) by too much lending . 
I know I have discharged others Score , 
But will ( for aught I know ) do so no more . 
I know , that four and twenty letters teaches 
All the whole world's tongues , languages & spe●cheses . 
I know that I not any word can frame , 
But in some Language 't is an Annagram . 
And though the world of sundry parts consists , 
Yet all the world are Anagramatists . 
I know the numbers numberless of faces , 
That were , are , shall be , at all times , and places , 
Are all unlike each other , for we see 
They each from other may distinguished be . 
I know the difference of these voices are , 
Unlike each other , being near , or far . 
And that men's several writings are contrary , 
And in some things from one another vary , 
And by this knowledge I have inward sight , 
How that the works of God are infinite . 
I have credulity , that when I here 
A man avouch a thing , protest and swear ▪ 
I have given credit to him by and by , 
Although the wicked wretch did swear and lie , 
Because I have a hope that want of grace , 
Doth not our Maker's Image quite deface . 
As that a man who hath wit , sense , or reason , 
Dares to commit so horrible a treason , 
As to call God to witness of his lies , 
Thereby to countenance his villainies . 
Thus through simplicity , and light belief , 
I have believed an arrant whore , or thief . 
I have opinion , and have ever had , 
That when I see a stagg'ring drunken swad ▪ 
then that a man worse than an Ass , I see , 
Because an Ass will never drunken be . 
And yet in mine opinion I am bold , 
( That friendship and society to hold ) 
The merry spending of an idle hour , 
To take a cup , or two , or three , or four ▪ 
If soberly the meeting be well ended , 
't is tolerable , and to be commended . 
And yet I have my imperfections to , 
Which makes me daily do , as others do : 
For I l●ke ( many rich men ) now and than , 
Make show to be a very honest man : 
But strong temptations dog me every hour , 
Which to resist I have so little power , 
That if ( perhaps ) I had their means , I think 
I should ( as they do ) di●e and drab and drink , 
And through infirmity , or wilfulness , 
Run greedily to Riots vain excess : 
For Honour's changes Manners , wealth and place 
Are ( oftentimes ) temptations to disgrace , 
And did some great men cast up their account , 
To what their vain expenses do amount : 
So much for needless quartes , so much for smoke , 
Paid so much for Eringoes , ( to provoke ) 
So much for Coach-hire , so much for a whore , 
With Item not three halfpences to the poor . 
And who knows , if I had their meanus , I say 
But I should be as very a K●ave as they . 
For I have imperfections , and a will 
And frail infirmities , t'atempt what 's ill , 
That I in no good action cannot stand , 
Except supported by th' almighties hand . 
I have a sense , and feeling sympathy , 
Of others woe , and want , and misery : 
If one man doth do good , another bad 
I ( for them both ) can be both glad , and sad . 
For when I see a Great man raised hie , 
I have a sense of his Nobility , 
And wish , that all his Actions still may be , 
To make him worthy of his dignity . 
But when I see that Fortune ' gins to frown , 
And from her fickle wheel to cast them down , 
Though their foul faults I hate and do abhor , 
Yet as they are men , I have a pity for . 
For when a whore is whipped , a Bawd i'th' Cart , 
A drunkard in the stocks , for his desert : 
An arrant Knave , or perjured wretch to stand , 
And makes the Pillory his falling band ; 
Or one whose backward Fortune doth prevail , 
To make a bri●le of a Horses ●aile , 
With riding Retrograde , i'th' streets proclaim , 
On their own backs & breasts , their faults & shame . 
When any Villain for his fault is tortured , 
A Thief , or Traitor , hanged , or drawn and quartered . 
As I do hope for mercy from Above , 
As they are men they do my pity move . 
And I do grieve the Devil hath so much power , 
Man's Reason , and Allegiance to devour : 
And that of Grace they laid no faster hold , 
But fall into these mischiefs manifold . 
I have a Fortune that attends on me , 
For never will I Fortune's vassal be : 
And let her frown or smile , or hang herself , 
And g●ue me either poverty or pelf , 
Or cast me low , or lift me up on hie , 
Yet ( spite her teeth ) I 'll live until I die . 
For all man's outward happiness , are things 
Tied and bound fast to fickle Fortune's wings : 
Which when she li●t she will alight and stay , 
And wh●● her wheel but turns she fly's away . 
she 's bountiful to fools , and therefore I 
Have small share in her liberality . 
On wise men she doth favours seldom fix , 
For wisdom scorns her slights and juggling tricks , 
And yet no 〈◊〉 of man alive , 
( If Fortune frown , on him ) can make him thrive . 
For why , so powerful is the purblind witch , 
To raise up knaves , and make fools devilish rich , 
To set an Ass on top of all her wheel , 
And to kick virtue backward , with her heel , 
To raise 〈◊〉 Piper , Pander , or a jester , 
And therefore hang the hag , I do detest her . 
She hath strange tricks , and works for diverse end● , 
To make a great man have more kin than friends , 
But seldom she this good report doth win , 
To make a poor man have more friends than kin . 
A King in 's Throne , a general in the war , 
Places of best command , and reverence are . 
But yet if Fortune frown on their affairs , 
They shall be rich in nothing but in cares . 
she 's like a I●nus with a double face , 
To smile and lower ; to grace , and to disgrace ; 
She loves and loathes , together at an instant , 
And in inconstancy is only constant . 
Uncertain certain , never loves to settle , 
But here , there , every where ; in dock out nettle . 
The man whom all her frowns or favours spurns , 
Regardeth not her wheel , how oft it turns . 
A wise man knows she's easier found , then kept 
And as she 's good , or bad , he doth accept . 
He knows she comes , intending not to stay , 
And gives but what she means to t●ke away . 
For by discretion it is truly known , 
Her liberal gifts she holds still as her own . 
And unto me her bounty hath been such , 
That if she take 't again I care not much . 
I have a love which I to God do own , 
With which I have a fear doth in me grow : 
I love him for his goodness , and I fear , 
To anger him , that hath loved me so dear ▪ 
I fear in love , as he 's a gracious God , 
Not love for fear of his revenging Rod. 
And ●hus a lo●ing fear in me I have , 
L●ke an adopted son , not like a slave . 
I have a King whom I am bound unto , 
To do him all the service , I can do : 
T● whom when I shall in Allegiance fail , 
Let all the Devils in hell my soul anmaile ; 
If any i● his government abide , 
In whom foul Treacherous malice doth reside 
Against him , his Royal offspring or his friends , 
I wish that Halters may be all their ●●dss . 
And those that cannot most unfeignedly , 
Say this , and swear , as confident as I : 
Of what degree so ere , I wish ( one hour ) 
They were , in some kind skilful Hangman's power . 
I have a life was lent me before my birth , 
By the great Landlord both of Heaven and Earth : 
But though but one way unto life is common , 
For All that ever yet was born of woman , 
Yet are there many thousand ways for death , 
To dispossess us , of our lives , and breath . 
For why , the Lord of life ( that life doth make ) 
Will ( as he pleaseth ) life both give and take , 
And let me ( blameless ) suffer punishment , 
Or loss of goods , or causeless banishment , 
Let me be ●anged , or burned or stabbed , or drowned , 
all 's one to me , so still my Faith keep sound , 
then let my life be ended , as God will ▪ 
This is my mind , and hope shall be so still : 
To get to Heaven , come thousands deaths together , 
they are welcome pleasures , if they bring me thither . 
I know for certain , all Mortality , 
When it begins to live , begins to die ; 
And when our lives that back again we give , 
We ever endless then do die , or live . 
When good men wish long life , 't is understood 
That they would longer live , to do more good : 
But when a bad man wishes to live long , 
It is because he fain would do mo●e wrong . 
And this one reason gives me much content , 
Thought I shall have no Marble Monnument , 
Where my corrupted Carcase may inherit . 
With Epitaphs , to blaze my want of merit , 
To waste as much to polish and beguiled , 
As would a charitable Almshouse build . 
All which , a gouty Usurer , or worse , 
May have , and have poor people's heavy cu●se , 
That many times the senseless Ma●ble weeps , 
Because the execrated corpse it keeps . 
When the mean space perhap's the wretched soul , 
In flames unquenchable doth yell and bowl . 
I have a hope , that doth my hea●t refresh . 
How ever my soul be sundered , from my flesh : 
Although I have no friends to mourn in sack , 
With merry insides , and with outsides black ; 
Though never so poorly they my corpse inter , 
Without bell , book or painted Sepulchre , 
Although I miss these trifles Transitory , 
I have a hope my soul shall mount to glory . 
I have a vain in Poetry , and can 
Set forth a knave to be an honest man ; 
I can my Verses in such habit clad , 
' Tabuse the good , and magnify the bad . 
I can write ( if I li●t ) nor Rhyme or Reason , 
And talk of felony , and whistle Treason . 
And Libel against goodness ( if I would ) 
And against misery could rail and scold ; 
Fowl Treachery I could mince out in parts , 
Like Vintner's pots , half pints , and pints , and quarts . 
Even so could I , with Libles base abound , 
From a grain weight or scruple , to a pound , 
With a low note I could both say or sing , 
As much as would me unto Newgate bring . 
And straining of my voice a little higher , 
I could obtain the Fleet at my desire : 
A little more advancing of my note , 
I from the Fleet , might to the Gatehouse float . 
Last , above Ela raising but my power , 
I might , in state be mounted to the Tower. 
Thus could my Muse ( If I would be so base ) 
Run careless by degrees , into disgrace , 
But that for love of goodness I forbear , 
And not for any servile slavish fear . 
Time serving vassals , shall not me applaud , 
For making of my Verse a great man's Bawd : 
To set a lustre , and a flatt●●ing gloss , 
On a dishonourable lump of dross ; 
To sl●bber o'er a Ladies homely feature , 
And set her forth for a most beauteous creature . 
No● shall my free invention , stoop t' adore , 
A fowl diseased , pocky , painted whore . 
Rewards or b●●bes my Muse shall never entice , 
To wrong fair Virtue , or to honour Vice , 
But as my Conscience doth inform me still , 
So will I praise the good , condemn the ill . 
That man is most to be abhorred of men , 
Who in his cursed hand dares take a pen , 
Or be a means to publish at the press , 
Profaned lines , or obscene beastliness , 
Sc●●illitie ▪ or known a parant lies , 
To animate or cover villainies ; 
A ●alter for such Poets , stead of Bays , 
Wh● make the Muse's whores● , much worse than T●ais ▪ 
Such Rascals make the Helliconian well , 
( 〈…〉 and respect ) like hell . 
●nd of 〈◊〉 , good m●n justly are rewarded , 
〈◊〉 and scorned l●ke hellhounds , unregarded . 
For Poetry ( 〈…〉 be us● aright ) 
〈…〉 mercy , and his might : 
For 〈…〉 ignorance ) it hath some foes , 
〈◊〉 may be praised in Verse , as well as prose . 
〈…〉 are fit for Kings , 
To 〈◊〉 them Metaphorical ) such things 
〈…〉 they should know and hear , 
〈◊〉 none but Poets dare to speak for fear ▪ 
A poet 's 〈◊〉 a Poet , and his trade 
Is still to make : but Orators , are made . 
All Arts are taught and learnt , we daily see , 
But taught , a Poet never yet could be . 
And as the ●ree is by the fruit well known , 
So by his writing is a Poet shown ; 
If he be 〈◊〉 disposed , he 'll well indite , 
If ill 〈…〉 viciously will write . 
And 〈…〉 or bad , in his condition , 
His 〈◊〉 ●ill sh●w his inward disposition . 
And to 〈◊〉 this point , and make an end , 
The best amongst them hath much need to mend . 
I ha●● a tongue , and could both swear and lie , 
( I● to such customs ▪ I would it apply ) 
But often swearing now and then forswears , 
And lying , a man's credit quite out wears ; 
I 'll trust 〈◊〉 arrant Th●●fe to keep my purse , 
As soon as one that lou●● to swear and curse : 
For can it be that he that takes a use , 
And custom , God in swearing to abuse , 
Can it be thought he will make Conscience then , 
To play the false dissembling Knave with men ? 
Nor can my supposition ever dream , 
That he who dares his Maker's name blaspheme , 
But that if Time would but occasions bring , 
He would betray his Country , and his King. 
For 't is a Maximm , ( no man can convince ) 
The man that fears not God , loves not his Prince . 
And ●e that cares not for his soul , I think , 
Respects not if his Country swim or sink . 
To lying I bear such a ha●e that I 
Will never ( wittingly ) affirm a lie : 
I will not say , but I a lie may say , 
But I will not affirm it any way : 
't is the maintaining falsehoods to be true , 
To whom a liars odious name is due . 
That all untruths are falsehoods , none denies , 
But sure all falsehoods cannot be called lies . 
For Esop's fables , Ovid's artlike fictions , 
( Although they are ' against truth mere contradictions , ) 
Of human transformations from their kind , 
Of disputations 'twixt the Sun , and win●e , 
Of fowls , and beasts , and rivers , trees , and stones , 
To tell each other of their joys or moans , 
Of men transformed to dogs , bears , bulls , swine , apes , 
Which shows that treasons , murders , incests , rapes ; 
Turns men into worse forms then beastly creatures , 
When reason 's dispossessed by brutish natures . 
A fiction , fable , or a harmless jest , 
I tolerate , but lies I do detest . 
Th'egyptians had a Law , that every liar , 
Should straight way be beheaded , for their hire . 
But if that Law were executed here , 
Few Pettifoggers would be left I fear . 
The very Court would forfeit now and than , 
Many a complementing Gentleman . 
But sure the Ci●ty were the greatest share , 
Where lying buys and sells , a world of ware ; 
The Country sometimes would a head alow , 
In selling Corn , a Horse , a Sow , a Cow : 
And then a headsman would get store of pelf , 
If he could but refrain to lie himself . 
I have a memory like ( as I do find ) 
A wallet , half before , and half behind . 
In the fore part my neighbour's faults I put , 
Behind ( quite from my sight ) mine own are 〈◊〉 . 
Thus partiality runs like a stream , 
To spy a Moat , and not to see a Beam . 
But when as reason memory collects . 
T'exammin , my own impotent defects , 
then doth it unto me such things record , 
As makes me ( almost ) of myself abhorred . 
It tells me I was in corruption born , 
And to corruption that I shall return . 
It tells me that betwixt my birth and this , 
I have done thousand thousand things amiss , 
It bids me to remember what I am , 
To what place I must go , and whence I came , 
And with these thoughts , when as my mind is high , 
I am dejected , through humility . 
And this all great men well remember may , 
They are but Honourable clods of clay : 
Or Reverend Right Worshipful grave dust , 
And ( whence they came ) again they thither must . 
I say if foolish females , with fair features , 
Would but remember they were Mortal Creatures : 
And that as their good Grandames died before , 
e'en so must they , and must be seen no more , 
And all their gaudy glory be forgot , 
Whilst they shall lie , consume , and stink , and rot . 
If these things , they would to remembrance call , 
Their honeyed pleasures , would be mixed with Gall. 
And all and every one their course would bend ▪ 
Within themselves , what is amiss to mend . 
The memory , unto the soul is food , 
That thinks , & says , & doth the things that 's good . 
I have a hea●t doth like a Monarch reign , 
Who in my Microcosm , doth laws ordain : 
Affections , Senses , Passions , Subjects Slaves , 
Some like good Courtiers ; some like flattering knaves , 
With show of Virtue , hiding of their Vice , 
They bring their Lord t'a foolish Paradise , 
For when the heart thinks swearing an abuse , 
then Anger says it is a manly use , 
And when to quaff , the mind hath no intent , 
Affection says 't is ho●est merriment , 
The mind calls Lechery abomination , 
Sense says 't is Gentlemanlike recreation , 
The mind holds Coveteousnes worse than theft , 
Sense calls it Husbandry , and frugal thrift , 
Reason delights in liberality , 
Sense counsels it to prodigality . 
And thus these vassals do their King misled , 
( Whilst Reason seems to be asleep or dead . ) 
And thus this little Kingdom man doth fade , 
With hearing Traitors , when they do persuade . 
I have experience , by the which I find , 
That some though poor in purse , are rich in mind : 
And they that have of wealth the greatest store , 
Are ( in content ) most miserable poor , 
there 's many a Mammanist doth houses keep , 
With lofty Turrets , and with Sellers deep : 
With a most stately porch , and spacious hall , 
And kitchen , lesser than a Cobbler's stall 
Where ( in two days ) a poor half ●acke of Mutton , 
Proclaims the Master of the house , no Glutton . 
Where foul bewitching gold in bondage is , 
( ●ss may the keepers be , in hell's abyss . ) 
Where waking thoughts , keeps still the mind oppressed 
And frightful dreams , makes ●est to be unrest , 
And where as fears by night , and doubts by day 
Drives happiness , and sweet content away . 
M●●h better than is my estate than theirs , 
I ha●e content , and they the golden cares : 
I can feed well at home , and sound sleep , 
And what I have not care to lose or keep . 
I have consideration , to perceive , 
what 's best for me to take , and what to l●ave ▪ 
When I consider , pleasures past and gone , 
Doth add affliction , to affliction , 
Though he that 's low can very hardly rise , 
Yet he that'● high , oft falls to miseries . 
He that is down , his fear 's already past , 
Whilst he that 's up may have a slippery cast . 
I do consider , that I oft did crave , 
Things both from God and men , unfit to have : 
And many times , through in considerate wi● , 
Guilts give●● and receivers , are unfit . 
He 〈◊〉 a liberal man , that doth deny , 
That which will do the askers injury ; 
There i● a bounty , which I will reveal , 
That he ne'er gives in vain that gives in zeal : 
As prodigality , brings wan● , and woes , 
So liberality , makes friends of foes . 
't is better for a man his purse to hold , 
then give to make a beggar proud , or bold , 
True bounty , is ( on earth ) a special grace , 
And hath in heaven prepared a glorious place . 
For as the Sun unto the moon gives light , 
Which light she gives again to us by night : 
So God doth give his gifts to libr'all men , 
Which they ( to men that want ) do give again . 
But he that gives should straight forget it quite , 
What they that take , in memory should write . 
And I accept a like , great gifts , and small , 
Only to me the giver's mind is all . 
't is a base bounty when a man relieves , 
These prostituted whores , or knaves , or Theives , 
For still the Devil is bountiful to those , 
That unto virtue are in●etterate foes . 
But many hold it for a generous part , 
To give a man that 's drunk the tother quart : 
And in a humour ( to have Drawers trouble ) 
Throw pottle Pots down stairs , to come up double ▪ 
When straight upon their knees , they all accord , 
To drink a health to some unworthy Lord : 
Some fusty Madam , or some carpet Knight , 
●till they can neither speak , or stand upright . 
then being all abominable drunk , 
A Gallant drinks a health unto his Punk : 
The which withal Sir Reverence straight they are , 
Injoind to do , upon their knees , all bare . 
If any dare deny to pledge the Drab , 
he 's in great danger of a mortal Stab : 
For he accounts it worse than blasphemy , 
That one should there his Mistress health deny . 
Until at last , o'er charged with to much wine , 
They wallow in their vomits , worse than swine : 
Thus many a beastly rude Barbarian , 
Gains little of a liberal Gentleman . 
A worthy spirit , a rare Noble spark , 
True bred , a merry Greek , or man of mark . 
A right mad Trojan , a most excellent blade , 
As bountiful a man as ever God made . 
Thus many an idle fellow gets a name 
Of Bountiful , through deeds of sin and shame . 
Indeed he 's liberal , that spends health and wealth , 
And precious Time , in drinking others health : 
If dropsy Drunkards fallen to poverty , 
Should beg a Pension of his Majesty , 
And in their humble suits would make it known , 
How drinking of his healths , they lost their own , 
I think , his Highness ●ustly would relieve them , 
And ( for Rewards ) to each a Halter give them . 
But is 't not stran●● , that man so mad should be , 
Idolatrous ▪ bareheaded on his knee , 
Bow and fall down unto an absent Whore , 
As th' only Saint ( or devil ) he doth adore ? 
But ever he 'll kneel unto his God , to crave 
For mercy , his infected soul to save : 
Before he 'll beg God's pardon for his crimes , 
He swears him o'er and o'er a hundred times , 
And takes it for a Gentlemanlike grace , 
To spit his venom against his Maker's face , 
And with his Oaths , as false as black is white , 
God damn him , or renounce , or sink him quite : 
Refuse him ( or if not refuse ) for sake him , 
And now and then swears , then the Devil take him . 
Thus he in ordinary talk affords , 
Amongst ( truth & lies ) more oaths than other words , 
These are the bounteous youths I car● not for , 
And these I have a heart that doth abhor . 
From a rich knave of worshipful degree , 
I have a mind to spare my cap and knee : 
To a good man that 's honest , poor and wise , 
I have a heart that my affection ties . 
Some sixteen times I on the Seas have been , 
In Spain and Germany both out and in , 
At Cales , at Ostend , Prague , and ma●● a where , 
And yet I do thank God , I 'm here , Cha● here . 
I have a Wife which I was wont to praise , 
But that was in my younger wooing days : 
And though she 's neither Shrew nor Sheep ( I vow 
With justice ) I cannot dispraise her now . 
She hath an Instrument ( that 's ever strung , 
To exercise my patience on ) her tongue . 
But past all question , and beyond all doubt , 
she 'll never infect my forehead with the Gout . 
A married man ( some say ) has two day's gladness , 
And all his life else , is a lingering sadness : 
The one day's mirth is when he first is married , 
The other 's when his wife 's to burying carried . 
One I have had , should I the other see , 
It could not be a day of mirth to me . 
For I ( as many have ) when I did woe , 
Myself ( in tying fast ) did not undoo : 
But I have by my long experience found , 
I had been undone , had I not been bound . 
I have my bonds of marriage long enjoyed , 
And do not wish my obligation void . 
I have a house where I do eat and sleep , 
But bread nor meat , or drink in it ( I keep . ) 
For many Lords , ●nd great men keep good meat , 
But I spend mine , to make good fellows eat . 
And though no Turrets do my house bedeck , 
There one may break his fast , before his neck . 
I have a trade , much like an Alchemist , 
That oft-times by extraction , if I list , 
With sweeting labour at a wooden Ore , 
I 'll get the coined refined silver Ore. 
Which I count better than the sharking tricks , 
Of cuz'ning Tradesmen , or rich Politikes , 
Or any proud fool , never so proud or wise , 
That doth my needful honest trade despise . 
I have some troubles , by the which I know , 
How flattering friends do ebb , and foes do flow : 
Prosperity increaseth friendship much , 
But adverse Fortune tries them with the touch . 
By troubles , and by crosses I gain wit , 
When daily pleasures do diminish it . 
Thus ( by his power that All-sufficient is ) 
I have had time and power to write all this : 
And I have hope that He the time will grant , 
That I may tell of some things that I want , 
The Motto of I have is large and wide , 
Which largely here , I could have amply fide , 
For I have joy , and Love , and Comforts here , 
And I have folly , sorrow , doubt and fear ; 
I have ( in part ) my frailty here revealed , 
I have some Vices which I have concealed ▪ 
I have done as I have , then if I have 
Bu● pleased my friends , I have gained what I crave . 
Ye● my , I have , as great is every jot , 
And as small too as any man's have not . 
Et Careo , I want . 

Strange is the penance of my humble Muse , 
That must tell what I want without excuse . 
What man ( without much torture ) would confess 
His want , his beggary , and guiltiness ; 
But that the World would think him to be mad , 
Or that he very small discretion had ? 
Yet ( at this time ) it is my fatal lor , 
To tell I want , what other men want not . 
And therefore to declare my wants most plain 
I want a bragging or a boasting vain ; 
In words or writing , any ways to frame , 
To make myself seem better than I am . 
I want fair virtue to direct my course , 
And stand against the shock of vices force ; 
And ( of myself ) I no way can resist , 
Against Hell , the World , the Flesh , or Antichrist ; 
For ought I know , I want a courage stout , 
Afflictions and temptations to keep out : 
And I do fear should time of trial come , 
My constancy would bide no Martyrdom . 
But to help what I want , I want despair , 
And hope supplies my want in all my care . 
And as I want that boldfaced impudence , 
As may give just occasion of offence : 
So do I want base flattery with my pen , 
To soothe myself , or to tax other men . 
I do want goodness : for I clearly see , 
All good I do or say , is not from me . 
And amongst all the benefits I crave , 
Goodness I want , and goodness I would have . 
A man may seem too just , too full of wit , 
But to be too good , never man was yet . 
He that is great , is not made good thereby , 
But he that 's good , is great continually . 
Thus great and good , together's rare and scant , 
Whilst I no greatness have , all goodness want . 
I do want wit t' invent ▪ conceive and write , 
To move myself or others to delight : 
But what a good wit is , I partly know , 
Which ( as I can ) I will define and show . 
Wit is the offspring of a working brain , 
That will be labouring , though it be in vain : 
't is called the Mother wit , by which I find , 
she 's of the bearing , breeding , femall-kind . 
And some have of their mother's wit such store , 
That in their father's wisdom they are poor . 
A good wit is a virtue that excels , 
And is the house where understanding dwells : 
With whom the mind , the memory and sense , 
And reason keep continual residence : 
For why , if Reason chance to be away , 
Wit , ( like a Colt ) breaks loose and runs astray . 
there 's many that have got their wealth by wit : 
But never wealth had power to purchase it . 
Rich fools , and witty beggars every where , 
Are the third part of Mankind very near . 
And little friendship doth blind Fortune grant 
To me ; for wit and money both I want . 
Yet for mine ears price I could undertake 
To buy as much as would a Libel make : 
Or I could have as much , as fi●s these times 
With worthless jests , or beastly scurvy Rhymes ▪ 
To serve some Lord , and be a man of note , 
Or wear a guarded unregarded Coat . 
Wit for a fool I think enough I have ; 
But I want wit to play the crafty knave : 
And then the Proverb I should finely fit , 
In playing of the fool , for want of wit. 
To Archie ( at the Court ) I 'll make a jaunt , 
For he can teach me any thing I want , 
And he will teach me for a slender fee , 
A foolish knave , or knavish fool to be . 
Garret grows old and honest , and withal , 
His skill in knavish fooling is but small : 
The Knight o' th' Sun can caper , dance and leap ▪ 
And make a man small sport exceeding cheap 
In the old time a wiseman was a fool , 
That had compared himself with great Otoole : 
But his good days are past , he 's down the wind , 
In both his eyes and understanding blind . 
But holla holla Muse , come back again , 
I was half ravished with a fooling vain : 
And , if I had gone forward with full speed , 
I 'd played the fool for want of wit indeed . 
As Frogs in muddy ditches use to breed , 
So there 's a wit that doth from Wine proceed : 
And some do whet their wits so much thereon , 
Till all the sharpness and the steel is gone ; 
With nothing left but back , the edge gone quite ▪ 
Like an old Cat , can neither scratch nor bite . 
The wit I want , I have , y●t yields no profit , 
Because a fool hath still the keeping of it . 
Which had it in a Wiseman's head been planted , 
I should not now want what I long have wanted ; 
I want that undermining policy ; 
To purchase wealth with foul dishonesty : 
And I do want , and still shall want , I hope , 
Such actions as may well deserve a Rope . 
I want a mind , bad company to haunt , 
Which if I do , it seems I foresight wan● ▪ 
I want a Kingdom and a Crown to wear , 
And with that want , I want a world of care : 
But might I be a King , I would refuse it , 
Because I do want wisdom how to use it . 
When an unworthy man obtains the same , 
he 's razed to high preferment for his shame ▪ 
For why , the office of a King is such , 
And of such reverence as I dare not touch : 
Like to the Thunder , is his voice expressed , 
His Majesty , as lightning from the East , 
And though he want the art of making breath , 
he 's like a Demigod , of life and death . 
And as Kings ( before God ) are all but men , 
So before men , they all are gods again . 
he 's a good King , whose virtues are approved , 
Feared for his justice , for his m●rcy loved : 
Who patterns all his Royal dignity , 
By the just rule of Heaven's high Majesty , 
Who can distribute ( to good men's content ) 
Reward for virtue , vices punishment , 
Who loves a poor man's goodness , and doth hate 
All soul corruption in a man of State , 
Combined in love with Princes near and far , 
Most affable in peace , powerful in war : 
And above all , religious , full of zeal , 
To guard the Church , & guide the Common weal . 
And though such Kings as this hath seldom been ; 
Yet such a King as this I oft have seen . 
And as I want a Regal power and fame , 
I want Revenues to maintain the same : 
I think a King that 's made of Gingerbread 
His Subjects would obey him with more dread : 
And any knave that could but kiss his Claw , 
And make a leg , would make me but jack-daw . 
And as the Swallow all the Summer stays , 
And when the winter comes , he flies his ways : 
So flatterers would adore my happiness , 
And take their flight , and leave me in distress . 
To praise my vices , all the swarm of them 
Would flock , and all my virtues would condemn . 
Much worse than Ravens is their flattery , 
For Ravens eat not men until they die : 
But so a flattering knave may get and thrive , 
He daily will devour a man alive . 
Besides , the body only feeds the Fowl : 
But flattery oft consumes both body and soul . 
For like to trencher-flies they ever prove , 
Who still wait more for lucre then for love . 
Thus , though I want a Kingly power Royal , 
't is against my will to want will to be loyal . 
And if that any King alive there be 
That willingly would change estates with me , 
I in my bargain should have gold for brass , 
And he would be accounted but an Ass . 
For any King's estate , be 't never so bad , 
To change it with john Taylor , were stark mad , 
A King of Clubs keeps subjects in more awe : 
For he commands his Knave ( except at Maw ) 
A King of Spades hath more wit in his pate , 
To delve into the secrets of his state : 
The King of Diamonds is too rich and wise , 
To change his pleasures for my miseries . 
And for the King of Hearts , he 's so beloved , 
That to exchange with me , he 'll never be moved , 
For I am full of fears and dangerous doubts , 
And poorer far than is a King of Clouts : 
I therefore will a Subject still remain , 
And learn to serve that am unfit to reign . 
I want ten million of good coined gold , 
And with that want , want trouble's manifold : 
But if I had so much , what man can tell , 
But that I should want grace to use it well ? 
Within the walls and skirts of Troynovant , 
Many that have most goods , most goodness want : 
For Charity and riches seldom can 
Have both possession in a wealth man 
Fools that are rich with multitudes of Pieces , 
Are like poor simple sheep with golden fleeces ; 
A knave , that for his wealth doth worship get , 
Is like the Devil that is a cockhorse set . 
For money hath his nature in it still , 
Slave to the goodman , master to the ill . 
The Covetous amid his store is poor , 
The mind content is rich , and seeks no more . 
Who covets most , hath least ; who covets least , 
Hath most ; for why , sufficient is a feast . 
Wealth unto mischiefs might my mind enchant , 
And therefore 't is much good for me I want . 
I want a Son and Heir , and I perceive , 
That he no portion could from me receive ; 
Unless I could bequeath him Poetry , 
To add more poverty to poverty : 
But as I do want Children , I want care , 
And jealousy , in which some Fathers are : 
For many of them rake and toil ( God wot ) 
To gather wealth for Heirs they never begot : 
And run to Hell ( through mischiefs ) greedily 
For other men's misgotten Bastardy . 
The greatest females underneath the sky , 
Are but frail vessels of mortality : 
And if that Grace and Ver●ue be away , 
there 's Honour's shame , and Chastity's decay . 
For , if inconstancy doth keep the door , 
Lust enters , and my Lady proves a Whore : 
And so a Bastard to the World may come , 
Perhaps begotten by some stable Groom ; 
Whom the fork-headed , her cornuted Knight 
May play and dandle with , with great delight , 
And thus by one base misbegotten son , 
Gentility in a wrong line may run : 
And thus foul lust to worship may prefer 
The mongrel Issue of a Fruterer , 
Or yeoman of the Bottles it may be , 
Or some unmannerd rascal worse than he , 
And though the Stripling up in years doth grow , 
He shall want wit his father how to know : 
But he shall know one that will father him , 
And with good bringing up maintain him trim : 
And loves him with affection , as he were 
His own most natural Primogeniter . 
The old Knight dies and freely gives him all , 
And he being grown a Gallant fair and tall , 
If with his cursed wealth he purchase can , 
To wed the Daughter of some Nobleman , 
And being thus ennobled much thereby , 
Through his Alliance with Nobility ; 
He may in time possess an honoured state , 
Which God doth curse , and all good people hate : 
then shall be searched , if possible it be , 
Before Cains birth , to find his Pedigree : 
then is some famous coat of Arms contrived , 
From many worthy families derived . 
And thus may Lust & Wealth raise many a Clown , 
To Reputation , and to high Renown . 
Thus many good men are deceived ( perhaps ) 
In bowing of their knees , and doffing Caps , 
And courteously commit Idolatry , 
To a proud branch of Lust and Lechery . 
For my part , I want means to gull men so , 
I may be gulled with others goodly show . 
If any find my Children meat or cloth , 
I got them in my sleep , I 'll take mine oath , 
I cannot be deceived in my Heirs , 
As some that are my betters may in theirs , 
And as no Bastards my free mind perplexeth , 
So I want jealousy which some men vexeth . 
Should thousand such as Hercules combine , 
T' inspire with jealousy this breast of mine ; 
Nor all the Goatish foul luxurious brood , 
could not possess me with that frantic mood● , 
She that I have I know her continence , 
And she as well doth know my confidence ; 
Any yet , for ought you know , both she and I 
May want both honesty and jealousy : 
Though of ourselves our knowledge is but small ; 
Yet somewhat we do know , and God knows all . 
The man , whose wife will be a whore indeed , 
His jealousy stands but in little steed : 
Nor can bolts , locks or walls of brass suffice 
Briareus hundred hands nor Argos eyes ; 
Nor all the wit in man or Devil's pate , 
Can alter any man's allotted fate : 
For if a Woman be to lewdness given , 
And is not guided with the grace of Heaven ; 
She will find opportunity and time , 
In spite of watch or ward to do the Crime : 
But if she be with heavenly blessings graced , 
As outward beautiful , and inward chaste ; 
then may foul jealousy and false suspicion 
Against her nature alter her condition , 
From good to bad , from bad to naught , and worse , 
And turn her virtues to a vicious course . 
For nothing can an honest mind infect , 
So soon as jealousy and false suspect : 
And this foul Fury many times hath wrought ▪ 
To make the bad worse , and the good stark naught : 
But never yet by it ( as I could hear ) 
The good or bad , one jot the better were : 
And therefore be my wife , or good , or ill , 
I jealousy do want , and want it william 
I want dissimulation to appear , 
A friend to those , to whom I hatred bear : 
I want the knowledge of the thriving Art ▪ 
A holy outside and a hollow heart : 
But as I am , the same I 'll ever seem , 
Not worse , or better , in mine own esteem , 
For what attire so ever my corpse doth hide , 
Or whether I do go on foot or ride : 
Or were I with the King's high favour graced , 
Or at a great Lords board , at dinner placed , 
And should I have all this , I were no more 
But a poor Waterman , that at his Oar 
Doth ( for a living ) labour , tug , and pull , 
And carries both the Gallant and the gull . 
How ever others do esteem of me , 
Yet as I am , I know myself to be . 
If I do chance to be in company , 
Well welcomed , amongst true Gentility , 
I know in them it is a courteous part , 
And that in me it can be no desert . 
I want that high esteemed excellence 
Of fustian , or mockado Eloquence : 
To flourish o'er , or bombast ▪ out my stile , 
To make such as not understand me smile ; 
Yet I with Nonsense could contingerate , 
With Catophiscoes' Terragrophicate , 
And make myself admired immediately , 
Of such as understand no more then I 
Besides , I want the knowledge and the skill , 
How these my lines may pass now well or ill : 
For as a learned Poet lately written 
With a comparison , comparing fit 
men's writings and inventions like to Cheese , 
Which with some stomaches very well agrees ; 
Some love it , and some cannot well digest it , 
Some care not for it , and some quite detest it : 
And so my lines to sundry hands may come , 
Some pleasing , and displeasing unto some . 
One likes it well , and very well commends it , 
A second swears 't is naught , and madly rends it , 
A third cries mew , and screws his jaws awry , 
And in a scornful humour lays it by : 
Thus some like all , some somewhat , & some nothing . 
And one man's liking is another's loathing . 
I want hope to please all men where I come , 
I want despair , and hope I shall please some ; 
I want ingratitude to friends , I want 
A willing mind , ( what 's written ) to recant : 
I want against any man peculiar spite , 
I want a self-love unto what I write : 
I want some friends that would my want supply , 
I want some foes that would my patience try . 
If all things that I want I here should tell , 
To a large volume than my book would swell ; 
For though myself my wants do boldly bear , 
My wants of such great weight , and number are , 
That sure the burden of the things I want , 
Would break the back of any Elephant . 
Et Curo . I Care.  

I Care to think upon the Theme I write , 
For Care is careful , yielding no delight : 
And though Care flows like a continual stream , 
Yet Care is but a very barren Theme . 
Upon I care not , my swift Muse could jog , 
Like to an Irish Lackey o'er a bog ; 
But my poor wit must work upon I care , 
Which is a subject ( like my wit ) most bare . 
I care to keep my wife in that degree 
As that she always might my equal be : 
And I do care , and at all time's endever , 
That she to have the mastership shall never . 
I Care , and so must all that mortal are ; 
For from our births , unto our graves , our care 
Attends on us , in number like our sins , 
And sticks unto us close , as is our skins : 
For the true Anagram of Care is Race , 
Which shows , that whilst we on the earth have place , 
So many miseries do us ensnare , 
That all our life is but a Race of Care ; 
And when I call my life unto account , 
To such great numbers do my Cares amount , 
That Cares on Cares my mind so much do lad , 
As I of ( nothing else but ) Cares were made . 
When I conceive I am besieged round , 
With enemies that would my soul confound , 
As is the Flesh , the World and ghostly Fiends , 
How ( severally ) their force or flattery bends , 
To drive me to Presumption or despair , 
T' avoid temptations I am full of care . 
When I consider what my God hath done 
For me , and how his grace I daily eat : 
And how my sins ( for aught I know ) are more 
Than Stars in sky , or Sands upon the shore , 
Or withered leaves that Autumn tumbles down , 
And that sin's leprosy hath overgrown 
My miserable self from head to heel , 
then hopeful fears , and fearful cares I feel . 
When I do see a man that conscience makes 
Of what he speaks , or doth , or undertakes ; 
That neither will dissemble , lie , or swear , 
To have the love of such a man I care . 
I care when I do see a Prodigal 
( On whom a fair estate did lately fall ) 
When as is spent his credit and his chink , 
And he quite wasted to a snuff doth stink , 
Who in the Spring , or Summer of his Pride , 
Was worshipped , honoured , almost deified : 
And ( whilst the golden Angels did attend him ) 
What swarms of friends , and kindred did befriend him 
Persuading him , that give , & spend , & lend , 
Were virtues which on Gentry do depend . 
When such a fellow fallen to misery , 
I see forsaken and in beggary , 
then for some worthy friends of mine I care . 
That they by such examples would beware . 
A fool is he who gives ( himself t' impair ) 
And wise is he who gives what he may spare : 
But those that have too much , and nothing give , 
Are slaves of Hell , and pity 't is they live . 
But as the prodigal doth vainly spend , 
As though his ill sprung wellspring , never would end , 
Yet in his poverty he 's better much , 
then a hard hearted miserable Clutch ; 
Because the Prodigal let's money fly , 
That many people gain and get thereby . 
A prodigal 's a Commonwealths man still , 
To have his wealth all common 't is his will , 
And when he wants , he wants what he hath not , 
But miser's want what they both have , and got . 
For though man from the teat hath weaned been , 
Yet still our infancy we all are in , 
And from our birth , till death our lives doth smother 
All men do live be sucking one another . 
A King with Clemency and Royalty , 
Doth suck his Subject's love and loyalty : 
But as the Sea sucks in the River's goods , 
And Rivers back again , suck in the floods , 
So good Kings , and true Subjects , always prove 
To suck from each , protection , fear , and love . 
All Clients whatsoever , are Lawyers nurses , 
And many times they do suck dry their purses , 
But though the Lawyer seems in wealth to swim , 
Yet many great occasions do suck him . 
The Prodigals estate , like to a flux , 
The Mercer , Draper , and the Silkman sucks : 
The Tailor , Milliner , Dogs , Drabs and dice , 
Trey-trip , or Passage , or The most at thrice ; 
At Irish , Tick-tack , Doublets , Draughts or Chess , 
He flings his money free with carelessness : 
At Nowm , Mumchance , mischance , ( choose ye which 
At One and thirty , or at Poor and rich , 
Ruff , slam , Trump , noddy , whisk , hole , Sant , Newcut . 
Unto the keeping of four Knaves he 'll put 
His whole estate , at Loadum , or at Gleek 
At Tickle-me-quickly , he 's a merry Greek , 
At Primefisto , Post and pair , Primero , 
Maw , Whip-her-ginny , he●s a liberal Hero ; 
At My-sow-pigged , and ( Reader never doubt ye , 
he 's skilled in all games , except ) Look about ye . 
Bowls , shove-groate , tennis , no game comes amiss , 
His purse a nurse for any body is ; 
Caroches , Coaches , and Tobacconists , 
All sorts of people freely from his fists 
His vain expenses daily suck and soak , 
And his himself sucks only drink and smoke , 
And thus the Prodigal , himself alone , 
Gives suck to thousands , and himself sucks none . 
But for the miser , he is such an evil , 
He sucks all , yet gives none suck but the Devil : 
And both of them such cursed members are , 
That to be neither of them both I care . 
Thus young , old , all estates , men , maids , & wives , 
Do suck from one another , all their lives ; 
And we are never weaned from sucking thus , 
Until we die , and then the worms suck us. 
I care when I want money where to borrow , 
And when I have it then begins new sorrow : 
For the right Anagram of woe is owe. 
And he 's in woe that is in debt I know : 
For as I cared before to come in debt , 
So being in , my care is out to get . 
Thus being in or out , or out or in , 
Where one care ends , another doth begin . 
I care to keep me from the Sergeant's mace , 
Or from a barbarous Bailiffs rough embrace : 
Or from a Marshal's man that mercy lacks , 
That lives a cursed life by poor men's wracks , 
From Sergeants that are Saracens by kind , 
From Bailiffs ●hat are worse than Bears in mind : 
And from a Marshal's monsters trap or snare , 
To keep me from such knaves as those I care . 
A Pander ( Hostler-like ) that walks a whore , 
And for a fee , securely keeps the door , 
A Punk that will with any body do , 
And give the pox in to the bargain too : 
A rotten stinking Bawd , that for her crimes , 
Stewed in a sweat hath been some fifteen times , 
A Drunkard , that delights to curse and swear , 
To eat such company as those I care . 
I care to please ▪ and serve my Masters will , 
And he with care commands not what is ill . 
I care to have them hanged that careless be , 
Or false unto so good a Lord as he . 
I care for all Religions that are hurled 
And scattered o'er the universal world : 
I care to keep that which is sound and sure , 
Which ever and for ever shall endure . 
I care t' avoid all Sects and errors foul 
That to confusion hath drawn many a soul . 
For be a man , a Heathen , Turk or jew , 
With care his miserable state I rue , 
That he should have sense , reason , life and limb , 
Yet will not know that God that gave them him . 
And can a Christian think upon these things , 
But it his heart with care and pity wrings ? 
That three parts of the world , the grace doth eat 
Of their Creator , and his saving Son . 
And as the Christians few in number be , 
Yet how they in Religions disagree , 
Kings , subjects , parents , children much divided , 
By hell misguided , and by Turks derided . 
And can a Christian think how these things are , 
But that his heart must be possessed with Care ? 
I would all Princes that do Christ profess , 
And hope through him for endless happiness , 
Their quarrels to each other to lay by , 
And join against the common enemy , 
Who like a tempest oftentimes hath come , 
Advancing Mahomet in Christendom . 
If Christian Kings this way would all prepare , 
For such a glorious war as this I care . 
And here ( for mirth's sake ) some few lines are made 
In the behalf of me , and of my trade : 
But honest Reader be not angry though 
They look like verses I wrote long ago , 
But they by many men were never seen , 
And therefore fit to publish them I ween . 
I that in quiet in the days of yore , 
Did get my living at the healthful Oar , 
And with content , did live , and sweat and row , 
Where like the tide , my purse did ebb and flow , 
My fare was good , I thank my bounteous fares , 
And pleasure made me careless of my cares . 
The watery Element most plentiful , 
Supplied me daily with the Oar and Scull , 
And what the water yielded , I with mirth , 
Did spend upon the Element of earth . 
Until at last a strange Poetic vein , 
As strange a way possessed my working brain : 
It chanced one evening , on a reedy bank , 
The Muses sa●e together in a rank : 
Whilst in my boat I did by water wander , 
Repeating lines of Hero and Leander , 
The Triple three took great delight in that , 
Called me a shore , and caused me sit and chat , 
And in the end when all our talk was done , 
They gave to me a draught of Helicon , 
Which proved to me a blessing and a curse , 
To fill my pate with verse , and empt my purse . 
By their poor gift I have experience found 
what 's fit to be reproved , and what renowned : 
And that a Waterman a member is , 
Which neither King nor Commonwealth can miss , 
Yet we could well miss some that are too bad , 
If better in their rooms were to be had : 
But though abundance of them I could spare , 
't is only for the honest trade I care . 
Some say we carry whores and thieves , 't is true , 
I 'll carry those that said so for my due : 
Our boats , like hackney horses , every day , 
Will carry honest men and knaves , for pay , 
We have examples for it most divine , 
The Sun upon both good and bad doth shine ▪ 
Upon the dunghill and upon the rose , 
Upon God's servants and upon his foes : 
The wind , the rain , the earth , all creatures still , 
Indifferently do serve both good and ill . 
All tradesmen sell their ware continually , 
To whores , or knaves , or any that will buy . 
They never examine people what they are . 
no more can we , when we transport a fare . 
Sappho a Poetresse , a Lady famed , 
Did wed a Waterman was Phaon named : 
Eight Kings ( with Oars ) as histories do show , 
King Edgar to his Parliament did row . 
And when the waters all the world o'er ran , 
Old Noah was the only waterman . 
I care what quantity of this same stuff 
I write , for I may do much , or not enough , 
To end it therefore I will have a Care , 
And show the Waterman's brief Character . 
First , though he be not of the female kind , 
Yet he 's most like unto a Whore I find : 
For both , the more unready that they be , 
Both are most ready for their trade we see , 
The Watermen in shirts , and Whores in smocks , 
Both strip and fall to work , t' increase their stocks . 
Besides , a Waterman is much ingrateful , 
( And yet is his ingratitude not hateful ) 
For ( under God ) the River Thamesis , 
His chiefest friend , and best maintainer is , 
It feeds and fills him , gives him daily treasure , 
And he ( to cross that Friend ) takes pains with pleasure 
Mine own unkindness I have oft expressed , 
For when I cros● it most , it pleased me best . 
And as an Hypocrite speaks fairest when 
He most deceives , so we poor Watermen , 
Go backward when we do go forward still , 
And forward , we go backward with good william 
Thus looking one way , and another rowing , 
With forward backward , backward forward going 
To get my living I have thought it meet , 
Much like a Weaver with both hands and feet , 
Or like a Ropemaker , I in my trade 
Have many hundred times run retrograde ; 
But though the Ropemaker do backward go , 
Yet is his work before his face we know ; 
And all the voyages I undertake 
My business still hath been behind my back . 
But ( in a word ) let things be as they are , 
Those whom I carry , to land safe , I care . 
When I do stand my labour to apply 
I neither use to call , or yell , or cry , 
Or thrust ▪ or shove , or rake , or hale , or pull 
The Gentleman , or gentlemanlike Gull , 
A maid , a wife , a widow , or a trull . 
Be he the greatest swearer on the earth , 
Or the most dangerous thief that ere had birth , 
Be he or they as bad , or worse , or worst , 
then any that of God or man are cursed : 
Yet ( if it be their lots to be my fare ) 
To carry them and land them well I care , 
For why ? should I through careless negligence , 
Drown but a Rascal by improvidence , 
In me it were an action most untrue , 
For robbing of the hangman of his due . 
And be a velvet villain never so brave , 
A silver , silken , or a Satin slave : 
And that I know , and do esteem him so , 
Yet with great care his Rogueship will I row , 
Because I would not wrong the courteous River , 
With the base corpse of such a wicked liver ; 
I have a care to look about me round , 
That he may live and hang , and not be drowned . 
I take great care how I might Cares avoid , 
And to that end I have my Cares employed : 
For long a go I do remember that 
There was a Proverb , Care will kill a Cat. 
And it is said a cat 's a wondrous beast , 
And that she hath in her nine lives at least , 
And sure if any Cat this care could eat , 
It was the famous Cat of Whittington , 
For whom was given a ship rich fraught with ware 
And for a lucky Puss like that I care . 
But if Care of such potent power be , 
To kill nine lives , it may kill one in me ; 
And therefore it behoves me to beware , 
That though I care , not to be killed with care . 
I care , and in my care take great delight , 
( When by a Watch I do pass late at night ) 
Such answers to the Constable to shape , 
As by good words I may the Compter scape . 
My serious Cares and Considerations . 

't is said the age of man is seventy years , 
If eighty , it is full of grief and Cares , 
And if we of our time account should keep , 
How half our lives we do consume in sleep , 
And for the waking half , accounted that too , 
How little service to our God we do : 
For till seven years be past and gone away , 
We are uncapable to do or pray . 
Our Adolescency till our manly growth , 
We wast in vanity and tricks of youth , 
And as we travel to our journeys end , 
The more we live the more we do offend . 
In sixty years three thousand Sabbaths be , 
Which are some eight years in account we see , 
But of those Sundays let us think again , 
How little service God hath had of men , 
And to the holiest man it will appear , 
About one hundred hours in a year . 
And so in threescore years' God hath not one , 
Wherein his service we attend upon . 
And if that ( less them one ) t' account were brought , 
How many a nap , and many a wavering thought , 
And wand'ring fancies do us round beset , 
( That many times the text we do forget ? ) 
Think but of this , and then the year before 
Must be abated half , or somewhat more . 
Thus many a Christian sixty years hath trod 
The earth , and not six months hath served his God. 
When we our lives unequally thus share , 
In thinking ●f it , I am full of care . 
I care in all my actions so to live , 
That no occasion of offence I give 
To any man , with either pen or tongue , 
In name , or fame , or goods , to do them wrong . 
For he 's the greatest murderer alive , 
That doth a man of his good name deprive 
With base columnious slanders and false lies , 
't is the worst villainy of villains : 
To blast a good man's name with scandals breath , 
Makes his dishonour long survive his death : 
For Infamie's a colour died in grain , 
Which scarce oblivion can wash out again . 
As nothing's dearer than a man's good name , 
So nothing wounds more deeper than defame . 
Nature gave man a pair of ears and eyes , 
And but one tongue , which certainly implies , 
That though our sight and hearing still is free , 
Yet must we not speak all we hear or see , 
then he 's a Viper that doth lies invent , 
To work thereby another's detriment , 
't is sin to slander a notorious Knave , 
But sin and shame a good man to deprave : 
Thus good or bad , or whatsoever they are , 
To do to neither of them wrong I care . 
I care to get good Books , and I take heed , 
And care what I do either write or read : 
Though some through ignorance , & some through spite 
Have said that I can neither read nor write . 
But though my lines no scholership proclaim , 
Ye● I at learning have a kind of aim . 
And I have gathered much good observations , 
From many human and divine translations . 
I was well entered ( forty Winters since ) 
As far as possum in my Accidence ; 
And reading but from ●ossu● to posset , 
There I was mir'de , and could no further get , 
Which when I think upon ( with mind dejected ) 
I care to think how learning I neglected . 
The Poet Quid , ( or Ovid if you will ) 
Being in English , much hath helped my skill : 
And Homer too , and Virgil I have seen , 
And reading them I have much bettered been . 
Godfrey of Bulloyne , well by Fairfax done , 
Du Bartas , that much love hath rightly won : 
Old Chaucer , Si●ney , Spencer , Daniel , Nash , 
I dipped my finger where they used to wash . 
As I have read these Poets , I have noted 
Much good , which in my memory is quoted . 
Of Histories I have perused some store , 
As no man of my function hath done more . 
The Golden legend , I did over toss , 
And found the Gold mixed with a deal of dross . 
I have read Plutarch's Morals and his Lives , 
And like a Bee , sucked Honey from those Hives . 
josephus of the jews , Knowles of the Turks , 
Marcus Aurclius , and Gueuara's works : 
Lloyd , Grimstone , Montaigne , and Suetonius , 
Agrippa , ( whom some call Cornelius . ) 
Grave Seneca , and Cambden , Purchas , Speed , 
Old Monumental Fox , and Hollinshead : 
And that sole Book of Books which God hath given 
( The blessed eternal Testaments of heaven ) 
That I have read , and I with care confess , 
Myself unworthy of such happiness . 
And many more good Books I have with care 
Looked on their goods , and never stole their ware , 
For no book to my hands could ever come , 
If it were but the treatise of Tom Thumb , 
Or Scoggins jests , or any simple play , 
Or monstrous news came Trundling in my way . 
All these , and ten times more , some good , some bad 
I have from them much observation had . 
And so with care and study I have written 
These books , the issue of a barren wit. 
The most of them are verse , but I suppose 
It is much ease to name them here in prose . 
The names of many of the books that I have written . 

First , the Sculler . 


Upon Coriat three merry books , called , Odcombs' complaint , 
Coriats' resurrection , and 
Laugh and be fat . 
The nipping or snipping of Abuses . 
Two mad things against Fenor . 
Tailors Urania . 
The marriage of the Princess . 
An Elegy on Prince Henry . 
Two books of all the Kings of England . 
Three weeks , three days , and three hour's observations in Germany . 
Travels to Scotland . 
Travels to Prague in Bohemia . 
An Englishmans love to Bohemia . 
The Bible in verse . 
The Book of Martyrs in verse . 
The praise of Hempseed . 
A kicksy winsy . 
The great OH Toole . 
jack a Lent.  
The praise of Beggary . 
Tayl●rs Goose.  
Fair and foul weather . 
The life and death of the Virgin Mary . 
The Whip of Pride . 


And lastly ( since the reign of th' Emperor OTTO ) 
Was never seen the like of TAILOR'S MOTTO . 
All these , and some which I have quite forgot , 
With care ( as is aforesaid ) I have written . 
I care how to conclude this careful strain : 
In care I care how to get out again : 
I care for food and lodging , fire and raiment , 
And ( what I owe ) I care , to make good payment . 
But most of all , I care , and will endever 
To live so careful that I may live ever . 
Thus without wronging any man a jot , 
I show I have what every man hath not : 
My wants are such , that I forgive them free , 
That would but steal the most of them from me . 
My cares are many , as I here express , 
Poor cousin Germane unto carelessness . 
I have a knowledge some men will read this , 
I want the knowledge how their liking is . 
I care in all that I herein have penned , 
To please the good , and show the bad to mend . 
And those that will not thus be satisfied , 
I have a spirit that doth them deride . 
I flattery want men's like to obtain , 
I care to love those tha● lo●e me again . 
Thus be men's ●udgementss steady or unsteady 
To like my Book , the ●are is ta'en already . 
The Proverb says , that hast makes ( often ) waste , 
then wha● is waste , impute it to my haste : 
This Book was written ( not that here I boast ) 
Put hours together , in three days at most : 
And give me but my breakfast , I 'll maintain , 
To write another ever I eat again . 
But well or ill , or howsoe'er 't is penned , 
Liked as you list , and so I make an 
END . 





 Silvesters' nagram ● His I●j●sties' ●ame , in ●u Bar●as . 

〈…〉  I should believe all were Gold that glisters . In my English Latin Richard Swary , I find or coined this worthy word . The Heralds of this Office dwell at Nullibi .  Learned 〈◊〉 l●ds 〈◊〉 that 〈◊〉 ●omes near Curro . Some 6 or 8. lines are old of mine own ●ut I have 〈◊〉 varied ●hem . Shall God's gifts be common to good & bad , and our boats be private only to the good ?  The character of a Waterman . Thames a waterman's best friend , whom he delights to cross .  Strange Eloquence   Books that I have read of Poesy . Part of the Books of History that I have read .  I was m●ch beholding to this Emperor's name to make up the meeter . 