A DOG OF WAR . 



A DOG OF WAR . 

A Dog of War , OR , The Travels of Drunkard , the famous Cur of the Round - Woolstaple in Westminster . 

His Services in the Netherlands , and lately in France , with his home Return . 

By john Taylor . 

The Argument and contents of this Discourse is in the next Page or Leafe . 

Printed by I Perseus I , for OH pierce O , and & pierce & , and are to be sold at the Sign of the A diphthong . 

The Argument . 

AN honest , well-knowing and well-known Soldier , ( whose name for some Reasons I conceal ) dwelled lately in Westminster ) , in the round Woolstaple , he was a man only for Action , but such Action as Loyalty did always justify , either for his Prince , Country , or their Deer and near Friends or Allies ; in such noble designs He would and did often with courage , and good Aprovement employ himself in the Low-countrieses , having always with him a little black Dog , whom he called Drunkard ; which Cur would ( by no means ) ever forsake or leave him . But lately in these French Wars , the Dog being in the Isle of RHEA , where his Master ( valiantly fight ) was unfortunately slain , whose death was grieved for by as many as knew him ; and as the Corpse lay dead , the poor loving Masterless Dog would not forsake it , until an English Soldier pulled off his Master's Coat , whom the Dog followed to a Boat , by which means he came back to Westminster , where he now remains . Upon whose fidelity , ( for the love I owed his diseased Master ) I have written these following lines , to express my Adiction to the Proverb , Love me and love my Hound ; I have a little rubbed our Gull-gallant Roarers over the Coxcombs , and withal I have not forgotten our nosewise Prescisians : If the Dog Drunkard do a little snap at them , I hold it their wisest way to be silent and put it up , but if they will be maundering , let them expect what follows . 

To the Reader . 

Reader , if you expect from hence , 
For overplus of Wit or Sense , 
I deal with no such Traffic : 
Heroics and jambiks I , 
My Buskinde Muse hath laid them by , 
Pray be content with Saphicke . 
Durunkard the Dog my Patron is , 
And he doth love me well for this , 
Whose love I take for Guerdon ; 
And he 's a Dog of Mars , his Train . 
Who hath seen men and Horses slain , 
The like was never heard on . 
A Dog of War . 

Stand clear my master's ware your shinns , 
For now to Bark my Muse begins , 
't is of a Dog I write now : 
Yet let me tell you for excuse , 
That Muse or Dog , or Dog or Muse , 
Have no intent to By't now . 
In doggerel Rhymes my Lines are writ , 
As for a Dog I thought it fit . 
And fitting Best his Carcase , 
Had I been silent as a Stoic , 
Or had I writ in Verse Heroick , 
then had I been a Stark Ass . 
Old Homer wrote of Frogs and Mice , 
And Rablays wrote of Nitts and Lice , 
And Virgil of A Fly , 
One wrote the Treatise of the Fox 
Another praised the Frenchman's Pox 
Whose praise was but a Lye.  
Great Alexander had a Horse , 
A famous Beast of mighty force 
y cleped Bucephalus : 
He was a stout and sturdy Steed , 
And of an excellent Race and Breed , 
But that concerns not us.  
I list not write the babble praise 
Of Apes , or Owls , or Popinjaies . 
Or of the Cat Grimmalkin , 
But of a true and trusty Dog , 
Who well could faun , but never cog , 
His praise my Pen must walk in . 
And Drunkard he is falsely named , 
For with that Vice he never was blamed , 
For he loves not god Bacchus : 
The Kitchen he esteem more dear , 
then Cellars full of Wine or Beer , 
Which oftentimes doth wrack us.  
He is no Mastiff , huge of limb , 
Or Waterspaniell , that can swim , 
Nor Bloodhound or no Setter : 
no Bobtayle Tike , or Trundle rail , 
Nor can he Partridge spring or Quail , 
But yet he is much better . 
no Dainty Ladies fifting Hound , 
That lives upon our Britain Ground 
no Mongrel Cur or Shogh : 
Should Litters , or whole Kennels dare 
With honest Drunkard to compare , 
My pen writes , marry fough . 
The Otter Hound , the Fox Hound , nor 
The swift foot Grey hound cared he for , 
Nor Cerberus' Hell's Bandog ; 
His service proves them Curs and Tikes , 
And his renown a terror strikes . 
In Water dog and Land dog ; 
'Gainst brave Buquoy , or stout Dampiere , 
He durst have barked withouten fear 
Or against the hot Count Tylly : 
At Bergin Laguer and Bredha , 
Against the Noble Spinola , 
He showed himself not silly . 
He served his Master at commands , 
In the most warlike Netherlands , 
In Holland , Zealand , Brabant , 
He to him still was true and just , 
And if his fare were but a Crust , 
He patiently would knab on 't . 
He durst to have stood stern Aiax frown , 
When wise Ulysses talked him down , 
In grave Diebus illis , 
When he by cunning prating won 
The Armour , from fierce Telamon , 
That longed to Achilles : 
Brave Drunkard , oft on God's dear ground , 
took such poor lodging as he found , 
In Town , Feild , Camp or Cottage , 
His Bed but cold , his diet thin , 
He oft in that poor case was in , 
To want both Meat and Pottage . 
Two rows of Teeth for Arms he bore , 
Which in his mouth he always wore , 
Which served to fight and feed to : 
His grumbling for his Drum did pass , 
And barking ( loud ) his Ordnance was , 
Which helped in time of need to . 
His Tail his Ensign he did make , 
Which he would oft display , and shake , 
Fast in his Poop upreared : 
His Powder hot , but somewhat dank , 
His Shot in ( sent ) most dangerous rank , 
Which sometimes made him feared : 
Thus hath he long served near and far , 
Well known to be A Dog of War , 
Though he never shot with Musket ; 
Yet Cannons roar , or Culverings , 
That whizzing through the Welk in sings , 
He slighted as a Puss Cat 
For Guns nor Drums , nor Trumpets clang , 
Nor hunger , cold , nor many a pang , 
could make him leave his Master : 
In joy , and in adversity 
In plenty , and in poverty , 
He often was a Taster . 
Thus served he on the Belgia Coast , 
Yet ne'er was heard to brag or boast , 
Of services done by him : 
He is no Pharisey to blow 
A Trumpet , his good deeds to show , 
't is pity to belly him . 
At last he home returned in peace , 
Till wars , and jars , and scars increase 
'twixt us , and France , in malice : 
Away went he and crossed the Sea , 
With 's Master , to the Isle of Rhea , 
A good way beyond Calais . 
He was so true , so good , so kind , 
He scorned to stay at home behind , 
And leave his Master frustrate ; 
For which , could I like Ovid write , 
Or else like Virgil could indite , 
I would his praise illustrate . 
I wish my hands could never stir , 
But I do love a thankful Cur 
more than a Man ingrateful : 
And this poor Dog's fidelity , 
May make a thankless Knave descry 
How much that vice is hateful . 
For why ? of all the faults of Men , 
Which they have got from Hell's black den , 
Ingratitude the worst is : 
For treasons , murders , incests , rapes , 
Nor any sin in any shapes , 
So bad , nor so accursed is . 
I hope I shall no anger gain , 
If I do write a word or twain , 
How this Dog was distressed : 
His Master being wounded dead , 
Shot , cut , and slashed , from heel to head , 
Think how he was oppressed . 
To lose him that he loved most , 
And be upon a foreign Coast , 
Where no man would Relieve him : 
He licked his Master's wounds in love , 
And from his Carcase would not move , 
Although the fight did grieve him . 
By chance a Soldier passing by , 
That did his Master's Coat espy . 
And quick away he took it ; 
But Drunkard followed to a Boat , 
To have again his Master's Coat , 
Such theft he could not brook it . 
So after all his woe and wrack , 
To Westminster he was brought back , 
A poor half starved Creature ; 
And in remembrance of his cares , 
Upon his back he closely wears 
A Mourning Coat by nature . 
Live Drunkard , sober Drunkard live , 
I know thou no offence wilt give , 
thou art a harmless dumb thing ; 
And for thy love I 'll freely grant , 
Rather than thou shouldst ever want , 
Each day to give thee something . 
For thou hast got a good report , 
Of which there 's many a Dog comes short , 
And very few Men gain it ; 
Though they all dangers bravely bide , 
And watch , fast , fight , run , go and ride , 
Yet hardly they Attain it . 
Some like Dominical Letters go , 
In Scarlet from the top to toe , 
Whose vallour's talk and smoke all . 
Who make , ( God sink'em ) their discourse , 
Refuse , Renounce , or Dam , that 's worse , 
I wish a halter Choke all . 
Yet all their talk is Bastinado , 
Strong Armado Hot Scalado , 
Smoking Trinidado . 
Of Canvasado , Pallizado , 
Of the secret Ambuscado , 
Boasting with Bravado . 
If Swearing could but make a Man , 
then each of these is one that can 
With Oaths , an Army scatter : 
If Oaths could conquer Fort , or Hold , 
then I presume these Gallants could 
With Brags , a Castle batter . 
Let such but think on Drunkard's fame , 
And note therewith their merits blame , 
How both are universal ; 
then would such Coxcombs blush to see 
They by a Dog outstriped should be , 
Whose praise is worth rehearsal . 
The times now full of danger are , 
And we are round engaged in war , 
Our Foes would fain distress us : 
Yet many a stubborn miser knave , 
Will give no Coin his Throat to save , 
If he were stored like Croesus . 
These hidebound Varlets , worse than Turks , 
Top full with Faith , but no Good works , 
A crew of fond Precise-men ; 
In factions , and in emulation , 
Caterpillars of a Nation , 
Whom few esteem for wise men . 
But leaving such to mend , or end : 
Back to the Dog my Verse doth bend , 
Whose worth , the subject mine is : 
Though thou a dogs life here dost lead , 
Let not a dogs death strike thee dead , 
And make thy fatal Finis . 
thou shalt be Stellifide by me , 
I 'll make the Dog-star wait on thee , 
And in his room I 'll seat thee : 
When Soll doth in his Progress swinge , 
And in the Dog-days hotly sing , 
He shall not over heat thee . 
So honest Drunkard now adieu , 
Thy praise no longer I 'll pursue , 
But still my love is to thee : 
And when thy life is gone and spent , 
These Lines shall be thy Monument , 
And shall much service do thee . 
I loved thy Master , so did all 
That ever knew him , great and small , 
And he did well deserve it : 
For he was honest , valiant , good , 
And one that manhood understood , 
And did till death preserve it . 
For whose sake , I 'll his Dog prefer , 
And at the Dog at Westminster 
Shall Drunkard be a Bencher ; 
Where I will set a work his chaps , 
Not with bare bones , or broken scapps , 
But Victuals from my Trencher . 
All those my Lines that Ill digest , 
Or madly do my meaning wrist , 
In malice , or derision : 
Kind Drunkard , prithee by't them all , 
And make them reel from wall to wall , 
With Wine , or Maults incision . 
I know when foes did fight or parley , 
thou valiantly wouldst grin and snarl , 
Against an Army adverse ; 
Which made me bold , with rustic Pen 
Stray here and there , and back again , 
To blaze thy fame in mad Verse . 
It was no Avaritious scope , 
Or flattery , or the windy hope 
Of any fee , or stipend : 
For none , nor yet for all of these , 
But only my poor self to please , 
This mighty Volume I Penned . 
ANNO.  

This story 's written the day and year , 
That Seacoales were exceeding dear . 
Thus the old Proverb is fulfilled , A Dog shall have his day : And this Dog hath not out lived his Reputation , but ( to the perpetual renown of himself , and good example of his own begotten Puppies ) he hath his bright day of Fame perspicuously shining . 

I read in Anthony Guevaroa his Golden Epistles , that the Great Alexander buried his Horse ; that the Emperor Augustus made a stately Monument for his Parrot : and that Heliogabalus did embaulmne and entomb his Sparrow . Happy were those Creatures in dying before their Masters : I could with all my heart have been glad that Drunkard's fortune had been the like , upon the condition that I had paid for his Burial . 

But to speak a little of the nature of Beasts , and of the service and fidelity of Dogs toward their Masters : Quintus Curtius writes , that the Elephant whereon Porus the Indian King road in the Battle against Alexander , when the King was beaten down to the ground , that the Elephant drew his Master with his Trunk out of the danger of the Fight , and so saved him . 

A Groom of the Chamber to French King Francis the first , was murdered in the Forest of Fountein Belleau , but the said Groom had a Dog , who afterwards ( in the presence of the King & all the Court ) did tear the Murderer in pieces . 

amongst the Watermen at the Blackfriars , there lately was a little Bitch that Whelped or Littered in the Lane under a bench , the Men perceived that she had more Puppies than she could sustain , did take three of them and cast them into the Thames , ( the water being high ) but the next day , when the water was ebbed away , the Bitch went down the stairs , and found her three drowned Puppies , when presently she digged a deep pit in the ground , and drew them into it one after an other , and then scraped the gravel upon them and so hid them . 

I could produce and relate many of these examples and accidents , but they are so frequent and familiar , that almost every man hath either known or heard of the like : But chiefly for the Dog , he is in request above all Beasts , and by and from Dogs our Separatists and Amsterdamians , and our Precise despisers of all honest and laudable Recreations may see their errors ; For of all the Creatures , there are most diversity in the shapes and forms of Dogs ; of all which , there are but two sorts that are useful for Man's profit , which two are the Mastiff , and the little Cur , Whippet , or House-dogge ; all the rest are for pleasure and recreation ; so likewise is the Mastiff for Bear and Bull : But the Water-spaniel , Land-spaniell , Greyhound , Fox-hound , Buck-hound , Bloodhound , Otterhound , Setter , Tumbler , with Shove and Dainty , my Ladies delicate Fisting hound ; all these are for pleasure , by which we may perceive that Man is allowed lawful and honest recreation , or else these Dogs had never been made for such uses . 

But many pretty ridiculous aspersions are cast upon Dogs , so that it would make a Dog laugh to hear and understand them : As I have heard a Man say , I am as hot as a Dog , or , as cold as a Dog ; I sweat like a Dog , ( when indeed a Dog never sweats , ) as drunk as a Dog , he swore like a Dog : and one told a Man once , That his Wife was not to be believed , for she would lie like a Dog ; marry ( quoth the other ) I would give twelve pence to see that trick , for I have seen a Dog to lie with his Nose in his Tail . 

FINIS . 

