In Memorabilis Effigies . 

View and behold his Monumental Pictor , 
Whose trade was Arms , whose Fortune still was Victor : 
Look on Truncheon how it is becrowned , 
By which you may perceive how he 's Renowned . 
His Beard , a Grave bush ( Naturally fitted ) 
Shows by the store of hair how he is witted . 
And howsoever Times or Seasons change-thinges , 
This Captain very truly hath done strange-thinges ; 
Whilst some ( perhaps ) will say these lines do scoff him , 
Read what the Inside of the Book speaks of him . 
john Taylor . These 8.  Lines by an unknown Author . 

Great Moguls Landlord , and both indies King , 
( Whose self admiring Fame doth loudly Ring ) 
Writes 4. score years : more Kingdoms he hath right to 
The Stars say so . And for them he will Fight too . 
And though this worthless Age will not believe him , 
But clatter , spatter , slander , scoff and grieve him , 
Yet he and all the world in this agree , 
That such another TOOL , will never be . 
ARTHURUS SEVERUS O-TOOLE NONESUCH : Aetatis 80.  



Great Mogul's Landlord ; of both indies King , 
Whose self-admiring fame doth loudly ring ; 
Writes fourscore Years , more Kingdoms he hath right to , for them he will fight too : 
And though this worthless Age , will not believe him , 
But clatter , spatter , slander , scoff , to grieve him 
Yet He and all the World in this agree , 
That such another Tool will never be . 
THE GREAT OH Toole . 

Englands' , Scotland's , Ireland's Mirror , 
Mars his fellow , Rebel's Terror : 
These Lines do gallop for their pleasure , 
Written with neither feet or measure ; 
Because Prose , Verse , or Antic Story , 
Cannot Blaze OH Tools great Glory . 
LONDON . Printed for Henry Gosson . 1622.  

AN ENCOMIUM OR ENCO-MI-ASS-TRICK , dedicated to the unlimited memory of Arthur OH Toole , or OH Toole the Great : Being the Son and Heir of Brian OH Toole , Lord of Poors Court and far Collen , in the County of Dublin , in the Kingdom of Ireland . The Mars and Mercury , the Agamemnon and Ulysses both for Wisdom and Valour , in the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland . 

Prologue . 

Brave Vsquebough that fierce Hibernian liquor , 
Assist my brain , and make my wit run quicker : 
To heat my Muse like to a well warmed Chimney , 
I beg thy merry aid kind Polihimny . 
I list not to call Fables into question , 
Nor of Baboons , or idle bibles jest I on : 
And yet if Sense or reason here you look for , 
For neither , or for either read this Book for . 
And if perchance I do in any word lie , 
Do , as I written it , read it o'er absurdly ; 
Though in these days there are a Crew of fond men , 
That for invention strive to go beyond men , 
And write so humorous Dogmatic , 
To please my Lord and Lady what d' ye Call , 
With Inkhorn terms stiff quilted and bombasted , 
And ( though not understood ) yet are well tasted . 
And therefore I 'll not reach beyond the bounds of 
My weak capacity , nor search the sounds of 
Deep Nature's secrets , or Arts spacious cirquit : 
My Muse is free from those , myself will her quit . 
But leaving Idle toys , with toil endure I on , 
To write the praise of this brave bold Centurion . 
The Argument and meaning , of this following History . 

IN all Ages and Countries , it hath ever been known , that Famous men have flourished , whose worthy Actions , and Eminency of place , have ever been as conspicuous Beacons Burning and blazing to the Spectators view : the sparks & flames whereof hath sometimes kindled Courage in the most coldest and Effeminate Cowards ; as Thersites amongst the Grecians , Amadis de Gaul , and Sir Huon of Bordeaux in France , Sir Bevis , Gogmagog , Chinon , Palmerine , Lancelot , & Sir Tristram amongst us here in England , Sir Degree , Sir Grime , and Sir Grace Steel in Scotland , Don Quixot with the Spaniards , Gargantua almost no where , Sir Dagonet , and Sir Triamore any where , all these , and many more of the like Rank have filled whole Volumes , with the airy Imaginations of their unknown and unmatchable worths ; So Ireland amongst the rest , had the Honour to produce and breed a spark of Valour , Wisdom , and Magnanimity , to whom all the Nation of the World must give place . The Great OH Toole , is the tool that my Muse takes in hand , whose praises ( if they should be set forth to the full ) would make Apollo and the Muses Barren ; To whom the Nine Worthies were never to be compared : betwixt whom , and Hannibal , Scipio , the Great Pompey , or Tamburlaine , was such odds , that it was unfit the best of them should hold his stirrup , and who ( by his own Report ) in whom Ireland may rejoice , and England be merry , whose Youth was Dedicated to Mars , and his Age to Westminster , which ancient City , is now honoured with his beloved Residence . 

¶ To the Honour of the Noble Captain O Toole . 

Thou Famous man , Est , west , & North , & Southward , 
From Boreas' cold rump , to Austers slavering mouth ward , 
I call Apollo's daughters all , to witness , 
Much would I praise thee , but my Wit wants fitness . 
But thou thyself ( of thyself ) canst speak so-well , 
That though my Rhymes not altogether goe-well , 
Yet if the World's applause would not attend thee , 
were all tongues mute , thy own tongue would commend thee 
Thyself ( unto thyself ) art Fame's Trump blasting , 
To make thy name ( like Buff ) tough , long and lasting . 
Yet grant me ( thou brave man that never feared colors ) 
T' accept the poor Lines of an Artless Scullers . 
Thy Bilbo oft bathed in the blood of Foe man's , 
Like Caius Marius , Consul of the Romans : 
When thou hast seemed more dreadful in thy harness , 
then Babel's General great Holophernes , 
more in command than was Nabuchadnezar , 
And more renowned than Cayus julius Caesar : 
Upon thy foe's breast thou hast often trod free , 
As on the Pagans' did brave Boloignes Godfrey . 
Fierce Methridates the stout King of Pontus , 
If thou dost lead us , dares not to confront us : 
Thy matchless valour , ten to one more tried is , 
then ever was the Libyan strong Alcides : 
And all men know that never such an odd piece 
Of fight mettle , sprung from Mars his Codpiece . 
Upon the main land and the raging Ocean , 
Thy courage hath attained thee high promotion . 
thou never fear'dst to combat with Gargante , 
Thy fame 's beyond the battle of Lepanto . 
The mighty Alexander of Macedo , 
Near fought as thou hast done with thy Toledo . 
We hold thee for a worthy and no base one , 
But one that could have wone the fleece from jason : 
thou durst oppose against Boar , Bear Wolf or Lion , 
And from the torturing wheel to fetch Ixion , 
And I acknowledge that thy matchless valour is , 
To kill Pasiphaes' or the Bull of Phalleris , 
Though age hath overta'en thee , yet thy will is , 
To grapple with an Aiax or Achilles , 
Or with Hell's Monarch envious ill faced Pluto , 
And prove him by his horns a damned Cornuto . 
thou fearest no Devil , nor no Demogorgon , 
Nor yet the valiant Welshman Shone a Morgan : 
So that most Wizards and most fortune tellers , 
Approve thee for the greatest of Monster quellers : 
And absolute and potent Dominator , 
For War or Counsel both by land and Water , 
In times of tumult thou amongst the Irish , 
Hast made them skip o'er bogs and quagmires mirish , 
Whilst in the pursuit , like an angry Dragon , 
thou mad'st them run away with not a rag on . 
For had thy foes been thousands , with thy Pistol , 
And thy good sword , thou bravely wouldst Resist all . 
thou wast to us , as unto Rome was Titus , 
And stoutly sent our foes to black Cocytus . 
To kill , and cut throats , thou art skilled in that trick , 
As if thou wert the Champion to Saint Patrick : 
I know not to which worthy to compare thee , 
For were they living , they could not outdare thee . 
To thee what was great Tamburlaine the Bohemian-tartar , 
Or matched with thee what was our Britain Arthur ? 
Great Hannibal , that famous Carthaginean , 
Was not a mate for thee in mine opinion , 
And all Severus virtues , summed up total , 
Remain in thee , if this blind Age would note all . 
thou show'dst thyself a doughty wight at Dublin , 
When Irish Rebels madly brought the trouble in : 
At Baltimore , Kinsale , at Cork , and Yoghall , 
thou with thy power hast made them oft cry faugh all , 
oft in thy rage , thou hast most madly ran on , 
The burning mouth of the cumbustious Cannon . 
For in thy fury , thou hast oft been hotter , 
more swifter than an Ambler , or a Trotter , 
As witness can the bounds of fierce Tirconnell , 
and the rough Bicker with the stout Odonnell . 
The slaves did scud before thee o'er the Quagmires : 
Where many a warlike Horse & many a Nag mires : 
thou killed'st the gammon visaged poor Westphalians , 
The Al-to-totterd , torn Tatterdemalians : 
The broaging , roaging , brawling , base Bezonian : 
The swift foot , light heeled , run away Slavonians , 
thou lettest them have no ground to stand or walk on , 
But made them fly as Doves do from a Falcon. 
For if thou list in fight to lead a Band on , 
Thy slaughtering sword if thou but layst thy hand on 
Thy fearful foes would strait the place abandon , 
Without or hose , or shoes , shirt , or a band on : 
thou lettest them have no quiet place to stand on . 
By tongue or pen it cannot well be verifide , 
How many hundred thousands thou hast terrified , 
For thou hast razed more Castles , forts and Garrisons , 
Beyond Arithmetic , and past comparisons : 
The Proverb says Comparisons are odious , 
I 'll therefore leave them being incomodious , 
In all thy actions thou hast been impartial , 
Accommodating thy designs as Marshal , 
In mortal Battles and in bruising battery , 
Thy ears would entertain no smooth tongued flattery , 
That though to all men thy exploits seemed very odd , 
thou broughst them still to an auspicious Period . 
And as thy valour durst outdare bold Hector , 
Like wise Ulysses thou canst speak a Lector 
Such policies thy wits mint could devose on , 
Which wiser pates could never once surmise on : 
With many a hundred never heard of Stratagem , 
thou hast got precious honour , is not that a gem ? 
What tricks , or slights of war so ere the foe meant , 
thou canst descry and frustrate in a moment . 
Upon his Wisdom , and Policy . 

OF thy Heroic acts , there might be more said , 
For sure they are but slightly touched aforesaid , 
But Gods or Muses , Men , or Fiends infernal , 
To blaze thee to thy worth , can ne'er discern all : 
And should I write but half that I know of thee , 
Some Critics would persuade thee I did scoff thee . 
Thus having showed thy valour , now I 'll expound , 
Part of thy policies , and wisdom profound . 
Unfellowed , and unfollowed , and unmatched , 
Are the rare sleights that in thy pate were hatched : 
Of Engines , mines , of Counterscarphs and Trenches , 
And to keep clear the Camp from whoring wenches : 
To teach the Soldiers eat frogs , snails and vermin , 
Such Stratagems as these thou couldst determine . 
That Cato , Plato , or Aurelius Marcus , 
Wise Socrates , or reverend Aristarcus , 
Diogenes , or wise Pythagoras , 
Lycurgus , Pliny , Anaxagoras , 
Archidamus of Greece , or Roman Tully , 
could ne'er demonstrate Sapience more fully . 
And specially when there was any trouble like , 
To vex , molest , or trouble the Republic . 
That wit with valour , valour joined with wisdom , 
From all the world thou hast attained this doom : 
To be wars Abstract , Counsels Catechiser , 
That canst direct all , and all scarce the wiser . 
A Complaint and a Petition to him . 

Thus thou of Yore hast followed great Belona , 
And shined in Arms like twins of bright Latona : 
But now those manly martial days are gone . A 
Time of Cheating , sweeting , drinking , drabbing , 
Of Burst gut feeding and inhuman stabbing , 
The Spanish Pip. or else the Galtan Morbus , 
Bone-bred diseases , mainly do disturb us : 
That now more men by riot are confounded , 
then valiant Soldiers in the wars were wounded . 
Mars yields to Venus , Gownsmen rules the roast now , 
And men of War may fast , or kiss the post now . 
The thundering Cannon and the rumbling Drum now , 
The Instruments of War are mute and dumb now , 
And stout experienced valiant Commanders , 
Are turned Saint Nicholas Clarks & high way standers . 
And some ( through want ) are turned base Pimps & Panders , 
The watchful Corporal , and the Lansprezado 
Are Merchants turned , of smoky Trinidado . 
His shop , ( a fathom compass ) now contains him , 
Where midst the misty vapours he complains him , 
That he who hath made Forts and Castles caper 
lives now Chameleon-like , by Air and Vapour . 
Whilst fools & flatterers thrive , it greatly grieves him , 
When all Trades fail , Tobacco last relieves him . 
Besides each day some hound-like scenting Sergeant . 
Scouts , gapes , pries , peyes , & tires on him for argeant : 
And Longlane Dogditch , damned soul wanting Brokers 
The Common wealth's bane & poor men's unclokers , 
The Country's Sponges , and the City's soakers , 
The Peace's Pestilence , and Warriors choakers . 
These beat their hogsheads all , to try conclusions 
By base extorting , working our confusions . 
The Soldiers naked , by the Brokers bribing , 
The Scrivener lives brave by sophistic scribing 
The slaves grow rich ( and 't is not to be wondered ) 
By taking Forty interest for a hundred . 
And Nasty Beadles with their breath contaminous , 
With what are you , and who go there examine us : 
With hums and haws , Sir reverence , nods & becking , 
With senseless nonsense , checks and Counter checking : 
The brownbild Rug-gownd bench do think it fitting 
To exercise their Office , by committing , 
Where our expense , with Ale their faces varnish , 
Whilst we encountered , pay fines , fees and garnish . 
And Tyburn , Wapping , and St. Thomas Watering , 
Poor Soldiers ends to every neighbouring State ring's . 
Whilst lousy Ballad-mongers gape and look out , 
To set some Rhyming song , or Roguing Book out , 
Where more than all is against the dead imputed , 
By which means men are doubly executed : 
That sure the Gallows hath eat up more Pe — ople , 
then would subdue and win Constantinople . 
OH rouse thee , rouse thee , then brave man of Action , 
Make Fur-gowned peace burst into Armed faction : 
thou hast a pate that canst the State unsettle , 
Be as thou hast been then , a man of mettle 
And now base Cowardice doth seem to rust us , 
Into some worthy business , quickly thrust us , 
Now show thyself a noble Ahashuerus , 
And once more make our braving foes to fear us , 
Do thou but lead us on , and look but Grimly 
And make no doubt , we 'll do the business trimly . 
Amongst all the tools of war , be thou great OH Toole , 
And never let the world esteem thee no Foole. 
OH make the wheel of reeling State , and Fate turn 
In spite of sullen melancholy Saturn 
To Arms , but from the Arms of lustful Venus 
I do entreat thy warlike care to wean us. 
Let not the prick-eared power , of proud Priapus 
In bonds of painted Courtesans entrap us , 
And Rouse us from our Acts and thoughts libidinous , 
That ( Traytorlike ) in ambush do lie hid in us. 
Let not thy Tents of worthless Martial discipline , 
Be turned to stinking Tap-houses to tipple in : 
But make the freezing pot of numb-cold war-boyle , 
And bubble to a hurly burly Garboil : 
Do as thou hast done oft most noble Spartan , 
Strike silken peace into a fever Quartane ; 
Or else like Phoebus in his hot Meridian , 
Astonish all the world with a Quotidian . 
I know thy worth the world doth all admire on , 
then clad thyself in burnished steel and Iron . 
I know that all men knows thou hast been tried well , 
Discreetly thou canst talk , fight , run and ride well , 
I know the reach of thy politic skull , can 
Pluck rugged Mars from out the bed of Vulcan , 
To make war roar more loud than any Bull can , 
I know thou canst do more than any Gull can . 
I know thou hold'st it Valour's ignominy . 
To spend thy days in peaceful whip her Ginny . 
Thy name & voice , more feared than Guy of Warwick , 
Or the rough Rumbling , roaring Meg of Berwick . 
We should do some what , if we once were Roused , 
And ( being Lousy ) we might then be Lowsed . 
Encourage Soldiers to demean them like men , 
And measure Velvet with their Pikes brave Pikemen . 
Let shouts & clamours , Woods , groves , dales , & hills fill , 
With dreadful noise & cries of follow , follow , kill , kill , 
Let Drums cry dub , dub , and let Cannons thunder , 
Tantara Trumpet's , and let Cowards wonder : 
Let Muskets bounce , bounce , let the Welkin rumble , 
Let Towns , Turrets , topsy-turvy tumble , 
Do this ( as well I know thou canst do 't wisely ) 
Exceeding careless , fearless and precisely , 
And then thy Fame shall farther far be noised , 
then Titan's rays , or justice scales are poised . 
And since thou knowest man's time on earth is short all , 
Let mortal Actions make thy name Immortal . 
Envoy . 

Ivdge OH you Gentiles , what is written is probable , 
And though it seem a babble , yet 't is no babble . 
Doom amongst ill tinges , that the best is meant all , 
And what 's amiss , pray take as accidental , 
For like a puny practising Astronomy , 
And knows no grounds nor rules so far o'regon am I : 
In diving to his valour's whirlpit bottom , 
That like the Reverend Sages of old Gotam , 
I now perceive how much I overshot am : 
I 'll wade no further in 't , but in brief brevity , 
Abrupt , absurd , abject , thus cast thus leave it I 
These forced Rhymes , fully stuffed with fruitless labour , 
Hath Curried my poor brainpan like a Tabor : 
And to recure me from this strange quandary , 
Hence Vsquebaugh , and welcome sweet Canary . 
FINIS . 

