THE PENNYLES PILGRIMAGE , OR The Moneyless perambulation , of JOHN TAYLOR , Alias the King's Majesty's Water-poet . 

HOW HE TRAVAILED ON FOOT from London to Edinburgh in Scotland , not carrying any Money to or from , neither Begging , Borrowing , or Ask Meat , drink or Lodging . 

With his Description of his Entertainment in all places of his journey , and a true Report of the unmatchable Hunting in the Brea of Marre and Badenoch in Scotland . 

With other Observations , some serious and worthy of Memory , and some merry and not hurtful to be Remembered . 

Lastly that ( which is Rare in a Traveller ) all is true . 

LONDON Printed by Edw : All de , at the charges of the Author . 1618.  

TO THE TRULY NOBLE , AND RIGHT Honourable Lord , GEORGE Marquesse of Buckingham , Viscount VILLEIRS , Baron of Whaddon , justice in Eyre of all his Majesty's Forests , Parks , and Chases beyond Trout , Master of the Horse to his Majesty , and one of the Gentlemen of his Highness' Royal Bedchamber , Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter , and one of his Majesty's most Honourable Privy Council of both the Kingdoms of England and Scotland . 

Right Honourable , and worthy honoured Lord , as in my Travails , I was Entertained , welcomed , and relieved by many Honourable Lords , Worshipful Knights , Esquires , Gentlemen , and others , both in England , & Scotland . So now your Lordship's Inclination hath incited , or invited my poor Muse to shelter herself under the shadow of your Honourable Patronage , not that there is any worth at all in my sterile invention , but in all Humility I acknowledge that it is only your Lordship's acceptance , that is able to make this nothing , something , and withal engage me ever . 

Your Honours , in all observance : JOHN TAYLOR . 

To all my loving Adventurers , by what name or title so ever , my general salutation . 

Reader , these Travails of mine into Scotland , were not undertaken , neither in imitation , or emulation of any man , but only devised by myself , on purpose to make trial of my friends , both in this Kingdom of England , and that of Scotland , and because I would be an eye witness of diverse things which I had heard of that Country ; and whereas many shallow-brained Critics , do lay an aspersion on me , that I was set on by others , or that I did undergo this project , either in malice , or mockage of Master Benjamin jonson , I vow by the faith of a Christian , that their imaginations are all wide , for he is a Gentleman , to whom I am so much obliged for many undeserued courtesies that I have received from him , and from others by his favour , that I durst never to be so impudent or ingrateful , as either to suffer any man's persuasions , or mine own instigation , to incite me , to make so bad a requital , for so much goodness formerly received ; so much for that , and now Reader , if you expect 

That I should write of City's situations , 
Or that of Countries I should make relations : 
Of brooks , crooks , nooks ; of rivers , boorns and rills , 
Of mountains , fountains , Castles , Towers & hills , 
Of Shires , and Peers , and memorable things , 
Of lives and deaths of great commanding Kings : 
I touch not those , they not belong to me , 
But if such things as these you long to see , 
Lay down my Book , and but vouchsafe to reed 
The learned Camden , or laborious Speede.  


And so God speed you and me , whilst I rest yours in all thankfulness : JOHN TAYLOR . 

TAILOR'S PENNILESS PILGRIMAGE . 

List Lordings , list ( if you have lust to list ) 
I write not here a tale of had I wist : 
But you shall hear of travels , and relations , 
Descriptions of strange ( yet English ) fashions . 
And he that not believes what here is written , 
Let him ( as I have done ) make proof of it . 
The year of grace , accounted ( as I ween ) 
One thousand , twice three hundred and eighteen , 
And to relate all things in order duly , 
'T was Tuesday last ; the fourteenth day of july , 
Saint Revels day , the Almanac will tell ye 
The sign in Virgo was , or near the belly : 
The Moon full three days old , the wind full South ; 
At these times I began this trick of youth . 
I speak not of the Tide ; for understand , 
My legs I made my Oars , and rowed by land , 
Though in the morning I began to go , 
Good fellows trooping , flocked me so , 
That make what hast I could , the Sun was set , 
Ever from the gates of London I could get . 
At last I took my latest leave , thus late 
At the Bell Inn , that 's extra Aldersgate . 
There stood a horse that my provant should carry , 
From that place to the end of my fegary , 
My Horse , no Horse , or Mare , but gelded Nag , 
That with good understanding bore my bag : 
And of good carriage he himself did show , 
These things are excellent in a beast , you know . 
There , in my Knapsack , ( to pay hungers fees ) 
I had good Bacon , Biscuit , Neates-tongue , Cheese , 
With Roses , Barbaries , of each Conserves , 
And Mithridate , that vigrous health preserves ; 
And I entreat you take these words for no-lyes , 
I had good Aqua vita , Rosa so-lies : 
With sweet Ambrosia , ( the Gods own drink ) 
Most excellent gear for mortals , as I think . 
Besides , I had both vinegar and oil , 
That could a daring saucy stomach foil . 
This foresaid Tuesday night betwixt eight and nine , 
Well rigged and ballaced , both with Beer and Wine , 
I stumbling forward , thus my jaunt begun , 
And went that night as far as Islington . 
There did I find , ( I dare affirm it bold ) 
A Maidenhead of twenty five years old , 
But surely it was painted , like a whore , 
And for a sign , or wonder , hanged at ' door , 
Which show , a Maidenhead , that 's kept so long , 
May be hanged up , and yet sustain no wrong . 
There did my loving friendly Host begin 
To entertain me freely to his Inn : 
And there my friends , and good associates , 
Each one to mirth himself accommodates . 
At Well head both for welcome , and for cheer , 
Having a good New ton , of good stale Beer : 
There did we Trundle down health , after health 
( Which oftentimes impairs both health and wealth . ) 
Till every one had filled his mortal Trunk , 
And only Nobody was three parts drunk . 
The morrow next , Wednesday Saint Swithins day , 
From ancient Islington I took my way . 
At Hollywell I was enforced carouse , 
Ale high , and mighty , at the Blinde-mans' house . 
But there 's a help to make amends for all , 
That though the Ale be great , the Pots be small . 
At Highgate hill to a strange house I went , 
And saw the people were to eating bend , 
I neither Borrowed , Craved , Asked , Begged or Bought , 
But most laborious with my teeth I wrought . 
I did not this cause meat or drink was scant , 
But I did practise thus before my want ; 
Like to a Tilter that would win the prize , 
Before the day he 'll often excercise . 
So I began to put in ure , at first 
These principles against hunger , and against thirst , 
Close to the Gate , their dwelled a worthy man , 
That well could take his whiff , and quaff his Can , 
Right Robin Goodfellow , but humours evil 
Do call him Robin Pluto , or the Devil . 
But finding him a Devil , freely hearted , 
With friendly farewells I took leave and parted . 
And as alongst I did my journey take , 
I drank at Broomes-well , for pure fashions sake . 
Two miles I traveled then , without a bait , 
The Saracens head at Whetstone entering strait , 
I found an Host , might lead an Host of men , 
Exceeding Fat , yet named Lean , and Few , 
And though we make small reckoning of him here , 
he 's known to be a very Great man there . 
There I took leave , of all my Company , 
Bade all farewell , yet spoke to Nobody . 
Good Reader think not strange , what I compile , 
For Nobody was with me all this while . 
And Nobody did drink , and wink , and scinke , 
And on occasion freely spend his Chink . 
If any one desire to know the man , 
Walke , stumble , Trundle , but in Barbican . 
there 's as good Beer and Ale as ever twanged , 
And in that street kind Nobody is hanged , 
But leaving him , unto his matchless fame , 
I to St. Albans in the Evening came , 
Where Mr. Taylor , at the Saracens head , 
Unasked ( unpaid for ) me both lodged and said . 
The Tapsters , Ostlers , Chamberlains , and all , 
Saved me a labour , that I need not call , 
The jugges were filled and filled , the cups went round , 
And in a word great kindness there I found , 
For which both to my Cousin , and his men , 
I 'll still be thankful in word , deed , and pen. 
Till Thursday morning there I made my stay , 
And then I went plain Dunstable highway . 
My very hart with drought me thought did shrink , 
I went twelve miles , and no one bade me drink . 
Which made me call to mind , that instant time , 
That Drunkenness was a most sinful crime . 
When Puddle-hill I footed down , and past 
A mile from thence I found a Hedge at last . 
There struck we sail , our Bacon , Cheese and Bread 
We drew like Fiddlers , and like Farmers fed , 
And whilst 2. hours we there did take out ease , 
My Nag made shifted to mump green Pulse and Pease . 
Thus we our hungry stomaches did supply , 
And drank the water of a Brook hard by . 
A way t'ward Hockley in the hole , we make , 
When strait a Horsman did me overtake , 
Who knew me , and would sane have given me Coin , 
I said my Bonds did me from Coin enjoin . 
I thanked and prayed him to put up his Chink , 
And willingly I wished it drowned in drink . 
Away Road he , but like an honest man , 
I found at Hockley standing at the Swan , 
A formal Tapster , with a jugge and glass , 
Who did Arrest me , I most willing was 
To try the Action , and strait put in bale , 
My fees were paid before , with sixpences Ale. 
To quit this kindness , I most willing am 
The man that paid for all , his name is Dam 
At the green Dragon , against Grayes-iune gate , 
He lives in good Repute , and honest state . 
I forward went in this my Roving race , 
To Stony Stratford I toward night did pace , 
My mind was fixed through the Town to pass , 
To find some Lodging in the Hay or Grass , 
But at the Queen's Arms from the window there , 
A comfortable voice I chanced to hear , 
Call Tailor , Taylor and be hanged come hither , 
I looked for small entreaty and went thither , 
There were some friends , which I was glad to see , 
Who knew my journey ; lodged , and boarded me . 
On Friday morn , as I would take my way , 
My friendly Host entreated me to stay , 
Because it Reigned he told me I should have , 
Meat , Drink , and Horse-meat and not pay or crave . 
I thanked him , and for 's love remain his debtor , 
But if I live , I will requite him better . 
( From Stony Stratford , the way hard with stones ) 
Did founder me , and vex me to the bones , 
In blustering weather , both for wind and Rain , 
Through Tocetter I trotted , with much pain , 
Two miles from thence , we sat us down and bind , 
Well Bulwarked by a hedge , from rain and wind . 
We having fed , away incontinent , 
With weary pace toward Daventry we went , 
Four miles short of it , one o'ertook me there , 
And told me he would leave a jugge of Beer , 
At Daventry at the Horse-shoe , for my use , 
I thought it no good manners to refuse , 
But thanked him , for his kind unasked gift , 
Whilst I was lame as scarce a leg could lift , 
Came ilmping after to that stony Town , 
Whose hard streets , made me almost halt tied down . 
There had my friend performed the words he said , 
And at the door a jugge of liquor stayed 
The folks were all informed , before I came , 
How , and wherefore my journey I did frame , 
Which caused mine Hostess from her door come out , 
( having a great Wart Rampant on her snout . ) 
The Tapsters , Ostlers , one another call , 
The Chamberlains with admiration all , 
Were filled with wonder , more than wonderful , 
As if some Monster sent from the Mogul , 
Some Elephant from Africa , I had been , 
Or some strange beast from th' Amazonian Queen . 
As Buzzards , Widgions , Woodcocks , and such fowl , 
Do gaze and wonder at the broad-faced Owl , 
So did these brainless Asses , allamazed , 
With admirable Non sense talked and gazed . 
They knew my state , ( although not told by me , ) 
That I could scarcely go , they all did see , 
They drank of my Beer , that to me was given , 
But gave me not a drop , to make all eeven . 
And that which in my mind was most amiss , 
My Hostess she stood by and saw all this , 
Had she but said , come near the house my friend , 
For this day here shall be your journeys end , 
then had she done , the thing which she did not , 
And I in kinder words had paid the shot . 
I do entreat my friends , ( as I have some ) 
If they to Daventry do chance to come , 
That they will balk that Inn ; or if by chance , 
Or accident into that house they glance , 
Kind Gentlemen , as they by you reap profit , 
My hostess Care of me , pray tell her of it . 
Yet do not neither , Lodge there when you will , 
You for your money shall be welcome still . 
From thence that night , although my bones were sore , 
I made a shift to hobble seau'n miles more : 
The way to Dunchurch , foul with dirt and mire , 
Able , I think , both man and horse to tyre . 
On Dunsmore Heath , a hedge doth there enclose 
Grounds , on the right hand , there I did repose . 
Wit's whetstone , want , there made us quickly learn , 
With knives to cut down Rushes , and green Fern , 
Of which we made a field-bed in the field , 
Which fleepe , and rest , and much content did yield . 
There with my mother Earth , I thought it fit 
To lodge , and yet no Incest did commit : 
My bed was Curtained with good wholesome airs , 
And being weary , I went up no stairs : 
The sky my Canopy , bright Pheabe shined , 
Sweet bawling Zephyrus breathed gentle wind , 
In heaven's Star Chamber I did lodge that night , 
Ten thousand Stars , me to my bed did light ; 
There barricaded with a bank lay we 
Below the lofty branches of a tree , 
There my bedfellows and companions were , 
My Man , my Horse , a Bull , four Cows , two Steere : 
But yet for all this most confused rout , 
We had no bed-staves , yet we fell not out , 
Thus Nature , like an ancient free Upholster , 
Did furnish us with bedstead , bed , and bolster ; 
And the kind skies , ( for which high Heaven be thanked , 
Allowed us a large Covering and a Blanket : 
Aurora's face 'gan light our lodging dark . 
We arose and mounted , with the mounting Lark , 
Through plashes , puddles , thick , thin , wet and dry , 
I travailed to the City Coventry . 
There Master Doctor Holland caused me stay 
The day of Saturn , and the Sabaoth day . 
Most friendly welcome , he did me afford , 
I was so entertained at bed and board , 
Which as I dare not brag how much it was , 
I dare not be ingrate and let it pass , 
But with thanks many I remember it 
( In stead of his good deeds ) in words and written , 
He used me like his son , more than a friend , 
And he on Monday his commends did send 
To Newhall , where a Gentleman did dwell , 
Who by his name is height Sacheverell . 
The Tuesday julyes' one and twenteth day , 
I to the City Lichfield took my way , 
At Sutton Coffill with some friends I met , 
And much ado I had from thence to get , 
There I was almost put unto my trumps , 
My Horse's shoes were worn as thin as pumps ; 
But noble Vulcan , a mad smuggy Smith , 
All reparations me did furnish with . 
The shoes were well removed , my Palfrey shod , 
And he referred the payment unto God. 
I found a friend , when I to Lichfield came , 
A joiner , and john Piddock is his name , 
He made me welcome , for he knew my jaunt , 
And he did furnish me with good provant : 
He offered me some money , I refused it , 
And so I took my leave , with thanks excused it . 
That Wednesday I a weary way did pass , 
Rain , wind , stones , dirt , and dabbling dewy grass , 
With here and there a pelting scattered village , 
Which yielded me no charity , or pillage : 
For all the day , nor yet the night that followed , 
One drop of drink I 'm sure my gullet swallowed . 
At night I came t' a stony Town called Stone , 
Where I knew none , nor was I known of none : 
I therefore through the streets held on my pace , 
Some two miles farther to some resting place : 
At last I spied a meadow newly mowde , 
The Hay was rotten , the ground half o're-flowde : 
We made a breach , and entered horse and man , 
There our pavilion , we to pitch began , 
Which we erected with green Broome and Hay 
T' expel the cold , and keep the rain away ; 
The sky all muffled in a cloud 'gan lower , 
And presently there sell a mighty shower , 
Which without intermission down did pour , 
From ten at night , until the morning's four . 
We all that time close in our Couch did lie , 
Which being well compacted , kept us dry . 
The worst was , we did neither sup nor sleep , 
And so a temperate diet we did keep . 
The morning all enroabed in drizzling fogs , 
We being as ready as we had been dogs : 
We need not stand upon long ready making , 
But gaping , stretching , and our ears well shaking : 
And for I found my Host and Hostess kind , 
I like a true man left my sheets behind . 
That Thursday morn , my weary course I framed , 
Unto a Town that is Newcastle named , 
( Not that Newcastle standing upon Tine ) 
But this Town's situation doth confine 
Near Cheshiere , in the famous County Stafford , 
And for their love , I owe them not a straw for 't ; 
But now my versing Muse craves some repose , 
And whilst she sleeps I 'll spout a little prose . 
In this Town of Newcastle , I overtook an Ostler , and I asked him what the next town was called , that was in my way toward Lancaster , he holding the end of a riding rod in his mouth , as if it had been a Fluit , piped me this answer , and said , Talk on the hill ; I asked him again what he said , Talk on the hill : I demanded the third time , and the third time he answered me as he did before , Talk on the hill . I began to grow choleric , and asked him why he could not talk , or tell me my way as well there , as on the hill ; at last I was resolved , that the next Town was four miles off me , and the name of it was , Talk on the hill . I had not travailed above two miles farther : but my last night's supper ( which was as much as nothing ) my mind being informed of it by my stomach . I made a virtue of necessity , and went to breakfast in the sun : I have sared better at three suns many a time before now , in Aldersgate street , Creeplegate , and new Fish-street ; but here is the odds , at those Suns they will come upon a man with a Tavern bill , as sharp cutting as a Tailor's bill of Items : A Watchman's blil , or a Welch-hooke falls not half so heavy upon a man ; besides , most of the Vintners have the law in their own hands , and have all their Actions , Cases , Bills of Debt , and such reckonings tried at their own Bars ; from whence there is no appeal . But leaving these impertinencies , in the material Sunne-shiee , we eat a substantial Dinner , and like miserable Guests we did budget up the Reversions . 

And now with sleep , my Muse hath eased her brain . 
I 'll turn my stile from prose , to verse again . 
That which we could not have , we freely spared , 
And wanting drink , most soberly we fared . 
We had great store of fowl ( but 't was foul way ) 
And kindly every step entreats me stay , 
The clammy clay sometimes my heels would trip , 
One foot went forward , th' other back would slip . 
This weary day , when I had almost past , 
I came unto Sir Vrian Legh's at last , 
At Adlington , near Macksfield he doth dwell , 
Beloved , respected , and reputed well . 
Through his great love , my stay with him was fixed , 
From Thursday night , till noon on Monday next , 
At his own table I did daily eat , 
Whereat may be supposed , did want no meat , 
He would have given me Gold or Silver either , 
But I with many thanks , received neither . 
And thus much without flattery I dare swear , 
He is a Knight beloved far and near . 
First he 's beloved of his God above , 
( which love , he loves to keep , beyond all love ) 
Next with a Wife and Children he is blessed , 
Each having Gods fear planted in their breast . 
With fair Domains , Revenue of good Lands , 
he 's fairly blessed by the Almighty's hands , 
And as he 's happy in these outward things , 
So from his inward mind , continual springes 
Fruits of Devotion , deeds of Piety , 
Good hospitable works of Charity , 
Just in his Actions , Constant in his word , 
And one that won his honour with his sword . 
he 's no Carranto , Capr'ing , Carpet Knight , 
But he knows when , and how to speak or fight . 
I cannot flatter him , say what I can , 
he 's every way a complete Gentleman . 
I write not this , for what he did to me , 
But what mine ears , and eyes did hear and see , 
Nor do I pen this to enlarge his fame , 
But to make others Imitate the same . 
For like a Trumpet were I pleased to blow , 
I would his worthy worth more amply show , 
But I already fear have been too bold , 
And crave his pardon , me excused to hold . 
Thanks to his Sons and servants every one , 
Both males and females all , excepting none . 
To bear a letter he did me require , 
Near Manchester , unto a good Esquire : 
His kinsman Edmond Prestwitch , he ordained , 
That I at Manchester was Entertained 
Two nights , and one day , ere we thence could pass , 
For Men and Horse , Rost , boiled , and Oats , and Grass : 
This Gentleman , not only gave me harbour , 
But in the morning sent to me his Barber , 
Who laved , and shaved me , still I spared my purse , 
Yet sure he left me many a hair the worse . 
But in conclusion , when his work was ended , 
His Glass informed , my face was much amended . 
And for the kindness he to me did show , 
God grant his Customers beards faster grow , 
That though the time of year be dear or cheap , 
From fruitful faces he may mow and reap . 
then came a Smith , with Shoes , and Tooth and Nail , 
He searched my Horse hoofs , mending what did fail , 
Yet this I note , my Nag , through stones and dirt , 
Did shifted shoes twice , ere I did shifted one shirt : 
Can these kind things be in oblivion hid ? 
no , Mr. Prestwitch , this and much more did , 
His friendship did command , and freely gave 
All before written , and more than I durst crave . 
But leaving him a little , I must tell , 
How men of Manchester , did use me well , 
Their loves they on the tenterhookss did rack , 
Rost , Boiled , Baked , too too much , White , Claret , Sack , 
Nothing they thought too heavy or too hot , 
Can followed Can , and Pot succeeded Pot , 
That what they could do , all they thought too little , 
Striving in love the Traveller to whittle . 
We went unto the house of one john Pinner's , 
( A man that lives amongst a crew of Sinners ) 
And there Eight several sorts of Ale we had , 
All able to make one stark drunk or mad . 
But I with courage bravely flinched not , 
And gave the Town leave to discharge the shot . 
We had at one time set upon the Table , 
Good Ale of Hisope , 't was no Esope Fable : 
then had we Ale of Sage , and Ale of Malt , 
And Ale of Wormwood , that can make one halt , 
With Ale of Rosemary , and Bettony , 
And two Ales more , or else I needs must lie . 
But to conclude this drinking A lie tale , 
We had a sort of Ale , called Scurvy Ale. 
Thus all these men , at their own charge and cost , 
Did strive whose love might be expressed most . 
And farther to declare their boundless loves , 
They saw I wanted , and they gave me Gloves , 
In deed , and very deed , their loves were such , 
That in their praise I cannot write too much ; 
They merit more than I have here compiled , 
I Lodged at the Eagle and the Child , 
Whereas my Hostess , ( a good Ancient woman ) 
Did entertain me with respect , not common . 
She caused my Linen , Shirts , and Bands be washed , 
And on my way she caused me be refreshed , 
She gave me twelve Silk points , she gave me Baken , 
Which by me much refused , at last was taken , 
In troth she proved a mother unto me , 
For which , I evermore will thankful be . 
But when to mind these kindnesses I call , 
Kind Mr. Prestwitch Author is of all , 
And yet Sr. Vrian Leigh's good Commendation 
Was the main ground of this my Recreation . 
From both of them ; there what I had , I had , 
Or else my entertainment had been bad . 
OH all you worthy men of Manchester , 
True bred bloods of the County Lancaster ) 
When I forget what you to me have done , 
then let me headlong to confusion run . 
To Noble Mr. Prestwach I must give 
Thanks , upon thanks , as long as I do live , 
His love was such , I never can pay the score , 
He far surpassed all that went before , 
A horse and man he sent , with boundless bounty , 
To bring me quite through Lancaster's large County . 
Which I well know is Fifty miles at large , 
And he defrayed all the Cost and charge . 
This unlooked pleasure , was to me such pleasure , 
That I can never express my thanks with measure . 
So Mistress Saracoale , Hostess kind , 
And Manchester with thanks I left behind . 
The Wednesday being julyes' twenty nine , 
My journey I to Preston did Confine , 
All the day long it rained but one shower , 
Which from the Morning to the Ene'n did pour , 
And I , before to Preston I could get , 
Was sowsd , and pickled both with Rain and sweated . 
But there I was supplied , with fire and food , 
And any thing I wanted , sweet and good . 
There , at the Hind , kind Mr. Hind mine Host , 
Kept a good table , Baked and boiled , and Rost , 
There Wedensday , Thursday , Friday I did stay , 
And hardly got from thence on Saturday . 
Unto my Lodging often did repair , 
Kind Mr. Thomas Banister , the Mayor , 
Who is of worship , and of good Respect , 
And in his Charge discreet and circumspect . 
For I protest to God I never saw , 
A Town more wisely Governed by the Law. 
They told me when my Sovereign there was last , 
That one man's rashness , seemed to give distaste ▪ 
It grieved them all , but when at last they found , 
His Majesty was pleased , their joys were crowned , 
He knew the fairest Garden hath some weeds , 
He did accept their kind intents , for deedess 
One man there was , that with his zeal too hot . 
And furious haste , himself much over ▪ shot . 
But what man is so foolish , that desire's 
To get good Fruit , from thistles , thorns and briers ? 
Thus much I thought good to demonstrate here , 
Because I saw how much they grieved were . 
That any way , the least part of offence , 
Should make them seem offensive to their Prince . 
Thus three nights was I stayed and lodged in Preston , 
And saw nothing ridiculous to jest on , 
Much cost and charge the Mayor upon me spent , 
And on my way two miles , with me he went , 
There ( by good chance ) I did more friendship get , 
The under Sheriff of Lancashire , we met , 
A Gentleman that loved , and knew me well , 
And one whose bounteous mind doth bear the bell . 
There , as if I had been a noted thief , 
The Mayor delivered me unto the Sheriff . 
The Shreive's authority did much prevail , 
He sent me unto one that kept the jail . 
Thus I perambulating , poor john Taylor , 
Was given from Mayor to Sheriff , from Sheriff to jailor , 
The jailor kept an Inn , good beds , good cheer , 
Where paying nothing , I found nothing dear . 
For the under Sheriff kind Master Covill named , 
( A man for housekeeping renowned and famed ) 
Did cause the Town of Lancaster afford 
Me welcome , as if I had been a Lord 
And 't is reported , that for daily bounty , 
His mate can scarce be found in all that County . 
Th'extremes of miser , or of prodigal 
He shuns , and lives discreet and liberal , 
His wife's mind , and his own are one , so fixed , 
That Argos eyes could see no odds betwixt , 
And sure the difference , ( if there difference be ) 
Is who shall do most good , or he , or she . 
Poor folk's reports , that for relieving them , 
He and his wife , are each of them a gem ; 
At th'inne , and at his house two nights I stayed , 
And what was to be paid , I know he paid ; 
If nothing of their kindness I had written , 
Ingrateful me the world might justly note : 
Had I declared all I did hear and see , 
For a great flatt'rer than I deemed should be , 
He and his wife , and modest daughter Bess , 
With Earth and Heaven's felicity , God bless . 
Two days a man of his at his command , 
Did guide me to the midst of Westmoreland , 
And my Conductor , with a liberal fist 
To keep me moist , scarce any Alehouse mist. 
The fourth of August ( weary , halt , and lame ) 
We in the dark , t a Town called Sebder came , 
There Master Borrowed , my kind honest Host , 
Upon me did bestow unasked cost . 
The next day I held on my journey still , 
Six miles unto a place called Carling hill , 
Where Master Edmond Branthwaite doth reside , 
Who made me welcome , with my man and guide . 
Our entertainment , and our fare was such , 
It might have satisfied our betters much ; 
Yet all too little was , his kind heart thought , 
And five miles on my way himself me brought , 
At Orton he , I , and my man did dine 
With Master Corney , a good true Divine , 
And surely Master Branthwait's well beloved , 
His firm integrity is much approved : 
His good effects , doth make him still affected 
Of God and good men , ( with regard ) respected . 
He sent his man with me , o'er Dale and Downe , 
Who lodged , and boarded me at Peereth Town , 
And such good cheer , and bedding there I had , 
That nothing , ( but my weary self ) was bad ; 
There a fresh man , ( I know not for whose sake ) 
With me a journey would to Carlisle make ; 
But from that City , about two miles wide 
Good Sir john Dalston lodged me and my guide . 
Of all the Gentlemen in England bounds , 
His house is nearest to the Scottish grounds , 
And Fame proclaims him , far and near , aloud , 
he 's free from being covetous , or proud : 
His son Sir George , most affable , and kind , 
His father's image , both in form and mind : 
On Saturday to Carlisle both did ride , 
Where ( by their loves and leaves ) I did abide , 
Where of good entertainment I found store , 
From one that was the Mayor the year before , 
His name is Master Adam Robinson , 
I the last English friendship with him wone . 
He ( gratis ) found a guide to bring me through , 
From Carlisle to the City Edinborough : 
This was a help , that was a help alone , 
Of all my helps inferior unto none . 
Fight miles from Carlisle runs a little River , 
Which England's bounds , from Scotland's grounds doth sever . 
Without Horse , Bridge , or Boat I o'er did get 
On foot , I went yet scarce my shoes did wet . 
I being come to this long looked for land , 
Did mark , remark , note , renote , viewed and scanned : 
And I saw nothing that could change my will , 
But that I thought myself in England still . 
The Kingdoms are so nearly joined and fixed , 
There scarcely went a pair of Sheares betwixt ; 
There I saw sky above , and earth below , 
And as in England , there the Sun did show : 
The hills with Sheep replete , with Corn the dale , 
And many a cottage yielded good Scotch Ale ; 
This County ( Avandale ) in former times , 
Was the cursed climate of rebellious crimes : 
For Cumberland and it , both Kingdom's borders , 
Were ever ordered , by their own disorders , 
Such sha' king , shifting , cutting throats , and thieving , 
Each taking pleasure , in the others grieving ; 
And many times he that had wealth to night , 
Was by the morrow morning beggared quite : 
To many years this pellmell fury lasted , 
That all these borders were quite spoilt and wasted , 
Confusion , hurly-burly reigned and reveld , 
The Churches with the lowly ground were levelled ; 
All memorable monuments defaced , 
All places of defence o'erthrown and razed . 
That who so then did in the borders dwell , 
Lived little happier than those in hell . 
But since the all-disposing God of heaven , 
Hath these two Kingdoms to one Monarch given , 
Blessed peace , and plenty on them both hath showered 
Exile , and hanging hath the thieves devoured , 
That now each subject may securely sleep , 
His Sheep , and neat , the black the white doth keep , 
For now those Crowns are both in one combined 
Those former borders , that each one confined , 
Appears to me ( as I do understand ) 
To be almost the Centre of the land , 
This was a blessed heaven expounded riddle , 
To thrust great Kingdoms skirts into the middle . 
Long may the instrumental cause survive 
From him and his , succession still derive 
True heirs unto his virtues , and his throne , 
That these two Kingdoms ever may be one . 
This County of all Scotland is most poor , 
By reason of the outrages before , 
Yet mighty store of Corn I saw there grow , 
And as good grass as ever man did mow : 
And as that day I twenty miles did pass , 
I saw eleven hundred Neat at grass , 
By which may be conjectured at the least , 
That there was sustenance for man and beast . 
And in the Kingdom I have truly scanned , 
there 's many worse parts , are better manned , 
For in the time that thieving was in ure , 
The Gentles fled to places more secure . 
And left the poorer sort , t' abide the pain , 
Whilst they could never find time to turn again . 
That Shire of Gentlemen is scarce and dainty , 
Yet there 's relief in great abundance plenty , 
'twixt it and England , little odds I see , 
They eat , and live , and strong and able be , 
So much in Verse , and now I 'll change my stile , 
And seriously I 'll write in Prose a while . 


To the purpose then ; my first night's Lodging in Scotland was at a place called Mophot , which they say is thirty miles from Carlisle , but I suppose them to be longer than forty of such miles as are betwixt London and S. Albans , ( but indeed the Scots do allow almost as large measure of their miles , as they do of their drink , for an English Gallon either of Ale or Wine , is but their quart , and one Scottish mile now and then may well stand for a mile and a half or two English ) but howsoever short or long , I found that day's journey the weariest that ever I footed ; and at night being come to the Town , I found good ordinary Country entertainment ; my fare , and my lodging was sweet and good , and might have served a far better man than myself , although myself have had many times better : but this is to be noted , that though it Reigned not all the day , yet it was my fortune to be well wet twice , for I waded over a great River called Eske in the morning , somewhat more than 4. miles' distance from Carlisle in England , and at night within two miles of my lodging , I was fain to wade over the River of Annan in Scotland , from which River the County of Annandale hath its name . And whilst I waded on foot , my man was mounted on horseback , like the George without the Dragon . But the next morning , I arose and left Mophot behind me , and that day I travailed twenty one miles to a sorry Village called Blithe , but I was blithe myself to come to any place of harbour or succour , for since I was born , I never was so weary , or so near being dead with extreme travel ; I was foundered and refounderd of all four , and for my better comfort , I came so late , that I must lodge without door all night , or else in a poor house where the good wife lay in Childbed , her husband being from home , her own servant Maid being her nurse . A Creature naturally compacted and artificially adorned with incomparable homelines ; but as things were I must either take or leave , and necessity made me enter , where we got Eggs and Ale by measure and by tale . At last to bed I went , my man lying on the floor by me , where in the night there were Pigeons did very bountifully mute in his face : the day being no sooner come , and I having but fifteen miles to Ederborough , mounted upon my ten toes , and began first to hobble , and after to Amble , and so being warm , I fell to pace by degrees ; all the way passing through a most plentiful , and fertile Country for Corn and dattle : and about two of the clock in the afternoon that Wednesday , being the thirteenth of August , and the day of Clare the Virgin ( the Sign being in Virgo ) the Moon four days old , the wind at , West , I came to take rest , at the wished , long expected , Ancient famous City of Edinburgh , which I entered like pierce penniless , altogether monyles , but I thank God not friendless ; for being there , for the time of my stay I might borrow , ( if any man would lend ) spend if I could get , beg if I had the impudence , and steal if I durst adventure the price of a hanging , but my purpose was to house my horse , and to suffer him and my Apparel to Lie in durance , or Lavender in stead of Litter , till such time , as I could meet with some valiant friend that would desperately disburse . 

Walking thus down the street , ( my body being tired with Travel , and my mind attired with moody , muddy , More-ditch melancholy ) my Contemplation did devoutly pray , that I might meet one or other to prey upon , being willing to take any slender acquaintance of any man whatsoever , viewing , and circumuiewing every man's face I met , as if I meant to draw his picture , but all my acquaintance was Non est inventus , ( pardon me Reader , that Latin is none of mine own , I swear by Priscian's Pericranion , an oath which I have ignorantly broken many times . ) At last I resolved , that the next Gentleman that I met withal , should be acquaintance whether he would or no , and presently fixing mine eyes upon a Gentlemanlike object , I looked on him as if I would survey something through him , and make him my perspective : and he much musing at my gazing , and I much gazing at his musing , at last he crossed the way and made toward me , and then I made down the street from him , leaving him to encounter with my man who came after me leading my Horse , whom he thus Accosted . My friend ( quoth he ) doth yonder Gentleman , ( meaning me ) know me that he looks so wistly on me ; truly Sr. said my man I think not , but my Mr. is a stranger come from London , and would gladly meet with some acquaintance to direct him where he may have lodging and horse-meat : presently the Gentleman , ( being of a generous disposition ) overtook me with unexpected and undeserued courtesy , brought me to a lodging , and caused my Horse to be put into his own Stable , whilst we discoursing over a pint of Spanish . I related as much English to him as made him lend me Ten shillings , ( his name was Mr. john Maxwell ) which money I am sure was the first that I handled after I came from out the walls of London : but having rested two hours and refreshed myself , the Gentleman and I walked to see the City , and the Castle , which as my poor unable and unworthy pen can , I will truly describe . 

The Castle on a lofty Rock is so strongly grounded , bounded , and founded , that by force of man it can never be confounded ; the Foundation and Walls are unpenetrable , the Rampire's Impregnable , the Bulwarks Invincible , no way but one to it is or can be possible to be made passable . In a word , I have seen many straits and Fortresses , in Germany , the Netherlands , Spain , and England , but they must all give place to this unconquered Castle both for strength and Situation . 

amongst the many memorable things which I was showed there , I noted especially a Great piece of Ordinance of Iron , it is not for battery , but it will serve to defend a breach , or to toss balls of wildfire against any that should assail or assault the Castle ; it lies now dismounted . And it is so great within , that it was told me that a Child was once gotten there , but I to make trial crept into it , lying on my back , and I am sure there was Room enough and spare for a greater than myself . 

So leaving the Castle , as it is both defencive against any opposition , and magnific for Lodging and Receipt , I descend lower to the City , wherein I observed the fairest and goodliest Street that ever mine eyes beheld , for I did never see or hear of a street of that length , ( which is half an English mile from the Castle to a fair Port which they call the Neather-bow ) and from that Port the street which they call the Kenny-hate is one quarter of a mile more : down to the King's Palace called Holy-rood-house , The buildings on each side of the way being all of squared stone , five , six , and seven Stories high , and many by Lanes and Closes on each side of the way , wherein are Gentleman's houses , much fairer than the buildings in the high street , for in the High-street the Merchants and Tradesmen do dwell , but the Gentleman's mansions and goodliest Houses are obscurely founded in the aforesaid Lanes : the Walls are eight or ten Foot thick , exceeding strong , not built for a day , a week , or a month , or a year ; but from Antiquity to Posterity , for many Ages ; There I found entertainment beyond my expectation or merit , and there is Fish , Flesh , Bread and Fruit , in such variety , that I think I may offenceless call it superfluity , or satiety . The worst was , that Wine and Ale was so scarce , and the people there such Miser's of it , that every night before I went to bed , if any man had asked me a Civil question , all the wit in my head could not have made him a Sober answer . 

I was at his Majesty's Palace , a Stately and princely seat , wherein I saw a sumptuous Chapel most richly adorned , with all apurtenances belonging to so sacred a place , or so Royal an owner . In the inner Court , I saw the King's Arms cunningly carved in stone , and fixed over a door aloft on the wall , the red Lion being the Crest , over which was written this inscription in Latin , Nobis haec invicta miserunt , 105. proavi . 


I enquired what the English of it was ? it was told me as followeth , which I thought worthy to be recorded . 106.  Forefathers hath left this to us unconquered . 


This is a worthy and a memorable Motto , and I think few Kingdoms or none in the world can truly write the like , that notwithstanding so many inroads ▪ incursions , attempts , assaults , civil wars , and foreign hostilities , bloody battles , and mighty fought fields , that maugre the strength and policy of enemies , that Royal Crown and Sceptre hath from one hundred and seven descents , keep still unconquered , and by the power of the King of Kings ( through the grace of the Prince of peace ) is now left peacefully to our peaceful King , whom long in blessed peace , the God of peace defend and govern . 

But once more , a word or two of Edinborough , although I have scarcely given it that due which belongs unto it , for their lofty and stately buildings , and for their fair and spacious street , yet my mind persuades me that they in former ages that first founded that City , did not so well in that they built it in so discommodious a place ; for the Sea , and all navigable Rivers , being the chief means for the enriching of Towns and Cities , by the reason of Traffic with foreign Nations , with exportation , transportation , and receit of variety of Marchantdizing ; so this City had it been built but one mile lower on the Sea side , I doubt not but it had long before this been comparable to many a one of our greatest Towns and Cities in Europe , both for spaciousness of bounds , Port , state , and riches . It is said that King james the fifth ( of famous memory ) did graciously offer to purchase for them , and to bestow upon them freely , certain low and pleasant grounds a mile from them on the Sea shore , with these conditions , that they should pull down their City , and build it in that more commodious place , but the Citizens refused it : and so now it is like ( for me ) to stand where it doth , for I doubt such another proffer of removeall will not be presented to them , till two days after the Fair . 

Now have with you for Leeth , whereto I no sooner came , but I was well entertained by Mr. Barnard Lindsay , one of the Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber , he knew my estate was not guilty , because I brought no guilt with me ( more than my sins , and they would not pass for current there ) he therefore did replenish the vaustity of my empty purse , and discharged a piece at me with two bullets of gold , each being in value worth eleven shillings white money : and I was credibly informed that within the compass of one year , there was shipped away from that only Port of Leeth , fourscore thousand Bowls of Wheat , Oats , and Barley , into Spain , France , and other foreign parts , and every Bowl contains the measure of four English bushels , so that from Leeth only hath been transported three hundred and twenty thousand bushels of Corn ; besides some hath been shipped away from St. Andrew's , from Dundee , Aberdeene , Disert , Kirkady , Kinghorne , Burnt-iland , Dunbar , and other portable Towns , which makes me to wonder that a Kingdom so populous as it is , should nevertheless sell so much bread corn beyond the Seas , and yet to have more than sufficient for themselves . 

So I having viewed the Haven and Town of Leeth , took a passage Boat to see the new wondrous Well , to which many a one that is not well , comes far and near in hope to be made well : indeed I did hear that it had done much good , and that it hath a rare operation to expel or kill diverse maladies ; as to provoke appetite , to help much for the avoiding of the gravel in the bladder , to cure sore eyes , and old ulcers , with many other virtues which it hath , but I ( through the mercy of God having no need of it , did make no great inquisition what it had done , but for novelty I drank of it , and I found the taste to be more pleasant than any other water , sweet almost as milk , yet as clear as crystal , and I did observe that though a man did drink a quart , a pottell , or as much as his belly could contain , yet it never offended or lay heavy upon the stomach , no more than if one had drank but a pint or a small quantity . 

I went two miles from it to a town called Burnt-iland , where I found many of my especial good friends , as M. Robert Hay , one of the Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber , Master David Drummond , one of his Gentlemen Pensioners ▪ Master james Acmooty , one of the Grooms of the Privy Chamber , Captain M●rray , Sir Henry Witherington Knight , Captain Tyrie , and diverse others ▪ and there Master Hay , Master Drummond , and the good old Captain Murray , did very bountifully furnish me with gold for my expenses , but I being at dinner with those aforesaid Gentlemen , as we were discoursing , there befell a strange accident , which I think worth the relating . 

I know not upon what occasion they began to talk of being at Sea in former times , and I ( amongst the rest ) said I was at the taking of Cales , whereto an English Gentleman replied , that he was the next good voyage after at the Lands : I answered him that I was there also . He demanded in what Ship I was ? I told him in the Rainbow of the Queens , why ( quoth he ) do you not know me ? I was in the same Ship , and my name is Witherington . 

Sir , said I , I do remember the name well , but by reason that it is near two and twenty years since I saw you , I may well forget the knowledge of you : well , said he , if you were in that Ship , I pray you tell me some remarkable token that happened in the voyage : whereupon I told him two or three tokens which he did know to be true . Nay then said I , I will tell you another which ( perhaps ) you have not forgotten ; as our Ship and the rest of the fleet did ride at Anchor at the I 'll of Flores ( one of the Isles of the Azores ) there were some fourteen men and boys of our Ship , that for novelty would go a shore , and see what fruit the I land did bear , and what entertainment it would yield us : so being landed , we went up and down and could find nothing but stones , heath and moss , and we expected Oranges , Limonds , Figs , Muske-millions , and Potatoes : in the mean space the wind did blow so stiff , and the Sea was so extreme rough , that our Shipboate could not come to the land to fetch us , for fear she should be beaten in pieces against the rocks ; this continued five days , so that we were all almost famished for want of food : but at last ( I squandring up and down ) by the providence of God I happened into a Cave or poor habitation , where I found fifteen loaves of bread , each of the quantity of a penny loaf in England , I having a valiant stomach of the age of almost 120. hours breeding , fell too , and eat two loaves and never said grace : and as I was about to make a Horse-loaf of the third loaf , I did put 12. of them into my breeches , and my sleeves , and so went mumbling out of the Cave , leaning my back against a tree , when upon the sudden a Gentleman came to me and said , friend what are you eating , bread quoth I , for God's sake said he give me some , with that I put my hand into my breech , ( being my best pantrey ) and I gave him a Loaf , which he received with many thanks , and said that if ever he could requite it he would . 

I had no sooner told this tale but Sr. Henry Witherington did acknowledge himself to be the man that I had given the Loaf unto 22. years before , where I found the Proverb true that men have more privilege than mountains in meeting . 

In what great measure , he did requite so small a courtesy , I will relate in this following discourse in my Return through Northumberland : So leaving my man at the town of Burned Island , I told him , I would but go to Sterling , and see the Castle there , and withal to see my honourable friends the Earl of Marr , and Sir William Murray Knight , Lord of Abercarny , and that I would return within two days at the most : But it fell out quite contrary ; for it was five and thirty days before I could get back again out of these Nobleman's company . The whole progress of my travel with them , and the cause of my stay , I cannot with gratefulness omit ; and thus it was . 

A worthy Gentleman , named Master john Fenton , did bring me on my way six miles , to Dumfermling , where I was well entertained , and lodged at Master john Gibb his house , one of the Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber , and I think the oldest Servant the King hath : withal I was well entertained there by Master Crighton at his own house , who went with me , and showed me the Queen's Palace ; ( a delicate and a princely Mansion ) withal I saw the ruins of an ancient and stately built Abbey , with fair Gardens , Orchards , and Meadows belonging to the palace : all which with fair and goodly Revenues , by the suppression of the Abbey , were annexed to the Crown . There also I saw a very fair Church , which though it be now very large and spacious , yet it hath in former times been much larger . But I taking my leave of Dumfermling , would needs go and see the truly noble Knight Sir George Bruce , at a Town called the Cooras : there he made me right welcome , both with variety of fare , and discourse ; and after all , he commanded three of his men to direct me to see his most admirable Colemines ; which ( if man can or could work wonders ) is a wonder : for myself neither in any travels that I have been in , nor any History that I have read , or any Discourse that I have heard , did never see , read , or hear of any work of man that might parallel or be equivalent with this unfellowed and unmatchable work : and though all I can say of it , cannot describe it according to the worthiness of his vigilant industry , that was both the occasion , Inventor , and Maintainer of it : yet rather than the memory of so rare an Enterprise , and so accomplished a profit to the Commonwealth shall be raked and smothered in the dust of oblivion , I will give a little touch at the description of it , although I amongst Writers , am like he that worst may , holds the candle . 

The Mine hath two ways into it , the one by sea and the other by land ; but a man may go into it by land , and return the same way if he please , and so he may enter into it by sea , and by Sea he may come forth of it : but I for variety's sake went in by Sea , and out by land Now men may object , how can a man go into a Mine , the entrance of it being in the Sea , but that the Sea will follow him and so drown the Mine . To which objection thus I answer , That at a low water , the Sea being ebbed away , and a great part of the sand bare ; upon this same sand ( being mixed with rocks and crags ) did the Master of this great work build a round circular frame of stone , very thick , strong , and joined together with glutinous or bitunous matter , so high withal ▪ that the Sea at the highest flood , or the greatest rage of storm or tempest , can neither dissolve the stones so well compacted in the building , or yet overflowe the height of it . Within this round frame , ( at all adventures ) he did set workmen to dig with Mattocks , Pickaxes , and other instruments fit for such purposes . They did dig more than forty foot downright , into and through a Rock . At last they found that which they expected , which was Sea-coal , they following the vein of the Mine , did dig forward still : So that in the space of eight and twenty , or nine and twenty years they have digged more than an English mile under the Sea , that when men are at work below , an hundred of the greatest Ships in Britain may sail over their ●●●adss . Besides , the Mine is most artificially cut like an Arch or a Vault all that great length , with many nooks and byways in it : and it is so made , that a man may walk upright in the most places , both in and out . Many poor people are there set on work , which otherwise through the want of employment would perish . But when I had seen the Mine , and was come forth of it again ; after my thanks given to Sir George Bruce , I told him , that if the plotters of the Powder Treason in England had seen this Mine , that they ( perhaps ) would have attempted to have left the Parliament House , and have undermined the Thames , and so to have blown up the Barges and Wherries , wherein the King , and all the Estates of our Kingdom were . Moreover , I said that I could afford to turn Tapster at London : so that I had but one quarter of a mile of his Mine to make me a Cellar , to keep Beer and Bottle-ale in . But leaving these jests in Prose , I will relate a few Verses that I made merrily of this Mine . 

I That have wasted Months , Weeks , Days and Hours 
In viewing Kingdoms , Countries , Towns and Towers , 
Without all measure , measuring many paces , 
And with my pen describing sundry places , 
With few additions of my own devizing , 
( Because I have a smack of Coriatizing . ) 
Our Mandevill , Primaleon , Don Quixot , 
Great Amadis , or Huon travelled not 
As I have done , or been where I have been , 
Or heard and seen , what I have heard and seen ; 
Nor Britain's Odcomb ( Zanye brave Vlissis ) 
In all his ambling saw the like as this is . 
I was in ( would I could describe it well ) 
A dark , light , pleasant , profitable hell , 
And as by water I was wafted in , 
I thought that I in Charon's Boat had been : 
But being at the entrance landed thus , 
Three men there ( in the stead of Cerberus ) 
Conveyed me in , in each one's hand a light 
To guide us in that vault of endless night . 
There young and old with glim'ring candles burning , 
Dig , delve , and labour , turning and returning , 
Some in a hole with baskets and with bags , 
Resembling furies , and infernal hags : 
There one like Tantal feeding , and there one , 
Lake Sisyphus he rolls the restless stone . 
Yet all I saw was pleasure mixed with profit , 
Which proved it to be no tormenting Tophet ; 
For in this honest , worthy , harmless hell , 
There never did any damned Devil dwell : 
And th' owner of it gains by 't more true glory , 
then Rome doth by fantastic Purgatory . 
A long mile thus I passed , down , down , steep steep , 
In deepness far more deep , than Neptune's deep , 
Whilst o'er my head ( in fourefould stories hie ) 
Was Earth , and Sea , and Air , and Sun , and Sky : 
That had I died in that Cimmerian room . 
Four Elements had covered o'er my tomb : 
Thus farther than the bottom did I go , 
( And many Englishmen have not done so ; ) 
Where mounting Porpoises , and mountain Whales , 
And Regiments of fish with fins and Scales , 
'twixt me and Heaven did freely glide and slide , 
And where great Ships may at an Anchor ride : 
Thus in by sea and out by land I passed , 
And took my leave of good Sir George at last . 


The Sea at certain places doth leak , or soak into the Mine , which by the industry of Sir George Bruce , is all conveyed to one well near the land ; where he hath a device like a horsemill that with three horses and a great chain of Iron , going downward many fathoms , with thirty six buckets fastened to the chain , of the which eighteen goes down still to be filled , and eighteen ascends up to be emptied , which do empty themselves ( without any man's labour ) into a trough that conveys the water into the Sea again ; by which means he saves his Mine which otherwise would be destroyed with the Sea , beside he doth make every week ninety or an hundred Tuns of salt , which doth serve part of Scotland , some he sends into England , and very much into Germany : all which shows the painful industry with God's blessings to such worthy endeavours : I must with many thanks remember his courtesy to me , and lastly , how he sent his man to guide me ten miles on the way to Sterling , where by the way I saw the outside of a fair and stately house called Allaway , belonging to the Earl of Marr , which by reason that his Honour was not there , I passed by and went to Sterling , where I was entertained and lodged at one Mr. john Archibalds , where all my want was that I wanted room to contain half the good cheer that I might have had there ; he had me into the Castle , which in few words I do compare to Windsor for situation , much more than Windsor in strength , and somewhat less in greatness ; yet I dare affirm , that his Majesty hath not such another hall to any house that he hath neither in England nor Scotland , except Westminster Hall which is now no dwelling Hall for a Prince being long since metamorphosed into a house for the Law and the profits . 

This goodly Hall was built by King james the fourth , that married King Henry the eights sister and after was slain at Flodden field ; but it surpasses all the halls for dwelling houses that ever I saw , for length , breadth , height and strength of building , the Castle is built upon a rock very lofty , and much beyond Edinburgh Castle in state and magnificence , and not much inferior to it in strength , the rooms of it are lofty , with carved works on the ceilings , the doors of each room being so high that a man may ride upright on horseback into any chamber or lodging . There is also a goodly fair Chapel , with Cellars , Stables , and all other necessary Offices , all very stately and besitting the Majesty of a King.  

From Sterling I road to Saint johnston , a fine Town it is , but it is much decayed , by reason of the want of his Majesty's yearly coming to lodge there . There I lodged one night at an Inn , the Goodman of the house his name being Patrick Pettcarne , where my entertainment was with good cheer , good drink , good lodging , all too good to a bad weary guest . Mine Host told me that the Earl of Marr and Sir William Murray of Abercarny were gone to the great hunting to the Brea of Marre ; but if I made hast I might perhaps find them at a Town called Breekin , or Breechin , two and thirty miles from Saint johns' Stone , whereupon I took a guide to Breekin the next day , but before I came , my Lord was gone from thence four days . 

then I took another guide , which brought me such strange ways over mountains and rocks , that I think my horse never went the like ; and I am sure I never saw any ways that might fellow them . I did go through a Country called Glaneske , where passing by the side of a hill , so steep as is the ridge of a house , where the way was rocky , and not above a yard broad in some places , so fearful and horrid it was to look down into the bottom , for if either horse or man had slipped , he had fallen ( without recovery ) a good mile downright ; but I thank God , at night I came to a lodging in the Lard of Eggells' Land , where I lay at an Irish house , the folks not being able to speak scarce any English , but I supped and went to bed , where I had not lain long but I was enforced to rise , I was so stung with Irish Musketaes' , a Creature that hath six legs , & lives like a monster altogether upon man's flesh , they do inhabit and breed in most sluttish houses , and this house was none of the cleanliest , the beast is much like a louse in England , both in shape and nature ; in a word they were to me the A. and the Z. the Prologue and the Epilogue , the first and the last that I had in all my travels from Edinburgh ; and had not this highland Irish house helped me at a pinch , I should have sworn that all Scotland had not been so kind as to have bestowed a Louse upon me : but with a shift that I had , I shifted off my Cannibals , and was never more troubled with them . 

The next day I traveled over an exceeding high mountain , called mount Skeene , where I found the valley very warm before I went up it ; but when I came to the top of it , my teeth began to dance in my head with cold , like Virginal jacks ; and withal , a most familiar mist embraced me round , that I could not see thrice my length any way : withal , it yielded so friendly a dew , that it did moisten through all my clothes : Where the old Proverb of a Scottish Mist was verified , in wetting me to the skin . Up and down , I think this hill is six miles , the way so uneven , stony , and full of bogs , quagmires , and long heath , that a dog with three legs will outrun a horse with four : for do what we could , we were four hours before we could pass it . 

Thus with extreme travel , ascending and descending , mounting & alighting , I came at night to the place where I would be , in the Brea of Marr , which is a large County , all composed of such mountains , that Shooter's Hill , Gad's Hill , Highgate Hill , Hampsted hill , Birdlip hill , or Maluerne hills , are but Mole ▪ hills in comparison , or like a Liver , or a Gizzard under a Capon's wing , in respect of the altitude of their tops , or perpendicularitie of their bottoms . There I saw Mount Benawne , with a furred mist upon his snowy head in stead of a nightcap : ( for you must understand , that the oldest man alive never saw but the snow was on the top of diverse of those hills , both in Summer , as well as in Winter . ) There did I find the truly Noble and Right Honourable Lords , john Erskin Earl of Marr , james Stuart Earl of Murray , George Gordon Earl of Engye , son and heir to the Marquesse of Huntley , james Erskin , Earl of Bughan , and john Lord Erskin , son and heir to the Earl of Marre , and their Countesses , with my much honoured , and my best assured and approved friend , Sir William Murray Knight , of Abercarnye , and hundred of others Knights , Esquires , and their followers ; all and every man in general in one habit , as if Lycurgus had been there and made Laws of Equality : For once in the year , which is the whole month of August , and sometimes part of September ; many of the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom ( for their pleasure ) do come into these high-land Countries to hunt , where they do all conform themselves to the habit of the high-land men , who for the most part speak nothing but Irish ; and in former time were those people which were called the Redshankeses : Their habit is shoes with but one sole apiece ; stockings ( which they call short hose ) made of a warm stuff of diverse colours , which they call Tartane : as for breeches , many of them , nor their forefathers never wore any , but a jerkin of the same stuff that their hose is of , their garters being bands or wreathes of hay or straw , with a pled about their shoulders , which is a mantle of diverse colours , much finer and lighter stuff than their hose , with blue flat caps on their heads , a handkerchief knit with two knots about their necks : and thus are they attired . Now their weapons are long bows , and forked arrows , Swords and Targets , Harquebuses , Muskets , Durks and Loquhabor Axes . With these Arms I found many of them armed for the hunting . As for their Attire , any man of what degree soever that comes amongst them , must not disdain to wear it : for if they do , than they will disdain to hunt , or willingly to bring in their dogs : but if men be kind unto them , and be in their habit ; then are they conquered with kindness , and the sport will be plentiful . This was the reason that I found so many Noblemen and Gentlemen in those shapes . But to proceed to the Hunting . 

My good Lord of Marr having put me into that shape , I road with him from his house , where I saw the ruins of an old Castle , called the Castle of Kindroghit . It was built by King Malcolm Canmore ( for a hunting horse ) who reigned in Scotland when Edward the Confessor , Harold , and Norman William reigned in England : I speak of it , because it was the last house that I saw in those parts ; for I was the space of twelve days after , before I saw either house , corn field , or habitation for any creature , but Dear , wild Horses , Wolves , and such like Creatures , which made me doubt that I should never have seen a house again . 

Thus the first day we travelled 8. miles , where there were small cottages built on purpose to lodge in , which they call Lonquhards , I thank my good Lord Erskin , he commanded that I should always be lodged in his lodging , the Kitchen being always on the side of a bank , many Kettles and Pots boiling , and many spits turning and winding , with great variety of cheer : as Venison baked , sodden , roast , and stu'de Beef , Mutton , Goats , Kid , Hares , fresh Salmon , Pigeons , Hens , Capons , Chickens , Partridge , Moorecoots , Heathcocks , Caperkellies and Termagants ; good Ale , Sack , White and Claret , Tent ( or Alicant ) with most potent Aqua vitae . 

All these and more than these we had continually , in superfluous abundance , caught by Falconers , Foulers , and Fishers , and brought by my Lords tenants and purveyors to victual our Camp , which consisted of fourteen or fifteen hundred men and horses ; the manner of the hunting is this . Five or six hundred men do rise early in the morning , and they do disperse themselves diverse ways , and 7.8 . or 10. miles' compass they do bring or chase in the Deer in many herds , ( two , three , or four hundred in a heard ) to such or such a place as the Noblemen shall appoint them ; then when day is come , the Lords and Gentlemen of their Companies , do ride or go to the said places , sometimes wading up to the middles through bournes and rivers : and then they being come to the place , do lie down on the ground , till those foresaid Scouts which are called the Tinckhell do bring down the Dear : But as the Proverb says of a bad Cook , so these Tinkhell men do lick their own fingers ; for besides their bows and arrows which they carry with them , we can hear now and then a harguebuse or a musket go off , which they do seldom discharge in vain : then after we had stayed three hours or thereabouts , we might perceive the Deer appear on the hills round about us , ( their heads making a show like a wood ) which being followed close by the Tinkhell , are chased down into the valley where we lay ; then all the valley on each side being waylaid with a hundred couple of strong Irish Greyhounds , they are let loose as occasion serves upon the heard of Deer , that with Dogs , Guns , Arrows , Durks and Daggers , in the space of two hours fourscore fat Deer were slain , which after are disposed of some one way and some another , twenty or thirty miles , and more then enough left for us to make merry withal at our Rendezvous . I liked the sport so well , that I made these two Sonnets following . 

Why should I wast Invention to indite , 
Ovidian fictions , or Olympian games ? 
My misty Muse enlightened with more light , 
To a more noble pitch her aim She frames . 
I must relate to my great Master JAMES , 
The Calydonian anuall peaceful war ; 
How noble minds do eternize their fames 
By martial meeting in the Brea of Marr : 
How thousand gallant Spirits come near and far , 
With Swords and Targets , Arrows , Bows and Guns , 
That all the Troop to men of judgement , are 
The God of Wars great never conquered Sons . 
The Sport is Manly , yet none bleed but Beasts , 
And last , the Victors on the Vanquished feasts . 
IF Sport like this can on the Mountains be , 
Where Phoebus' flames can never melt the Snow : 
then let who lift delight in Vales below , 
Sky-kissing Mountain pleasures are for me : 
What braver object can man's eyesight see , 
then Noble , Worshipful , and worthy wights , 
As if they were prepared for sundry fights , 
Yet all in sweet society agree : 
Through Heather , Moss , amongst frogs , and bogs , and fogs , 
Amongst craggy cliffs , and thunder battered hills , 
Hares , Hinds , Bucks , Rees are chased by Man and Dogs , 
Where two hours Hunting fourscore fat Deer kills . 
Low lands , your Sports are low as is your Seat , 
The High-land Games and Minds , are high and great . 


Being come to our lodgings , there was such Baking , Boiling , Roasting , and Stewing , as if Cook Ruffian had been there to have scalded the Devil in his feathers : and after supper a fire of fir wood as high as an indifferent Maypole : for I assure you , that the Earl of Marre will give any man that is his friend , for thanks , as many Fir trees ( that are as good as any ships masts in England ) as are worth ( if they were in any place near the Thames , or any other portable River ) the best Earldom in England or Scotland either : For I dare affirm he hath as many growing there , as would serve for masts ( from this time to the end of the world ) for all the Ships , Carackes' , Hoys , Galleys , Boats , Drumlers , Barks , and Water-craftes , that are now , or can be in the world these forty years . 

This sounds like a lie to an unbeliever ; but I and many thousands do know that I speak within the compass of truth : for indeed ( the more is the pity ) they do grow so far from any passage of water , and withal in such rocky Mountains , that no way to convey them is possible to be passable either with Boat , Horse , or Cart.  

Thus having spent certain days in Hunting in the Brea of Marr , we went to the next County called Bagenoch , belonging to the Earl of Engye , where having such sport and entertainment as we formerly had ; after four or five day's pastime , we took leave of hunting for that year ; and took our journey toward a strong house of the Earls , called Ruthen in Bagenoch , where my Lord of Engye and his noble Countess ( being daughter to the Earl of Argile ) did give us most noble welcome three days . 

From thence we went to a place called Ballo Castle , a fair and stately house ; a worthy Gentleman being the owner of it , called the Lard of Grant ; his wife being a Gentlewoman honourably descended , being sister to the right Honourable Earl of Athol , and to Sir Patrick Murray Knight ; she being both inwardly and outwardly plentifully adorned with the gifts of Grace and Nature : so that our cheer was more than sufficient ; and yet much less than they could afford us. There stayed there four days , four Earls , one Lord , diverse Knights and Gentlemen , and their servants , footmen and horses ; and every meal four long Tables furnished with all varieties : Our first and second course being threescore Dishes at one board ; and after that always a Banquet : and there if I had not forsworn wine till I came to Edinbrough , I think I had there drank my last . 

The fifth day with much ado we gate from thence to Tarnaway , a goodly house of the Earl of Murrayes , ●●here that right Honourable Lord and his Lady did welcome us four days more . There was good cheer in all variety , with somewhat more than plenty for advantage : for indeed the County of Murray is the most pleasantess , and plentifullest Country in all Scotland ; being plain land , that a Coach may be driven more than four and thirty miles one way in it , all alongst by the Sea-coast . 

From thence I went to Elgen in Murray , an ancient City , where there stood a fair and beautiful Church with three steeples , the walls of it and the steeples all yet standing ; but the Roof , Windows , and many Marble Monuments and Tombs of honourable and worthy personages all broken and defaced : this was done in the time when ruin bore rule , and Knox knocked down Churches . 

From Elgen we went to the B. of Murray his house which is called Spiny , or Spinaye . A reverend Gentleman he is , of the noble name of Douglas , where we were very well welcomed , as befitted the honour of himself and his guests . 

From thence we departed to the Lord Marquesse of Huntley's , to a sumptuous house of his , named the Bogg of Geethe , where our entertainment was like himself , free , bountiful and honourable . There ( after two days stay ) with much entreaty and earnest suit , I gate leave of the Lords to depart towards Edinbrough : the Noble Marquesse , the Earls of Marr , Murray , Engie , Bughan , and the Lord Erskin ; all these , I thank them , gave me gold to defray my charges in my journey . 

So after five and thirty days hunting and travel , I returning , past by another stately mansion of the Lord Marquesses , called Stroboggy , and so over Carny mount to Breekin , where a wench that was born deaf and dumb came into my chamber at midnight ( I being asleep ) and she opening the bed , would fain have lodged with me : But had I been a Sardanapalus , or a Heliogobalus , I think that either the great travel over the Mountains had tamed me ; or if not , her beauty could never have moved me . The best parts of her were , that her breath was as sweet as sugar-carrion , being very well shouldered beneath the waste ; and as my Hostess told me the next morning , that she had changed her Maidenhead for the price of a Bastard not long before . But howsoever , she made such a hideous noise , that I started out of my sleep , and thought that the Devil had been there : but I no sooner knew who it was , but I arose , and thrust my dumb beast out of my chamber ; and for want of a lock or a latch , I staked up my door with a great chair . 

Thus having escaped one of the seven deadly sins at Breekin , I departed from thence to a Town called Forfard ; and from thence to Dundee , and so to Kinghorne , Burned Island , and so to Edinbrough , where I stayed eight days , to recover myself of falls and bruises which I received in my travel in the high-land mountainous Hunting . Great welcome I had showed me all my stay at Edinbrough , by many worthy Gentlemen , namely , old Master George Todrigg , Master Henry Levingston , Master james Henderson , Master john Maxwell , and a number of others , who suffered me to want no wine or good cheer , as may be imagined . 

Now the day before I came from Edinbrough , I went to Leeth , where I found my long approved and assured good friend Master Benjamin johnson , at one Master john Stuarts house : I thank him for his great kindness towards me : for at my taking leave of him , he gave me a piece of gold of two and twenty shillings to drink his health in England . And withal , willed me to remember his kind commendations to all his friends : So with a friendly farewell , I left him , as well , as I hope never to see him in a worse estate : for he is amongst Noblemen and Gentlemen that knows his true worth , and their own honours , where with much respective love he is worthily entertained . 

So leaving Leeth , I returned to Edinbrough , and within the port or gate , called the Netherbowe , I discharged my pockets of all the money I had : and as I came penniless within the walls of that City at my first coming thither ; so now at my departing from thence , I came monesse out of it again ; having in my company to convey me out , certain Gentlemen , amongst the which was Master james Acherson , Laird of Gasford , a Gentleman that brought me to his house , where with great entertainment he and his good wife did welcome me . 

On the morrow he sent one of his men to bring me to a place , called Adam , to Master john Acmootye his house , one of the Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber ; where with him , and his two brethren , Master Alexander , and Master james Acmootye , I found both Cheer and Welcome not inferior to any that I had had in any former place . 

amongst our viands that we had there , I must not forget the Sole and Goose , a most delicate Fowl , which breeds in great abundance in a little Rock called the Base , which stands two miles into the Sea. It is very good flesh , but it is eaten in the form as we eat Oysters , standing at a side-boord , a little before dinner , unsanctified without grace ; and after it is eaten , it must be well liquored with two or three good rouses of Sherry or Canary sack . The Lord or Owner of the Base doth profit at the least two hundred pound yearly by those Geese ; the Base itself being of a great height , and near three quarters of a mile in campasse , all fully replenished with Wildfowle , having but one small entrance into it , with a house , a garden , and a Chapel in it ; and on the top of it a Well of pure fresh water . 

From Adam Mr. john and Mr. james Acmootye went to the Town of Dunbar with me , where ten Scottish pints of wine were consumed and brought to nothing for a farewell : there at Master james Baylies house I took leave , and Master james Acmootye coming for England , said , that if I would ride with him , that neither I nor my horse should want betwixt that place and London . Now I having no money or means for travel , began at once to examine my manners , and my want : at last my want persuaded my manners to accept of this worthy Gentleman's undeserued courtesy . So that night he brought me to a place called Cober spath , where we lodged at an Inn , the like of which I dare say , is not in any of his Majesty's Dominions . And for to show my thankfulness to Master William Arnet and his wife , the owners thereof , I must a little explain their bonntifull entertainment of guests , which is this : 

Suppose ten , fifteen , or twenty men and horses come to lodge at their house , the men shall have flesh , tame and wildfowl , fish , with all variety of good cheer , good lodging , and welcome ; and the horses shall want neither hay or provender : and in the morning at their departure the reckoning is just nothing . This is this worthy Gentleman's use , his chief delight being only to give strangers entertainment gratis : And I am sure , that in Scotland beyond Edinbrough ▪ I have been at houses like Castles for building ; the Master of the house his Beaver being his blue Bonnet , one that will wear no other shirts , but of the Flax that grows in his own ground ; and of his wives , daughters , or servants spinning ; that hath his Stockings , Hose , and jerkin of the Wool of his own sheep's backs ; that never ( by his pride of Apparel ) caused Mercer , Draper , Silkman , Embroiderer , or Haberdasher to break and turn bankrupt : and yet this plain homespun fellow keeps and maintains thirty , forty , fifty servants , or perhaps more , every day relieving three or fourscore poor people at his gate ; and besides all this , can give Noble entertainment for four or five days together to five or six Earls and Lords , besides Knights , Gentlemen & their followers , if they be three or four hundred men and horse of them , where they shall not only feed but feast , and not feast but banquet , this is a man that desire's to know nothing so much as his duty to God and his King whose greatest cares are to practise the works of Piety , Charity , and Hospitality : he never studies the consuming Art of fashionlesse fashions , he never tries his strength to bear four or five hundred Acres on his back at once , his legs are always at liberty , not being fettered with golden garters , and manacled with artificial Roses , whose weight ( sometime ) is the last Relics of some decayed Lordship : Many of these worthy housekeepers there are in Scotland , amongst some of them I was entertained ; from whence I did truly gather these aforesaid observations . 

So leaving Coberspath we road to Berwick , where the worthy old Soldier and ancient Knight , Sir William Bowyer , made me welcome ; but contrary to his will , we lodged at an Inn , where Mr. james Acmooty paid all charges : but at Berwick there was a grievous chance happened , which I think not fit the relation to be omitted . 

In the River of Tweed , which runs by Berwick are taken by Fishermen that dwell there , infinite numbers of fresh Salmon , so that many households and families are relieved by the profit of that Fishing ; but ( how long since I know not ) there was an order that no man or boy whatsoever should Fish upon a Sunday : This order continued long amongst them , till some eight or nine weeks before Michaelmas last , on a Sunday , the Salmon played in such great abundance in the River , that some of the Fishermen ( contrary to God's law and their own order ) took boats and nets and Fished , and caught near three hundred Salmon ; but from that time until Michaelmas day that I was there which was nine weeks , and heard the report of it , and saw the poor people's miserable lamentations , they had not seen one Salmon in the River ; and some of them were in despair that they should never see any more there ; affirming it to be God , judgement upon them for the profanation of the Saboth . 

The thirtieth of September we road from Berwick to Belford , from Belford to Anwick the next day from Anwick to Newcastle , where I found the noble Knight , Sir Henry Witherington ; who , because I would have no gold nor silver , gave me a bay Mare , in requital of a loaf of bread that I had given him two and twenty years before , at the lland of Flores , of the which I have spoken before . I overtook at Newcastle a great many of my worthy friends , which were all coming for London , namely , Master Robert Hay , and Master David Drummond , where I was well welcomed at Master Nicholas Tempests house . From Newcastle I road with those Gentlemen to Durham , to Darington , to Northallerton , and to Topeliffe in Yorkshire , where I took my leave of them , and would needs try my penniless fortunes by myself , and see the City of York , where I was lodged at my Right Worshipful good friends , Master Doctor Hudson one of his Majesty's Chaplains , who went with me , and showed me the goodly Minster Church there , and the most admirable , rare-wrought , unfellowed Chapter house . 

From York I road to Doncaster , where my horses were well fed at the Bear , but myself found out the honourable Knight , Sir Robert Anstruther at his father in laws , the truly noble Sir Robert Swifts house , he being then high Sheriff of Yorkshire , where with their good Ladies , and the right Honourable the Lord Sanquhar , I was stayed two nights and one day , Sir Robert Anstruther ( I thank him ) not only paying for my two horse's meat , but at my departure , he gave me a Letter to Newarke upon Trent , twenty eight miles in my way , where Mr. George Atkinson mine host made me as welcome as if I had been a French Lord , and what was to be paid , as I called for nothing , I paid as much ; and left the reckoning with many thanks to Sir Robert Anstruther . 

So leaving Newarke , with another Gentleman that overtook me , we came at night to Stamford , to the sign of the Virginity ( or the Maidenhead ) where I delivered a Letter from the Lord Sanquhar ; which caused Master Bates and his wife , being the Master and Mistress of the house , to make me and the Gentleman that was with me great cheer for nothing . 

From Stamford the next day we road to Huntingdon , where we lodged at the Postmasters house , at the sign of the Crown ; his name is Riggs . He was informed who I was , and wherefore I undertook this my penniless Progress : wherefore he came up into our chamber , and supped with us , and very bountifully called for three quarts of Wine and Sugar , and four lugges of Beer . He did drink and begin Healths like a Horseleech , and swallowed down his cups without feeling , as if he had had the dropsy , or nine pound of Sponge in his maw . In a word , as he is a Post , he drank post , striving and calling by all means to make the Reckoning great , or to make us men of great reckoning . But in his payment he was tired like a jade , leaving the Gentleman that was with me to discharge the terrible Shott , or else one of my horses must have lain in pawn for his superfluous calling , and unmannerly intrusion . 

But leaving him , I left Huntingdon , and road on the Sunday to Packeridge , where Master Holland at the Faulkon , ( mine old acquaintance ) and my loving and ancient Host gave me , my friend , my man , and our horses excellent good cheer , and welcome , and I paid him with , Not a penny of money . 

The next day I came to London , and obscurely coming within Moore-gate , I went to a house and borrowed money : And so I stole back again to Islington , to the sign of the Maidenhead , staying till Wednesday that my friends came to meet me , who knew no other , but that Wednesday was my first coming : where with all love I was entertained with much good cheer : and after Supper we had a play of the life and death of Guy of Warwick , played by the Right Honourable the Earl of Derby his men . And so on the Thursday morning being the fifteenth of October , I came home to my house in London . 

THE EPILOGUE TO all my Adventurers and others . 

Thus did I neither spend , or beg , or ask , 
By any course , direct , or indirectly : 
But in each tittle I performed my task , 
According to my bill most circumspectly . 
I vow to God I have done SCOTLAND wrong , 
( And ( justly ) 'gainst me it may bring an Action ) 
I have not given 't that right which doth belong , 
For which I am half guilty of detraction : 
Yet had I wrote all things that there I saw , 
Misjudging censures would suppose I flatter , 
And so my name I should in question draw , 
Where Asses bray , and prattling Pies do chatter : 
Yet ( armed with truth ) I publish with my Pen , 
That there th' Almighty doth his blessings heap , 
In such abundant food for Beasts and Men ; 
That I never saw more plenty or more cheap : 
Thus what mine eyes did see , I do believe ; 
And what I do believe I know is true : 
And what is true unto your hands I give , 
That what I give may be believed of you . 
But as for him that says I lie or dote , 
I do return , and turn the Lie in 's throat . 
Thus Gentlemen , amongst you take my ware , 
You share my thanks , and I your money's share . 
Yours in all observance and gratefulness , ever to be commanded . JOHN TAYLOR . 

FINIS . 





My thanks to Sir john & S. George Dalstone , with Sir Hen : Gurwin Over Eskl waded . The afore named Knights had given money to my Guile of which he left some part at every Ale-hoose . 