AN ENGLISHMAN'S LOVE TO BOHEMIA : 

WITH A friendly Farewell to all the noble Soldiers that go from great Britain to that honourable Expedition . 

AS ALSO , The names of the most part of the Kings , Princes , Dukes , Marquess' , Earls , Bishops , and other friendly Confederates , that are combined with the Bohemian part . 

BY JOHN TAYLOR . 

Printed at Dort. M DC xx.  

We bear the outward form of Martialists , 
But worth and manhood in the mind consists . 
And noble Soldiers that our shapes do see , 
We are but shadows , you the substance be . 




TO THE HONOURABLE WELL APPROVED AND accomplished Soldier , Sir Andrew Grace , Knight ; Colonel of the forces of Great Britain , in this noble Bohemian Preparation . 

SIR ANDREW GRACE . Anagramma . I GARDE IN WARS . 

Honourable Knight : 

There are two especial Causes that have moved me most boldly to thrust these rude lines into the world : the first is my hearty affection to the generality of the cause you undertake , ( which I believe God and his best servants do affect : ) and the other is my love and service which I owe to your worthy self in particular , for many undeserued friendships which I have received from you , and many of your noble friends for your sake . Ingratitude is a Devil , so far worse than all the devils , that if it should crave harbour of me , in the likeness of an Angel of light , yet I would never be persuaded to entertain it . My thankful acknowledgement of your goodness towards me is my prayers and best wishes , which shall ever be a poor requital towards you , not forgetting my thanks in the behalf of all the worthy Ladies and others of that Angelical sex that are married and resident in London , whose chaste honours you ( as became a true Knight ) defended , when an audacious Frenchman most slanderously did ( without exception ) swear there was not one honest woman dwelling within the bounds of this populous City , but that they had all generally abused the bed of marriage : then did your noble self enforce the pestiferous peasant to swallow his odious calumny , and in humility to confess there were fifty thousand or a greater number that never had wronged their husbands in that unlawful act . I have made bold to speak of this matter here , because the abuse was so general , & your quarrel so honourable , which I think unfit to be buried in silence or forgetfulness : howsoever , I crave you pardon and worthy acceptance , whilst I most obsequiously remain 

Ever to be commanded by you , john Taylor . 

A FRIENDLY FAREWELL to all the noble Soldiers that go out of Great Britain unto BOHEMIA . 

Wars , noble Wars , 
and manly brave designs ; 
Where glorious valour 
in bright armour shines : 
Where God with guards of Angels 
doth defend , 
And best of Christian Princes do befriend , 
Where mighty Kings in glittering burnished arms 
Led bloody bruising battles , and alarms , 
Where honour , truth , love , royal reputation , 
Make Realms and Nations join in combination , 
Bohemia , Denmark and Hungaria , 
The upper and the lower Bavaria , 
The two great Counties of the Palatine , 
The King of Sweden friendly doth combine , 
The Marquesse and Elector Brandenburge , 
The Dukes of Brunswick , and of Lunenburge , 
Of Holsten , Deuxpont , and of Wittemberge , 
Of the low-saxons , and of Mackelberge , 
Brave Hessens Lantsgrave , Anholts worthy Prince , 
The enhance Towns , whom force cannot convince : 
Prince Maurice , and the States of Netherlands , 
And th' ancient Knights of th' empire lend their hands . 
These and a number more than I have named , 
Whose worths and valours through the world are famed , 
With many a Marquesse , Bishop , Lord and Knight 
T' oppose foul wrong , and to defend fair right : 
Whose warlike troops assembled bravely are 
To aid a gracious Prince in a just war . 
For God , for Natures , and for Nations laws 
This martial army undertakes this cause ; 
And true born Britain's , worthy countrymen , 
Resume your ancient honours once again . 
I know your valiant minds are sharp and keen 
To serve your Sovereign's daughter , Bohems Queen . 
I know you need no spur to set you on , 
But you think days are years till you are gone ; 
And being gone , you 'll wealth and honour win , 
Whilst riot here at home adds sin to sin . 
You ( God assisting ) may do mighty things , 
Make Kings of captives , and of captives Kings , 
riches and love those that survive shall gain , 
And fame , and Heaven the portion of the slain . 
The wounds and scars more beautiful will make 
Those that do wear them for true honour's sake . 
Since God then in his love did preordain 
That you should be his Champions , to maintain 
His quarrel , and his cause ; a fig for foes , 
God being with you , how can man oppose ? 
Some may object , Your enemies are store : 
If so , your fame and victori's the more ; 
Men do win honour when they cope with men , 
The Eagle will not triumph o'er a wren : 
The Lion with the Mouse will not contend , 
Nor men 'gainst boys and women wars will bend , 
But clouds of dust and smoke , and blood and sweat 
Are the main means that will true honour get . 
Thus to fame's altitude must men aspire 
By noble actions , wone through sword and fire , 
By trumpets clangor , drums , guns , flute or fife : 
For as there is an end to every life , 
And man well knows that one day he must end it , 
Let him keep 't well , defend , and bravely spend it . 
OH grief to see how many stout men lie 
Half rotten in their beds before they die ; 
Some by foul surfeits , some by odious whoring , 
In misery lie stinking and deploring , 
And ever a lingering death their sad life ends , 
They are most tedious loathsome to their friends ; 
Wasting in physic , which adds woe to grief 
That which should yield their family's relief : 
At last when wished death their cares do cure , 
Their names like to their bodies lie obscure . 
Whereas the soldier with a Christian breast , 
Wars for his Sovereign's peace , and Country's rest : 
He to his Maker's will , his will inclines , 
And never 'gainst heaven impatiently repines , 
He to his Saviour says , that thou art mine , 
And being thou redeemest me , I am thine , 
That if I live or die , or die or live , 
Blessed be thy name whether thou take or give . 
This resolution pierces heavens high roof , 
And arms a soldier more than Cannon proof . 
Suppose his life ends by some noble wounds , 
His soul to heaven , from whence it came rebounds : 
Suppose blown up with powder up he fly's , 
Fire his impurity repurifies , 
Suppose a shot pierce through his breast or head 
He nobly lived and nobly he is dead , 
He lies not bedrid stinking , nor doth rave 
Blaspheming against him , that him should save , 
Nor he in Physic doth consume and spend 
That which himself and others should defend , 
He doth not languish , drawing loathsome breath , 
But dies before his friends do wish his death , 
And though his earthly part to earth doth pass , 
His fame out wears a monument of brass . 
Most worthy countrymen , courageous hearts , 
Now is the time , now act brave manly parts , 
Remember you are sons unto such sires 
Whose sacred memories the world admires , 
Make your names fearful to your foes again 
Like Talbot to the French , or Drake to Spain : 
Think on brave valiant Essex , and Mountioy , 
And Sidney , that did England's foes destroy , 
With noble Norris , Williams , and the Veares , 
The Gray's , the Willoughbies all peerless Peers , 
And when you think what glory they have wone , 
Some worthy actions by you will be done . 
Remember Poicteirs , Cressy , Agincourt , 
With Bullen , Turwin , Turnyes warlike sport , 
And more ( our honours higher to advance ) 
Our King of England was crowned King of France , 
In Paris , thus all France we did provoke 
T' obey and serve under the English yoke . 
In Ireland 18 bloody fields we fought , 
And that fierce Nation to subjection brought , 
Besides Tyrones' rebellion , which soul strife 
Cost England many a pound , lost many a life , 
And before we were Scotland's , or it ours , 
How often have we with opposed powers 
In most unneighbourly , unfriendly manners , 
With hostile arms , displaying bloody banners : 
With various victories on either side , 
Now up , now down , our fortunes have been tried , 
What one fight wins , the other losing yields , 
In more than sixscore bloody fought fields . 
But since that we and they , and they and we 
more near than brethren , now conjoined be . 
Those scattering powers we each 'gainst other lead , 
Being one knit body , to one royal head . 
then let this Island , East , West , South and North 
jointly in these brave wars emblaze our worth . 
And as there was a strife , that once befell 
'twixt men of juda , and of Israel : 
Contending which should love King David best , 
And who in him had greatest interest : 
Long may contention only then be thus 
'twixt us and Scotland , and 'twixt them and us , 
Still friendly striving which of us can be 
Most true and loyal to his Majesty . 
This is a strife will please the God of peace , 
And this contending will our love's increase . 
You hardy Scots remember Royal Bruce , 
And what stout Wallace valour did produce : 
The glorious name of Stewarts , Hamiltons , 
The Ereskins , Morayes , and the Levingstons' , 
The noble Ramseys , and th' illustrious Hays , 
The valiant Douglases , the Grimes and Gray's , 
Great Sir james Dowglas , a most valiant Knight 
Led seventy battles with victorious fight , 
Not by Lieutenants , or by deputation , 
But he in person won his reputation . 
The Turks and Saracens he overcame , 
Where ending life he purchased endless fame , 
And his true noble worth is well derived 
To worthies of that name that since survived . 
then since both nations did and do abound 
With men approved , and through all Lands renowned , 
Through Europe , and through Asia , further far , 
then is our blessed Redeemer Sepulchre . 
Through all the coasts of tawny Africa , 
And through the bounds of rich America . 
And as the world our worths acknowledge must , 
Let not our valour sleeping lie and rust : 
But to immortalize our Britain's name , 
Let it from emberss burst into a flame . 
We have that Land and shape our elders had , 
Their courages were good , can ours be bad ? 
Their deeds did manifest their worthy minds , 
then how can we degenerate from kinds ? 
In former times we were so given to war 
( Witness the broils 'twixt York and Lancaster ) 
Having no place to foreign foes to go , 
amongst ourselves , we made ourselves a foe 
Full threescore years with fierce unkind alarms , 
Were practised fierce uncivil civil arms , 
Whilst fourscore Peers of the blood royal died , 
With hundred thousands commoners beside . 
Thus Englishmen to wars did bear good will , 
They would be doing although doing ill . 
And Scotland's history avoucheth clear , 
Of many civil wars , and tormoyles there , 
Rebellion , discord , rapine and foul spoil 
Hath pierced the bowels of their native soil , 
Themselves against themselves , Peers against Peers , 
And kin with kin together by the ears , 
The friend 'gainst friend , each other hath withstood , 
Unfriendly friends weltering in their blood . 
Thus we with them , and they with us contending , 
And we ourselves , and they themselves thus rending , 
Doth show that all of us have ever been 
Addicted unto martial discipline : 
Spain can report , and Portugal can tell , 
Denmark and Norway both can witness well , 
Sweden and Poland truly can declare 
Our service there , and almost every where . 
And Belgia but for the English and the Scots , 
Perpetual slavery had been their lots 
Under the great commanding power of Spain , 
By th' prince of Parma's and the Archdukes train . 
far for my witnesses I need not look , 
't is written in many a hundred living book . 
And Newports famous battle bravely tells 
The English and the Scots in fight excels : 
Yea all , or most towns in those seventeen Lands 
Have felt the force , or friendship of their hands . 
Ostend whose siege all sieges did surpass 
That will be , is , or I think ever was , 
In three years , three months , Scots and Englishmen 
Did more than Troy accomplished in ten . 
Ostend endured ( which never will be forgot ) 
Above seven hundred thousand Cannon shot : 
And , as if hell against it did conspire , 
They did abide death , dearth , and sword and fire . 
There danger was with resolution mixed , 
And honour with true valour firmly fixed . 
Were death more horrid than a Gorgon's head , 
In his worst shapes they met him , free from dread . 
There many a Britain died , and yet they live 
In fame , which fame to us doth courage give . 
At last when to an end the siege was come , 
The gainers of it , cast their losing sum , 
And the uneven reckoning thus did run : 
The winners had most loss , the losers won ; 
For in this siege upon the Archdukes side 
Seven Masters of the Camp all wounded died . 
And fifteen Colonels in that war deceased : 
And Sergeant Mayors twenty nine , at least . 
Captains five hundred sixty five were slain . 
Lieutenants ( whilst this Leaguer did remain ) 
One thousand , and one hundred and sixteen 
Dyed , and are now as they had never been . 
Ensigns three hundred twenty two , all even : 
And nineteen hundred Sergeants and eleven . 
Corporals and Lantzprizadoes death did mix 
In number seventeen hundred sixty six . 
Of Soldiers , Mariners , women , children , all , 
more than seven times ten thousand there did fall . 
Thus Ostend was at dear rates won and lost , 
Besides these lives , with many million cost . 
And when 't was won , 't was won but on conditions , 
On honourable terms , and compositions : 
The winners won a ruined heap of stones , 
A demi-golgotha of dead men's bones . 
Thus the brave Britain's that the same did leave , 
Left nothing in it worthy to receive . 
And thus from time to time , from age to age , 
To these late days of our last pilgrimage , 
We have been men with martial minds inspired , 
And for our meeds , beloved , approved , admired . 
Men prise not Manhood at so low a rate 
To make it idle and effeminate : 
And worthy Countrymen I hope and trust 
you 'll do as much as your forefathers durst , 
A fair advantage now is offered here 
Whereby your wont worths may well appear , 
And he that in this quarrel will not strike , 
Let him expect never to have the like . 
He that spares both his person and his purse , 
Must ( if ever he use it ) use it worse . 
And you that for that purpose go from hence 
To serve that mighty Princess , and that Prince , 
Ten thousand , thousand prayers shall every day 
Implore th' almighty to direct your way . 
Go on , go on , brave soldiers , never cease 
Till noble war , produce a noble peace . 
A brief Description of Bohemia . 

The Kingdom of Bohemia is well peopled with many brave horsemen and footmen : rich , fruitful , and plentifully stored ( by the Almighty's bounty , ) with all the treasuries of Nature fit for the use and commodity of man : it hath in it of Castles and walled towns , to the number of 780 and 32000 villages ; by a grant from the Emperor Charles the fourth , it was freed for ever of the payments of all contributions to the Empire whatsoever , Moravia , Silesia , and Lusatia are as large as Bohemia , well replenished with stout horsemen and footmen . 

FINIS . 





 Prince of Ascania . Bishops of Halberstadt , Magenberg , Hilsheine , Osenburgh  The Marquesse of Anspash , Cullinbagh , Durlagh . The Count Palatine of Lowtrecke and Luxenburgh . The States of Venice & Savoy . 34 Battles fought in France by Englishmen since the Conquest . Henry the sixth . The praise of sir james Dowglas , in the reign of K. Robert Bruce 1330.  In 13. main battles he overcame God's enemies , and at last was slain .  The low countries , Holland , Zealand etc.  