Mad fashions , odd fashions , all out of fashions , or , the emblems of these distracted times . 

by John Taylor . 

London , printed by John Hammond , for Thomas Banks , 1642.  

Mad fashions , odd fashions , all out of fashions , or , the emblems of these distracted times . 

The picture that is printed in the front 
Is like this kingdom , if you look upon 't 
For if you well do note it as it is , 
It is a transformed metamorphosis . 
This monstrous picture plainly doth declare 
This land ( Quite out of order ) out of square . 
His breeches on his shoulders do appear , 
His doublet on his lower parts doth wear ; 
His boots and spurs upon his arms and hands , 
His gloves upon his feet ( Whereon he stands ) 
The church o'er turned ( A lamentable show ) 
The candlestick above , the light below , 
The coney hunts the dog , the rat the cat , 
The horse doth whip the cart ( I pray mark that ) 
The wheelbarrow doth drive the man ( Oh base ) 
And eels and gudgeons fly a mighty pace . 
And sure this is a monster of strange fashion , 
That doth surpass all Ovid's transformation . 
And this is England's case this very day , 
All things are turned the clean contrary way ; 
For now , when as a royal parliament , 
( With King , and peers , and Commons whole consent ) 
Have almost sat two years , with pains and cares , 
And charge , to free us from our griefs and fears , 
For when many a worthy Lord and knight , 
And good esquire ( For King and countries right ) 
Have spent so much time with great toil , and heed , 
All England's , vicious garden how to weed , 
so like a wilderness 't was overrun , 
That though much hath been done ; all is not done . 
The devil doth persuade , entice and lurk , 
And force bad men to set good men a-work . 
That whilst the worthies strive to right our wrongs , 
And give to each man , what to him belongs ; 
Whilst they take pains to settle all things here , 
And Irish devil , doth madly domineer . 
From hell's black pit , begirt with Romish arms , 
Thous•ndss of locusts are in troops and swarms , 
More barbarous than the heathen , worse than Jews , 
No Turk or Tartars would such tortures use . 
Sure that religion can no ways be good , 
That so inhumanly delights in blood : 
Nor doth that doctrine from the scriptures spring , 
That subjects should rebel against their King . 
Nay ( Further ) murder , ravish , spoil , deflower , 
Burn and lay waste , depopulate , devour , 
Not sparing infants at the breast or womb , 
( To die where first they lived , their birth , their tomb ) 
't is said no serpent , adder , snake , or toad , 
Can live in Ireland , or hath there abode : 
't is strange that she those vipers doth not kill , 
That guawes her bowels , and her blood doth spill , 
Can Irish earth kill all things vennemous , 
And can she nurse such vermin mischievous : 
Her own sons native , worse than strangers born , 
They have their mother's entrails rent and torn , 
Yet still her indulgency , harbours those , 
And feeds those rebels that do breed her woes : 
God ( In thy mercy ) give her strength and aid , 
And courage , make her foes and ours dismayed , 
Thou Lord of hosts , thine own cause take in hand , 
Thy foes ( Thine Antichristian foes ) withstand ; 
defend thy truth , and all our armies guide , 
Our enemies to scatter and divide . 
Thus leaving Ireland ( With my hearty prayers ) 
To Britain back again my muse repairs : 
Where i perceive a metamorphosis , 
Is most preposterous , as the picture is , 
The world 's turned upside down , from bad to worse , 
Quite out of frame , the cart before the horse . 
The fe•t-maker , and saucy stable groom 
Willd•re to perch into the preachers room , 
Each ignorant , do of the spirit boast , 
And prating fools brag of the holyghost , 
When Ignoramus will his teacher teach , 
And sowgelders , and cobblers dare to preach , 
This shows , men's wits are monstrously disguised , 
Or that our country is antipodised . 
When holy common prayer , is by the rabble 
Accounted porridge , and unfruitful babble , 
When our belief is not so much as sed , 
When as the ten commandments are not read , 
When as the Lord's prayer is almost neglected , 
When as all decency is quite rejected , 
When to avoid a Romish Papists name , 
A man must be unmannerly , past shame , 
When he that doth show reverence , doth offend , 
And he seems best that will not bow or bend , 
When he that into God's house doth not come , 
As to a stable , or a tippling room , 
Is Counted for a popish favourite , 
And branded so , despised , and scorned with spite . 
When he that ( Of his waves ) doth conscience make , 
And in his heart doth world , flesh , fiend forsake , 
Loves God with all his soul ; adores no pelf , 
And loves his neighbour , as he loves himself , 
this man is rare to find , yet this rare man 
Shall have the hateful name of Puritan ; 
When execrations pierce the firmament , 
And oaths do batter against heaven's battlement : 
When imprecations , and dambed blasphemies , 
In sundry cursed volleys scale the skies , 
When men more brutish than the horse or mule , 
Who know not to obey , presume to rule , 
Thus church and commonwealth , and men , all are 
( Much like the picture ) out of frame or square . 
And if 't were possible our father's old 
Should live again , and tread upon this mould , 
And see all things confused , overthrown , 
They would not know this country for their own . 
For England hath no likelihood , or show 
Of what it was but seventy years ago ; 
Religion , manners , life and shapes of men , 
Are much unlike the persons that were then , 
Nay England's face and language is estranged , 
That all is metamorphised , choped and changed , 
For like as on the poles , the world is whorled 
So is this land the bedlam of the world ; 
That i amazed , and amated am , 
To see great Britain turned to Amsterdam , 
Men's brains and wits ( Two simples beat together ) 
From thence ( Mixed and compounded ) are sent hither . 
For Amsterstam is landed ( As i hear ) 
At Rye , or Hastings , or at Dover peer , 
At Harwich , Ipswitch , Sandwich , or at Weymouth , 
At Portsmouth , Dartmouth , Exmouth , Plymouth , Farmouth , 
At Yarmouth , and at all the ports to Tinmouth ; 
And westward unto Bristol and to Monmouth ; 
From all these mouths and more , mad sects are sent , 
Who have religion all in pieces rent , 
one would have this , another would have that , 
And most of them would have they know not what . 
God give us peace , and ease us of our pain , 
And send those sects , from whence they came again , 
The Papist , and the schismatic ; both grieves 
The church , for she 's like Christ ( Between two thieves . ) 
I took the protestation twice of late , 
Where i protested not to innovate . 
 Tavoide all popish rites , and to express 
Obedience to what England's church profess , 
My loyalty unto my King is bent 
With duty to the peers and parliament . 
With prayers , and my best service for them all , 
That on them May heaven's chiefest blessings fall , 
That with one heart , as one man , with one mind , 
( For God's great glory ) they May be combined , 
And never vary , but go boldly on , 
To end the good work , which they have begun . 
This is the sum ( Which ne'er shall be forsook ) 
Of what i in the protestation took . 
But , for all this , i May be mannerly 
In God's house , and be free from papistry ; 
I hope i May put off my hat , and be 
Allowed to kneel , and pray , and bow my knee , 
When as divine command bids , only then 
I 'll bow to God , and not to saints , or men . 
And from those duties i will never vary 
Till death , or order do command contrary . 
Th' almighty's name be ever praised and blessed , 
That Romish superstition is suppressed , 
We have no abbeys , abbots , friars , or monks , 
Nor have we nuns , or stews allowed for punks , 
We have no masses , or no mass-priests here , 
But some are hanged , and some are fled for fear . 
All those that are so bold to stay behind , 
I wish they May like entertainment find ; 
Beads , babbles , relics , tapers , lamps or lights , 
We have no superstitious Romish rites , 
We seek our pardons from our heavenly hope , 
And not by works , or favour from the Pope ; 
To saints we make no prayer , or intercession , 
And unto God alone we make confession ; 
We hold no real presence in the bread , 
And we do know King Charles our supreme head 
( Beneath God , who hath placed him in his throne ) 
For other supreme , we acknowledge none . 
No purgatory , image , wood or stone , 
No stock , or carved block , we trust upon , 
Nor is our church discretion here so little , 
As to baptise with cream , with salt and spita . 
We have as many sacraments , as heaven 
Ordained ; which are but two , and Rome hath seven . 
We do not christen bells , and give them names 
Of Simon , Peter , Andrew , John and James ; 
We use no pilgrimage , or holywater , 
Nor in an unknown tongue our prayers scatter ; 
All these , and many more , in Rome are used 
Which are by us rejected and refused . 
And yet too many faults , alas remains , 
Which are the churches , and the kingdom's stains , 
The church triumphant is not clear from spots , 
The poor church millitant hath still some blots , 
here 's all unperfect , something 's still amiss , 
And nothing's blessed , but in eternal bliss . 
Mean time , till we amend , and leave our crimes , 
The picture is the emb•em of the times . 
Finis . 


















