To his friend john Taylor , the ingenious Poeta Aquaticus , and the Author of this most wholesome following Black-mouthed biting Satire . 

Nor speech nor silence now a days protects 
Men from the Critics Bolt , he spies defect●… 
( At least pretends so ) in the thought of man 
As well as in his actions ; shall I than 
That have a freeborn spirit balk the way , 
Because a Dog barks , or an Ass doth bray ? 
Or cause some rash fool , such an one as he 
That late reviled the Prince of Poetry 
Shall rip up thy beginning , and shall rail 
And find exceptions out ( Sans head or tail ) 
Shall this I say deter me from bestowing 
An approbation where 't is justly owing ? 
no , I have read thy Fancies , and desir●… 
Whilst others censure thee , I may admire 
How the Castalian Flood should swell so high 
To drench thy Skull , and raise thy Poesy 
To such a pitch ; while many a Learned brain 
Spoke only prose , short of thy weakest strain : 
Mean while thy Books and these salute ●…hee , all 
Thy friends here do the like in general : 
And this thy harmless and just Satire shall 
Make thee and it ; be loved in general . 
W. Gainsford Allandro pasqueto Mallatrumpa entantrino liuroe . 

Il vento Chioli , Mauritambull Tella fulg●…e , 
Antro della campo il Danto Cordi sublima 
Pantatbos , stremo standina eschine vandri 
Bene in shendo , tercia penthe dissadi . 
M●…crops , Sans fida vocifera Randa Bavinea , 
Allatendrea quanto , Eltrada Pizmin●… venta , 
Mega Pollimunton , Theorba quasie quicunque 
Triptolina Typhoon , Quabacondono sapho . 
Terra trag●…us sophy , sunt di●…calcitheo Geata . 
A vostre Obserdandi Zhean De FAVORINA vostre Obserdandi Zhean De Fistye cankie De sallamanca Andalowsia . Or thus you may English it , in the transcending praise of the Author , and his following Book . 

Till Phoebus' blustering blasts shall cease to blow , 
And Aeolus shall hide his radiant Rays , 
Till Vulcan's Forge be framed of Scythian Snow , 
And Neptune like a Shepherd spend his days ; 
When Satuane shall sell Mouse-trapps , and allow 
Mars to sing Madrigals , and Round-delayes : 
then shall thy Book and thee be out of Date , 
And scorn the fu●…ry of consuming Fate . 
To your Worthiness in all Observance Devoted john Defistie Cankie of Sallamanca in Andalusia . A most Horrible , Terrible , Tolerable , Termagant Satire : 

Most fresh and newly made , and pressed in Print , 
And if it be not liked , the Devils in 't . 


1 Satire . The Proud man  

What in the World doth true contentment give , 
That Man should have desire therein to live ? 
Yet is it not so full of sinful stains , 
But he doth make it worse that most complains . 
Pride doth for Hamans' Honour madly hope , 
But never mind's his Ladder , or his Rope ; 
So Elephants are mighty Beasts , but when 
They fall can hardly ever rise again : 
And 't is a sign that honour is extorted , 
And basely got that is with pride supported . 
That cannot mount men to eternal Bliss , 
Which cast the Angels thence to Hell's Abyss : 
It is a Fabric that on Sand is builded , 
A feigned glory with damnation guilded . 
Ambition deems the world not transitory , 
And Flattery blows the Bladders of Vainglory , 
Which makes th' ambitious swim to honour's brink ; 
Until Time pricks their Bladders ; then they sink . 
By fools he may be valued at high rate , 
A Bugbear , or a Scarecrow in a State , 
A Mountebank of Honour , or a Thing , 
That may in Posthaste to Promotion spring : 
And may with whimsies milch a Commonwealth 
And purchase , by his Universal stealth , 
God's curse and man's , and more ; he may do this 
Be way of Change , or Metamorphosis ; ( need , 
Turn men to Silkworms , forcing them through 
From out their bowels spin his gaudy weed . 
Consider this thou new made Mushroom man , 
Thy life 's a Blast , a Bubble , and a Span ; 
And thou with all thy Gorgeous trappingss gay , 
Art but a Mouldering lump of guilded Clay . 
Thy outside may be Rich , thy inside poor , ( door 
Worse than the wretch that begs from door to 
What though thy Coat be richer Stuff than mine ? 
And that thy Linen be more pure and fine ? 
Or that thy Periwig be sweetly scented , 
Most neatly Keamed , slicked , curled and indented ? 
What though I be nine days behind the fashio●… 
Or that my Breech be of the old Translation ? 
Not to be drawn on with a shooing-horn 
As Quail-pipe Breeches are , and wise men scorn 
What though with points I am not Trust below 
My small unto my ankle ? ( O rare show ) 
What though that I observant be to thee , 
And stand before thee bare , with bent Knee ? 
Will my Hat off , cause thy head cease to ache ? 
Or my Leg make the Gout thy Limbs forsake ? 
Or doth not my poor duty puff thee higher , 
And swell thy too much hateful Pride t' aspire ? 
then is my manners quite misplaced , for I 
Have no mind to commit Idolatry ; 
Unto a thing that 's out of Relics made 
From Drapers , Mercers , and the Silkman's Trade 
I 'll bend no Knee , nor shall my Bonnet Wag , 
To Velvet Remnant , or a piece of Shag ; 
A Plush Plus ultra man in scorn and pride , 
Such joys , such Popping-joyes my Lines deride : 
His Tailor made , and shaped , and trimmed , & tricked him 
And ( like a young Bear ) into fashion licked him : 
He put his Corpse insuite , and brave Array , 
And after puts his Bill in 〈◊〉 for pay , 
Such Things as thos●… 
Nor will I give 
For though man 
Of all the trea●… 
●…t hath he not these gifts to man allowed , 
●…at he should be thereby ambititus , proud . 
●…ere must be neat distinctions of Superiors 
〈◊〉 Habits ; to be known from their inferiors : 
●…t he 's a Cinnick , and a stupid Stoic 
●…at will not Reverence such as are Heroic ; 
●…odnesse with Greatness , Merits , Dignity 
●…ost gracious gifts of Heaven's Benignity ) 
●…r Honours due , where Honour doth belong ; 
●…d those that yield it not their souls do wrong . 
●…d gorgeous Garments may be justly worn , 
●…t yet not lined with pride , contempt , and scorn . 
●…od doth hate Pride , the gate of Heaven is low , 
●…nd all that enter there must humbly Bow. 
●…alew no man for that which he doth wear , 
●…or value any man for what they were : 
●…is inside being good , I care not which , 
●…hether his outside be or poor or Rich ; 
●…or Tarquin 't was unkingly , most unfit 
●…or him a Rape on Lucrece to commit ; 
●…et though the fault were foul , 't is understood 
●…was done by lustful youth , and heat of blood : 
●…o doubt , but Tarquin ( in those Heathen Times ) 
〈◊〉 th●…t fact 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 other crimes ; 
, 
; 
to Riot , 
; 
But all these Vices were not in him seen , 
They seemed in him as if they had not been : 
For they ( like Vermin ) all did hide and shrow●… 
In th'odious Title of Tarquin the Proud. 
Thus though man's Life to sundry sins is thrall , 
Pride's gaudy Ca●…opy doth hide them all . 
2.  Satire . The Avaricious or Covetous Man , and Projector . 

What Title best befits that cursed Wretch , 
That daily makes his Chevril Conscienc●… stretch , 
His muck unto his Neighbour's muck to join , 
And be a Bawd to his engendering Coin ; 
Whose soul to damned Avarice is sold , 
And ( like an Atheist ) knows no God ( but Gold ) 
And pale-faced Silver is his Goddess pure , 
To gain whom , he all slavery will endure ; 
Do any villainy with hand or Brain , 
( Provided that the end of it be gain ) 
Live like a Rascal , beggarly and bare , 
Lie down in sorrow , and rise up in care ; 
Rake , and rack Tenants to the very Bones , 
Respecting neither Tears , or sighs , or m●…aneses ; 
And keep 〈◊〉 House ( as Hunger-starved as Hell ) 
●…ith whom the Mice and Rats disdain to dwell ; 
●…hose Christmas Dinner ( in a Pipkin dressed ) 
●…e count's a costly and Voluptuous Feast . 
●…t let him be invited once abroad , 
●…he tiranizing Wolf will lay on load 
〈◊〉 if he never in his life did eat ; 
●…r that he never after should see meat : 
●…us often his ung●…ily Guts are crammed , 
●…ot at his own charge , he will first be dammned ; 
●…hus Beggared in his m●…d insatiate 
●…e looks on ●…idas State , forgets his Fate ; 
●…e will not wear the Ass' Ears in vain , 
●…e once ( perhaps ) may wear a golden Chain : 
●…r if not so , he●…le serape what wealth he can 
●…o make his Lack-wit Son a Gentleman , 
●…or whom ( more Mad than any man of Goatham ) 
●…ee'le dive to Tagus Sands , or Hell's vast bottom ? 
●…ll that he doth possess he count's it none , 
●…is Neighbours State he daily dotes upon ; 
●…midst his Mass of riches he 's not rich , 
●…is Achans Wedge that doth his soul bewitch : 
●…hus like a Fiend of Hell he neither cares 
For Orphans injuries , or Widow's tears ; 
His ears are deafened to their lamentations , 
His Coffers filled with Coin and execrations ; 
Himself grows old and Gouty , Rheumatic , 
Most loathsome Coughing , Wayward , Choleric , 
Noisome to all , and stinks above the ground , 
Despised and slighted like a mangy Hound . 
His Wife , his Children , Kin , and Family 
All look upon him most disdainfully ; ( rat 
He coughs , spits , spawles , and in the throat do●… 
And death and him are in a mortal Battle : 
His people pity him , and altogether 
They wish him dead & gone , they care not whith●… 
He would say somewhat but he cannot speak , 
He fumbles with the Sheets , his Eyestrings brea●… 
Within his mouth he mumbles , champs & chaw●… 
These 12. next following lines shall show the ca●… 
A mole 's a Mole , whose food is only Mould , 〈◊〉 
And best of mould is but refined gold : 
God Mammon is of such high Eminence , 
It makes man love Dame Tellus Excrements , 
't is vice's glory , Virtue's Laughing stock , 
The Miser's honour , and true Bounties mock ; 
And he that life's a slave , and dies a Knave , 
Is most unworthy of a Christian Grave . 
He hides his wealth , and at his dying day , 
He in his Dying chops doth hide the Key ; 
And in those hiding he is quite bereaven 
Of Keys and Locks , and entrance into Heaven . 
He dies and stinks , and every one is glad , 
( Although for fashion sake some must seem sad : ) 
He must be buried , and a Banquet spent , 
Which if he knew it would his mind torment ; 
●…e in his life never kept a Festival , 
●…nd grieves to have one at his Funeral . 
●…or ought I know , his Son the head hangs down , 
●…A merry living for a mourning Gown ) 
●…hen in the Grave the fragile Corpse are put 
●…here , till the Resurrection closely shut ; 
●…nd on his Monumental stone , or Tomb , 
●…is good Deeds are Insculpt in little room . 
Epi●…ph . 

●…ere lies a wight interred beneath this Stone , 
●…ho w●…s of Age near fourscore years and one●… 
●…e with all hidden virtues was possessed , 
And kept them ; for he few or none expressed : 
●…n all the time which he did here survive , 
His holy care was to live long , and thrive ; 
At last Death struck him down , and laid him flat , 
He died , and gave ●…he poor no man knows what . 


●…he Funeral tears are quickly dried and done , 
And now behold his long Eclipsed Son , 
From th'obscure Clouds of baseness rushing forth , 
To show his Father left him something worth ; 
He let's those Angels fly to sight external , 
His Dad had long kept dark , like Fiends infernal ; 
He roars , and Revels , drabs , & drinks and Dices , 
Wears and sees fashions , & most strange devices ; 
Marries at last into a Stock of State , 
Maintains her , as befits a Lady's Rate 
And more ; because her joys shall full be Crown 
He buys a Knighthood of five hundred pound : 
Her Ladyship will quickly have a care 
To be as proud as other Ladies are ; 
For though of wealth they have the Devil and 〈◊〉 
Her pride shall make their Charity so small 
That she will make her Knight to scrape and gathe●… 
And keep a base House like the slave his Father ; 
That ever a year or two be gone and passed , 
A man may sooner break his Neck than 's fast . 
And as the Ocean's bounds are largely bounded , 
So Avarice , is measureless unsounded ; 
The Sea hath many branches , that do keep 
Their Tributary course unto the Deep ; 
As fountains , springs , brooks , make mighty River●… 
Those Rivers all into the Sea delivers 
All these disbursments : yet for all the store 
th' insatiate Ocean hath no jot the more : 
So Avarice , though it be still supplied 
With aids , or helps , like a perpetual Tide 
It swallows all , and yet , it 's Dropsy thirst 
Is as unquenchable as 't was at first . 
And now ( most pertinent ) I will express 
th' attendance that do wait on Covetousness . 
Mistake me not , 't is not my aim or drift 
T'enveigh against honest gain , or Lawful thrift ; 
Inhuman Lucre , Spawn of Avarice , 
Which wretched men esteem at so high price ; 
●…at they ( above all virtues ) seek and choose it , 
●…d will lose Heaven itself before they 'll lose it . 
●…ucre is cruel , in an Anagram 
Which doth express the Nature of the same ; 
〈◊〉 there be any thing more cruel , then 
●…or greedy Lucre , men should Murder men ? 
Wolves in their Kind amongst themselves agree , 
●…or Lucre men each others Bane will be . 
●…here are a swarm of , old Gehezies' Tribe , 
●…hat for the love of Lucre love a Bribe : 
●…wish that they and their posterity , 
●…light likewise have Gehezies' Leprosy : 
●…ites stoop to Carrion , Beasts to grass & Herbage 
●…o will these Mongrels do to golden Garbage . 
A Bribe may spin a Suit in Law , so long 
That he whose cause was right , may have the wrong . 
A Bribe may have that force and powerfulnesse , 
To make the greater Thiefs hang up the less : 
A Bribe , the Scales of Justice oft hath swayed , 
And made a Whore pass currant for a Maid . 
My Satire might an endless Journey run , 
To search what villainy Bribes hath not done : 
What mischief still it doth , and more would do , 
But that the eye of Justice looks thereto ; 
Yet many times and oft , I hear it said , 
That Justice long ago to Heaven is fled : 
And that by her , our faults cannot be seen , 
So many Clouds are interposed between : 
But I would have all vain surmisers know 
True Justice sees , and notes what 's done below . 
no Bribe , that Court of Conscience tolerates , 
Nor no Bribetaker enters in those Gates . 
There comes no Lawyer thither that plays booty , 
Th'oppressors' soul 's kept out , all smutched & sooty . 
The feared , the flawed , corrupt galled conscience , 
Are all eternally exiled from thence . 
But as all Trees are Wood , yet every Tree 
Is not to burn ; some fit for buildings be , 
For Fruit or Physic some , and some for shade , 
For diverse uses diversely are made : 
Yet mens opinion all in this agrees , 
That they are all in general called Trees . 
I have heard Brooms called Beesoms , and I have 
Herd honest Titles put upon a Knave : 
Yeast is called Barm , or Ryfing , but 't is known 
That Barm , and Yeast , and Ryfing all are one . 
Even so a Bribe , though it can make a shift 
To turn the Name unto a friendly gift , 
A kind Remembrance , or a Courtesy , 
A Fee , a Present , or Gratuity ; 
A Thanks , or a Reward , or what you will , 
Yet 't is a Bribe , if given or taken ill . 
The sundry Names cannot the Nature alter , 
The name of Rope's oft put upon the Halter ; 
Yet he 's a Block , a senseless Stock or Stone , 
That thinks for naught to have his business done ; 
He may as well expect meat , drink , & clothing ; 
House-rent and Land : & all things else for nothing . 
If I will have my Lawyer pled for me , 
't is just that he from me should have his Fee ; 
For be I either Plaintiff , or Defendant ; 
And that my cause is difficult , dependant ; 
If my good Lawyer do with pains and cares , 
Free me from out the Laws entangled Snares , 
That he , or any other whomsoever 
Shall do me good , or use their best endeavour , 
I would requite them any way I could ; 
And such Requitalls for no Bribes I hold . 
't is being forced to give , or to subscribe 
Before the business done , that makes a Bribe ; 
But he that for a good turn is ingrateful , 
I wish him live accursed ; and die most hateful . 
Thus Bribery is a Member of great price , 
And chief supporter unto Avarice . 
The Highway Thief that robs by day or night , 
Doth Covet that which is not his by right . 
The filching Rogue ( as every where 't is known ) 
Doth Pilfering covet , what is not his own ; 
The Gamesters that play deeply , soon or late , 
Are covetous to win each others state . 
The perjured Slave is courteous , for he 
Will pawn his Ears unto the Pillory ; 
And purposely ( another's goods to gain ) 
Hazard his soul to everlasting pain . 
The Cheater , Pickpocket , and Cutpurse Knave , 
Are covetous another's Coin to have ; 
Nick Froth the Tapster with his curtal Can 
Most courteous courteous Cheats every man , 
False Weights or measures , be they great or small 
Are Avarices' Slaves , and Servants all . 
Mounsieur Projector Monopollitan 
A Well composed , ill disposed Gentleman ; 
That for his good deserve , night and day 
Is prayed for oft , ( the clean contrary way ) 
The Sea of Avarice is his main Ocean ( motion , 
Through which he swims , and struggles for Pro - 
Which being long in gaining soon is lost , 
Upon the waves of Envy heaved and tossed . 
The winds of sighs and curses raise a storm , 
( And in the conscience lies a gnawing Worm ) 
That hurls him too and from , from place to place ; 
( That he can scarcely at his meat say Grace ) 
He splits upon the Rock of scorn and spite , 
And just disgraces Quicksands sink him quite . 
Thus have I showed that covetousness is 
The very Root of all that is amiss ; 
All men , ( as men ) are subject to offending , 
My Satire bites such , as are quite past mending . 
May not that man be justly called a fool 
That thinks to make good March-pan of a stool , 
Or of a Sow's ear frame a Velvet purse , 
Or of a She-beare make a good meltch Nurse , 
Drink Aquofortis , and sustain no harm , 
Or take the Town of Dunkirk with a Charm : 
The way to do all these I 'll sooner find , 
then satisfy an Avaricious mind ; 
A hungry jade the World can never fill , 
Still feeds , still leaves , still empty , hungry still ; 
And so I wish all men away to beaten him , 
Or knock his brains quite out & let dogs eat him : 
But he that willingly will entertain him , 
I wish an old house may fall down and brain him . 
3.  Satire . The bragging Rogue . 

Another Coxcomb boasts of excellent parts , 
How he hath practised Arms , & studied Arts ; 
His Travels to write down would Volumes fill , 
Beyond our famous Sir John Mandivill : 
And to his reputation 't were a blot , 
To put him in the rank of Don Quixot . 
He passed the Zones , Phrygia , and Torrida , 
Surveyed the South World , called Incognita , 
And there he saw Great Gorgon's empty Scull 
So big , four Bushels scarce could fill it full . 
At Stamboloya , ( a most stately Port , ) 
Where the Emperor great Robombo keeps his Court : 
There in a Shamaranguah , ( which we call 
A Chapel ) was a building round and tall , 
Where as the huge Gargantuas' corpse were laid , 
The-tombe is full a Furlongs length 't is said ; 
Built of a polished stone like Crimson jet , 
( Surpassing far the Tomb of Mahomet ) 
Enchased with precious Stones that dims the sight 
That none can look on 't , it doth shine so bright . 
From thence he passed the straits of Magellan , 
And feasted was by mighty Pouhatan , 
Where amongst a world of dainties to be brief , 
A Phoenix stewed in white-broth was the chief . 
Tut , it will tyre a man to hear him half 
He hath seen Miloes' Bull , and Walthams' Calf ; 
The Monmouth Cap of famous Owen Glendor , 
And three eye teeth of th' ' ancient witch of Endor : 
Ischartots Lantern , at Saint Dennisis , 
th' Ephesian Diana , at the Lowre is : 
The Amphitheatre that 's at Ulismos , 
The Pirramids of Egypt , or the Isthmos 
That parts Utopia from fair Thessaly , 
Or lofty Atlas that doth prop the sky . 
If all be true he says , we may him call 
The God of Wars Lieutenant General : 
no Turk , or Bohemian-tartar , Moor , or Myrmidon 
Such valiant exploits hath under-gone : 
He learned Wars Hornbook first , & did not stint 
But past his Grammar Rules was perfect in 't ; 
He first began with Trayning , Mustering , Drilling , 
Before he came to fight , or to kill ; 
To March , to put his men in Files , and Ranks , 
To order a Battalions , wings , or Flanks , 
To lead the Vanguard , or bring up the Rear , 
To be here , there , ( and almost every where ) 
To guide and manage men , and make them stout , 
Double your Ranks and Files , faces about : 
He served the Turk nine years , a Renegado , 
Where oftentimes he felt the Bastinado ; 
And though he wore a Coat of Bare-freezado , 
Yet there he learned the Art of a Soldado , 
' T 'affront an Enemy with a Brau●…ado , 
To make a Battery , and to use Sealado ; 
To use Petards , Engines , Wildfire , Granado , 
' Tintrappe the Foe by secret Ambuscado ; 
To Raise , Mount , Parapet , or Camisado , 
To make a strength more strong with Canvasado ; 
With his good Sword to use the Imbrocado ; 
The Punto , the Roverso , the Stockado : 
And for Land Service , or the Sea Armado , 
He knows a roll of Match from Trividado . 
His Music , drums , Guns , Cannons , thundering roar , 
As if the Welkin were in tartars tore ; 
The Harquebuz and Muskets go pit pat , 
Towers , Castles , Forts , and Ciradells laid flat ; 
mines , Countermines , Assaults , Repulses , Sallies , 
Whilst Horse and men shine strew the Field●… and 
Battalias , batteries , breaches , armies , arms , ( valleys 
Broils , Garboy les , hot encounters , fierce Allarm●… : 
Fortifications , Camps , Redoubts , and Trenches , 
Va●…dres , and Counter-mutes , walls , sconces , fences , 
On-set●… and Onslaughts he hath been upon , 
He blow up Tauris , conquered Babylon : 
He stood Pordu●… beneath the frozen Zone 
Turned to a man of Ice , or Crystal Stone . 
The same day Mars his valour did inspire 
And thawed him brave , with Sulphur , smoke , & fire . 
He in the Battle seemed a man all flame , 
In smould ring Powder , he that day o'er came 
The Bohemian-tartar Chrim , and near to Samere and , 
He with Mackougly Shangh , fought hand to hand . 
The Leaguers , and the Sieges he hath seen , 
The dread full dangers where he oft hath been ; 
He hath danced Antiques in a Crimson Flood , 
And swom Leu●…aeses in a sea of blood : 
In greatest perils he would bravely on , ( geton , 
His throat belched fog , and flames like Phle - 
Thus Salamader like , he oft hath been 
In scorching flashes , and three winters in 
An Icy coat , like Armour shining bright 
He sorved the Pole , against the Moscovite . 
He hath lain down to sleep a Man , in show , 
And rose a Snowball , or a Ball of Snow : 
Like the Ca●…lion ( not to food inclined ) 
He lived by sucking the cold Northern Wind , 
●…ained by the blast of Fame , that swiftly flies , 
Compounding and confounding truth with lies . 
He hath 〈◊〉 Blade , ( if his report be true ) 
Wherewith he sixteen desperate Corporals flew ; 
And eight Lieutenants he outright hath killed , 
Four valiant Sergeants he hath slain in Field : 
Two Noble Captains and one General , 
His fury , force perforce did force to fall . 
Blades broke , & battered Hilts , he hath had more 
Than any Castle can contain the store ; 
He had a Rapier , sharp , pure Castilliano , 
With which he gored and killed a great Umbrano , 
For guided with an Arm and courage fierce , 
It quite through double Cannon proof will pierce . 
he 'll Guard himself from any Bullets fall , 
His sword 's his Racket , and the shot the Ball , 
Which though it swiftly come , he 's so quick-eyed 
That with his Morglay he would turneed aside : 
With the same Bilbo , once he madly strikes 
And cropped the tops off , from a Grove of Pikes : 
Thus fight oft in Winter , and in Summer , 
He had more wounds than holes are in a Scummer . 
A thousand blows and bruises , knocks , & cuts 
He hath received ; eight times shot through the guts : 
He was in Leaguer late before Breda . 
Associate with the Marquesse Spinola : 
And being in a Boat upon the water , 
A Musket shot run through his Pia mater , 
It pierced his Perricranion , that his brain 
Was taken out and washed , put in again . 
Yet all these wounds , and all his desperate matches , 
He calls them petty hurts , or simple scratches : 
He was so mawled once at Berghen ap Zone , 
Boys called him Rawhead there , and Bloody-bone . 
From thence he took his journey into Flanders , 
And so to England where he cants and maunders ; 
Where though he be not now the man he was . 
For an old beaten Soldier he may pass . 
4.  Satire . The Mountebank , or Quacksalver . 

Signior Gonsalvo , come from Naples late , 
Hath in the Curcumclusion of his Pate 
Engrossed all Learning , and can teach the way 
To speak all Tongues ; ( excepting truth ) they say ; 
there 's not a Pissing-post but wears a Bill , 
That doth Proclaim his admirable skill . 
In Grammar , Logic , and in Rhetoric , 
Music , Geometry , Arithmetic ; 
Bright Star surmounting rare Astronomy , 
Life-saving Physic , starving Poetry : 
Invisible Gold Creating Alchemy 
Extracting , and distracting Chimistrie : 
These Art's perfection are exceeding rare , 
And are ( me thinks ) too much for one man's share : 
But yet this Mountebank hath often swore 
That he is perfect in all these , and more . 
I will say nothing that may him deprave , 
But I will think he is a cheating Knave . 
Grammer's the ground of Speech , though all men 
Without it ; 't is rude , simple harsh , & weak : ( speak 
For though all speak by Nature , I can tell 
By rules of Grammars Art , men may speak well : 
Logick's a Speech , that seems by disagreeing 
To make things be , or not be in their being ; 
To whet men's wits , to try and toss conclusions , 
And learnedly to reconcile confusions . 
Rhetoriq●…e's , I call th' Embroyderick , or the Varnish , 
That doth ( with Eloquence ) a Language Garnish : 
It decks speech , with stile , phrase , and illustration , 
And method ; and is Crowned with Admiration . 
Arithmetic can show by Numeration , 
How many Minutes past since the Creation : 
And how by finite Numbers , and by Fractions , 
Allusions may be made to all our Actions . 
Astronomy doth search the Pl●…nnetss courses , 
Their Influences , their Aspects , and forces ; 
The revolutions of Time , Days , and years , 
And how the Sun and Moon pass their Car●…ireses . 
Geometry shows , squares , rounds , eranes & sins , 
Miles , engines , ovalls , quadrats , traps , and grins ; 
The Seaman's Compass , Clock and Dial's , all 
Houses , and Ships built Geometrical . 
Music consists of Airs , of Sounds , of Voices , 
Of Time , space , measure , which the heart rejoices : 
Of Concord , Discord , Unity , Division , 
Which none but Affes hold in base derision . 
Physic doth labour , study , search , and try 
The hidden secrets of Philosophy 
And every simple , for man's preservation ; 
The learned Physicians know their operation . 
But Poetry must know much more than these , 
It scales the Skies , it dives into the Seas , 
't is fire , earth ; water , air ; 't is sickness , health 
Probatum est : 't is any thing but wealth . 
And Mounsieur Quack-salver , I tell thee plain 
thou liest , to say these Arts are in thy brain . 
thou hast perhaps the Theory of prating , 
And jesuitticall Equivocating : 
But for the Practic , thou as much dost know , 
As he that said that Corn on Trees doth grow : 
What madness hath possessed our Nation here , 
That take delight to buy their deaths so dear : 
Can not our Doctors we in England have , 
send us as cheap as Strangers to our Grave : 
Or do not our Physicians well deserne 
To kill men , but they must Frenchmen learn , 
Of Germans , or Italians , o base , 
And insupportable most vile disgrace : 
I dare presume that we know every way 
To help , hurt , kill or cure as well as they . 
But all things strange are rare , all 's good that 's dear 
I muse we have no foreign Hangmen here . 
't is miserable comfort , poor relief , 
Moore danger 's in the Physic than the grief : 
Diseases oft are of such strange conditions 
They kill not , if not helped by strange Physicians . 
Like Conjurers , they give their Pagan drugs , 
The fearful name of the infernal Bugs : 
A Bitter Devil , Collaquintida , 
A Stinking Devil , Arsefetita ; 
A Pocky Devil , called Zarsaperilla , 
A mortal for the Morbus Gallica : 
Elaphoboscon , bane Cantharideses , 
Aureum Pomona , of th' Hesperideses . 
With these ( or such like Bugbear words as these ) 
they 'll fright a sound man into a disease , 
And often put a sick man in such fits , 
That he falls quite besides his little wits . 
But leaving such impostures as these be , 
The scorn of Physic , and Chirurgery , 
A swarm of Vipers , of so vile desert , 
So empty of experience , wit , and Art , 
That all their learned and over-boasted skills , 
Th'affore said posts do wear in Printed Bills . 
And when unto the World it doth appear , 
They can do half the Cures they promise there ; 
I for my writing will Repent , and mourn , 
And beg forgiveness ; and my Satire burn . 
5.  Satire . The Alchemist 

Now shall my flagging Muse a while persist , 
And blaze the Honour of the Alchemist ; 
Fire , Water , Aire , Earth , to us presents , 
The Names and Natures of four Elements : 
But Alchemy ( prepoiterously ) doth strive 
To Multiply those Elements to five : 
From joves' and Mercury's quick influence , 
The Alcimist will draw a Quintessence ; 
With which extraction he a Stone will mould , 
That shall turn Tin , Brass , Steel , & Led , to gold . 
He doth profess that Stone shall lengthen health , 
Prolong our lives , give us abundant wealth : 
But diverse wealth men his skill have tried , 
And as they fools did live , they Beggars died . 
could he help others he would help himself , 
To that impossible never purchased pelf ; 
For commonly he 's in a greasy Coat , 
Old Hat and Boots , and cannot change a Groat : 
Yet promises with more gold to possess us , 
Than Roman Croesus had , or Lydian Croesus . 
But yet from these his golden hopes to feed , 
He borrows money still to serve his need : 
He daily tries newfound experiments , 
Soap , Stibium , Salt , and such ingredients 
As is Argentum vive ; Ordure , Urinal , 
Coals , Crusibles , Led , Allom , poisonous Vermin , 
For he hath Gelded all the Philosophers , 
And with their only Stone he 'll fill our Coffers . 
The Riddling and sophisticated Names 
Are most mysterious Dog-tricks , or May-games ; 
For when the Furnace , or the Crusible , 
begins to work , or seem conducible , 
He calls it the Green Lion , and anon , 
As soon as that first foam is Presto , gone ; 
then bubbles up the Fleeing Heart apace , 
To whom the Fleeing Eagle strait gives Chase : 
Next Master Alchemist puts in his Tool , 
And then amain huffs up the Dancing Foole. 
The Dragon's Tail mounts next in Fog and froth , 
And next the swollen Toad , in a Bumble-broath : 
Last comes the Crow's head , ( ugly black to see ) . 
more black ten times than any black can be . 
then mounts the fume unto the Azure Sky , 
And strait drops down the Seal of Mercury ; 
And presently the golden work is done , 
( Almost as near as when 't was first begun ) 
For then the Stone invisibly doth fall , 
Which ( if he could but see ) would make us all . 
But lest we chance to see it and not know it , 
What private marks it bears I 'll plainly show it ; 
The substance of it is nor Fire , nor Water , 
Nor Earth , or Air , nor Elemental matter ; 
It hath no shape or colour , nor is framed 
Like any thing that is unnamed , or named : 
't is neither light , or heavy , soft , nor hard , 
Nor sharp , or blunt , flat , oval , round , or squared : 
It is not sweet , nor doth it stink outright , 
't is not unpleasing , yet gives no delight . 
This is the Stone which many men desire , 
And he that finds it shall have for his hire 
Twelve Hogsheads filled ; and 24.  Buckets , 
Of Pieces , Royalls , Nobles , and of Ducats : 
Thus to its own and unknown worth alone , 
I leave this Sterile ( Gold begetting ) Stone . 
6.  Satire . The Hypocrite . 

And now my Muse hath got an appetite , 
To touch a little of the Hypocrite ; 
But let not any Reader think that I 
The name of knowing Zeal do vilify : 
For these my lines shall not touch any man , 
That ( wrong ) doth bear the Náme of Puritan ; 
no doubt , but many people well affected , 
( Are with that jeering Title much dejected ) 
Who will not swear or lie presumptuously , 
And when they err , they err unwillingly ; 
Who would be just in all they do or say , 
And know the Sunday from a common Day ; 
Who are conformable to Church and State , 
And have no minds to change or innovate : 
Who in their Callings labour , and take pain , 
And will do no man wrong for earthly gain : 
Who do ( for Conscience sake ) obey command , 
And deal no further than they understand ; 
Whose faiths are known by works , & doing good , 
Such men are of a blessed Brotherhood . 
Some such there are , whose number is too small , 
And happy were all men to be so all . 
For when the Ruffian , or profane wretch swears 
Abusing God and man , with scoffs and jeers 
If one that 's Civil mildly do reprove them , 
The Devil their Tutor presently doth move them 
To be in Choler ; strait to swear and ban , 
And call an honest man a Puritan : 
And thus some Rascals hold no man in price , 
Except he be excusive given to vice ; 
But those I mean are such , whose holy fits , 
Approves them to be hare-brained Hypocrites : 
Who with a heaved up hand , and white of eye 
Will do a man a mischief zealously : 
they 'll pray for Pardons for sins done and passed , 
Praise temperance , yet will sooner hang than fast ; 
And on Religious points will stand most stoutly , 
And in conclusion cozen men devoutly . 
Their best Opinions are like Weathercockes , 
Their wits are vapours , and their heads are blocks ; 
Their Brains are puffed , & stuffed with windy bubbles , 
Their Concord's discord , & their peace is troubles . 
Cain Sacrificed , and jesabell did fast , 
Prince Absolom some silly fools embraced ; 
So judas kissed , when as to kill he meant , 
So Pilate washed , yet was corruptly bend : 
So Annanias brought his feigned gift , 
So Satan alleged Scripture for a shift . 
These were all Hypocrites , and so are they 
That wrest , to serve God the contrary way . 
For many a soul ( by them prevented ) wanders 
In misty Labyrinths , and crooked Meanders : 
One would have this , and th' other would have that 
And most of them would have they know not what 
For were we bound unto their approbation , 
We should have a mad fashioned Congregation . 
Nor do I think it meet the Church should crave 
Their wisdoms counsel , what is fit to have , 
Their long Tantologie , extemporary prating , 
Their babbling repetitions , oft repeating , 
Are but mere froth , without Pith , weak , ungrounded , 
And these have many a Conscience pricked , and wounded ; 
For they will turn a Windmill to a Cow , 
And of a rotten Cloak-bag make a Blow . 
Ixion , so his time in vain did waste , 
When ( stead of juno ) he a Cloud embraced ; 
Upon which Cloud the Centaurs be begot , 
And such strange Monsters breeds their zeal so hot : 
Or like the fellow in a Moonshine Night , 
saw in a Pond or Poole , her likeness bright ; 
And Riding in to give his Mare some drink , 
The Moon behind a Coal-black cloud did shrink : 
He ( being drunk ) began to storm and stare , 
And swore the Moon was swallowed by his Mare . 
Such are their real Arguments , and such 
Are all their points wherein they stand so much : 
They most dispute whereas their cheer is b●…st , 
And ( in Plum-broath ) they Church & State detest : 
Of sacred Scriptures ( bet wixt every bit ) 
They Coin interpretations with their wit ; 
These separatists , the Alchemists would play , 
And turn our golden peace to Dross or Clay . 
't is not their Organizing in the Nose , 
Their hate to Verse , or love to tedious Prose : 
Their seorne , like dust that 's cast against the Wind , 
Which in their blind eyes falls & makes more blind 
For envy 's like an Arrow shot upright , 
Which on the Shooter's heads with danger light . 
Thus they by Owl-light still do miss the mark , 
And like poor Curs against the Moon they bark : 
For sure small credit to that man belongs 
That can be wronged , with babblers Pens or tongues . 
Awake my Muse , shake off this filthy scum , 
These dregss , who altogether are a sum 
Of many Simples and ingredients ; 
Of innovating disobedience . 
I wish them all with holiness endowed , 
To be more knowing zealous , and less proud : 
And as for their good sakes these lines are penned , 
I leave them either to amend or end . 


7.  Satire . The Whoore.  

I 'll tell thee who 's a Whore ; that thing 's a Whore 
Which whilst men most embrace they most abhor , 
Prized in the heat of Blood , at costly rate , 
A Dish we feed on , surfeit , and then hate : 
They Traffic for diseases , waste their youth 
In woeful Riot ; without wit , or truth . 
They sell their souls an heritage to win , 
An Heritage in Hell , dear bought with sin : 
Put case they compass age ; what 's their reward ? 
they are old , poor , scorned , & beg without regard . 
They would repent them , then know not the way ; 
Such are all Whores , who wilfully do stray : 
There hath been Whoors much honoured , Whores of State ; 
Who bought Damnation at a dear , dear rate : 
And 't is a difference , which offendeth more , 
Either a Coached , or a Carted Whore ? 
●…omprous whore may rustle some small time ; 
●…t State and Pomp extenuates no Crime . 
8.  Satire . Of degenerate Honour . 

Honour is not compiled in Rank , or File , 
Or Measure , for no man hath reached that Style 
But by supernal favour ; and from thence 
True Honour hath its only influence : 
For S●…rdanapulus was mighty once , 
Yet by Voluptuous frailty was a Dunce : 
then what an Ass is he that hath a State 
Either by his Inheritance , or Fate , 
And squanders it , and dribbles it away , 
To be his Honours and his House decay : 
He that would be a Gentleman complete , 
Should every way seek to be good as great ; 
And he that is not so , himself doth plunge , 
And is the curse of man , and Satan's sponge : 
Of Fatterers he may have a mighty shoal , 
And in the World may boar a mighty hole ; 
And when he sinks into that hole he bore●… , 
He dies unpitied ; no man him deplores . 
God is true Honour-giver , and will still 
Defend it with his Eviternall William 
And let the sacred Sisters all forefend , 
That any word should from my Muse be penned 
That may be taken a miss ; for I persuade 
Myself , that none will kick , except a Jade : 
I know I play the fool in every line , 
But no wise man will set his wit to mine ; 
Nor let a Scholar to a Sculler be 
An opposite , though different in Degree ; 
For though I touched at damned pride before , 
Perhaps I should be proud if I had more . 
I blame the man that 's covetous , but why ? 
Because I want his precious Treasury . 
I jeer the Quack-salver , and Mountebank , 
Alas I cannot reach unto their Rank . 
I scoff the maund ring Knave , and Alchemist , 
Yet I ( perhaps ) would fain do what I list . 
I mock the Hypocrite , yet I confess 
I ( Hypocrittically ) still transgress : 
And I am stark naught , so that Tongue nor Pen , 
Can make me better than the worst of men . 
FINIS . 

