THE Subject's joy , For the Parliament . 

JACOBUS REX . 



Such and so great , all man's Corruption is 
In shunning Good , and running to Amiss : 
That the Almighty , did long since ordain 
Laws , that should our rebellious wills restrain . 
And from that Parliament , of highest Heaven 
A Statute , and an Ordinance was given , 
That from those Laws of the Eternal King , 
All other Laws ( that govern men ) should spring . 
And as the Sea in Rivers , Creeks and Bays , 
Flows , and disperses many several ways : 
So doth God's Acts in many Branches run , 
To show us what should be undone , or done . 
For this cause did the power of Heaven ordain , 
That Kings ( like Gods ) on Earth should Rule and Reign : 
To judge , to be a Refuge , and Defence 
With Right , of too much wronged Innocence . 
And for this cause , God doth a King command , 
That he his Laws should Read and understand . 
And sure , of All the Kingdoms that there are 
Beneath the Heavens , none may with us compare : 
To us th' Almighty , graciously did grant 
Freely his Sacred Gospel here to plant , 
Making Great Britain an Admired mirror , 
( When other Nations blindly live in Error . ) 
For us a matchless King , he out did pick , 
Defendor of the Faith Apostolic , 
Who all his Laws and Statutes doth incline , 
Conformable unto the Laws Divine . 
God's Law in every faithful heart is written , 
And our King's Government doth witness it . 
And now these Eighteen years a blessed Peace , 
Hath made our sins ( more than our thanks ) increase , 
That breach of Laws , hath sown neglected seeds , 
Being almost grown unprofitable weeds : 
Our Gracious King , these evils to prevent , 
Assembled hath a Royal Parliament . 
The high Creator , made this Kingly Creature 
His Steward , by his Office , Name , and Nature , 
And he doth guide and Rule this happy Land , 
As he is guided by th' Almighty's hand . 
And though a King hath Honour and Renown , 
Yet many Cares attend upon a Crown : 
And though a King a Royal port doth keep , 
Yet doth he wake , when Subject ; often sleep . 
And had not our dread Sovereign , been protected 
By the Almighty , who hath him directed , 
We could not have enjoyed such Peace and Rest , 
Wherewith so many years we have been blessed . 
And as he now hath caused a Parliament , 
God still be present there , and Precedent : 
Let the King's heart as it hath done persever , 
That God may have the Glory , now and ever . 
( Like David ) let him not from goodness start , 
But be a man according to God's heart . 
Let Salomon's great Wisdom ever be 
In him , that Good from Ill he may foresee : 
Let him with Iosua's courage ( Constantly ) 
The Devil , the world , and eke the Flesh defy . 
And let him ( like to Moses ) ever write , 
And ordain Laws that may be Just and Right . 
Like faithful Hushays be his Counsel still , 
To give Advice according to thy william 
Guide thou the Reverend Bishops , and the Peers , 
The judges , and elected Knights , of Shires , 
And Burgesses of Towns within this Land , 
Do thou ( OH God ) amid their Counsel stand . 
Let all their Consultations , still depend 
To beat down Vice , and Virtue to defend : 
Thy Gospel to increase and propagate , 
And for the Good of Commonwealth and State. 
The Pride of Haman , far from them expel , 
confound the Counsel of Ahitophell : 
Pluck Heresies up by the very Root , 
And tread proud Antichrist quite under foot . 
Banish 〈◊〉 , leprous with base Bribes , 
Papisticke pharisees , Sophistic Scribes : 
And those that wholesome Laws can wrist and wring , 
For gain against Conscience , Country , and their King. 
Thus being guided by thy blessed Spirit , 
They will accomplish Statutes worthy merit : 
That after Ages gladly may Receive 
The Acts , and Orders , which our times must leave . 
Let Prince , and Peers , and people thus Combine , 
The profit will be ours , the Glory thine : 
And as thy Blessings hath been multiplied 
Upon our Kingdom , let them still abide : 
Let not our Sins as a partition be , 
Or make us be as castawayes to thee . 
Let not our Crimes thy Indignation move , 
Whereby they may us separate from thy Love : 
But as thy favours to Us have been such , 
As never any Kingdom had so much , 
So let our thankfulness to thee therefore , 
Be every day expressed more and more . 
Protect the King with thy Almighty Arms , 
Save him from Foreign and Domestic harms : 
At all times with thy heavenly Grace relieve him , 
And after Death a Crown of Glory give him . 
Preserve for evermore , our gracious Prince , 
And strength him , his and thy Foes to convince , 
The Prince and Princess Palatines high Grace , 
With all the Royal and the hopeful Race : 
Defend them Against all that them oppose , 
And fight their Battles still against their Foes . 
Grant that of this Seed we may never want one , 
To magnify thy Name in Britain's Throne : 
Until our Saviour , and thy only Son , 
Shall come in judgement , and the world be done . 
To whom with thee and with the Holy Ghost , 
Be rendered ( every where from Coast to Coast ) 
All Honour , Glory , Power , Might , Praise , Thanksgiving , 
To thee three persons , one GOD , everliving . 
FINIS . 

john Taylor 

Printed by E Allde for H. G. and are to be sold by Edw : Wright . 





 Deu. 17. 15   Heb. 8. 10.   2 Sam. 15.  