A BRIEF REMEMBRANCE OF ALL THE ENGLISH MONARCHES , 

From the Normans Conquest , until this present . 

BY JOHN TAYLOR 

LONDON : 

Printed by George Eld , for Henry Gosson . 1618.  

WILLIAM THE FIRST , Surnamed the CONQVEROUR : KING OF ENGLAND , And DUKE OF NORMANDY . 

William 7 D : of Normandy . at the age of 38 years' Conquered England , Was Crowned at Westminster the 25 of December . 1667 Reigned 20 Years 10 months . 26. days . died at St. garuis in Norm the 9 of Septemb buried at Caen in Normandy . 



William Conqueror . 

BY bloody battles , Conquest , and by Fate , 
Fair England's Crown and Kingdom I surprised : 
I topsy-turvy turned the English State , 
And Laws and Customs new and strange devised . 
And where I vanquished , there I tyrannised , 
In stead of people's love , enforcing fear : 
Extorting Tolls I daily exercised , 
And Tributes , greater than this Land could bear . 
Besides , ( the Normans fame the more to rear ) 
The English I forbade the English tongue , 
French Schools of Grammar I ordained here , 
And ' 'gainst this Nation added wrong to wrong . 
At last my Crown , Sword , Sceptre , Conquest brave 
I left , I lost , scarce found an earthly Grave . 
WILLIAM THE SECOND , Surnamed RUFUS : KING OF ENGLAND , And DUKE OF NORMANDY . 

William Rufus was Crowned at Westminster the 26. of Septemb 1087. being 21 years of age . He reigned 12 years 11. months 18. days . was killed with an arrow in new forest the 2 of Aug : 1160. was buried at winchester 



William Rufus . 

What my triumphant Father won , I held , 
I peeled and polled this Kingdom more than he . 
Great Tributes from my people I compelled : 
no place in Church , or Commonwealth was free , 
But always those that would give most to me 
Obtained their purpose being wrong or right . 
The Clergy I enforced to agree 
To sell Church-plate and Chalices outright , 
Until at last ( by the Almighty's might ) 
My Kingly power and force was forceless made , 
My glorious pomp that seemed t'eclips men's sight , 
Did vanish by a glance , by chance , and fade : 
For hunting in New forest ( void of fear ) 
A Subject slew me , shooting at a Deer . 
HENRY THE FIRST , Surnamed BEAUCLERK : KING OF ENGLAND , And DUKE OF NORMANDY . 

Henry the 1 , Beuclarck , born at selby in york shire Was crowned at the age of 30 years the ●● of August . he Reigned 35.  Years 4. months Died in the forest of Lions . in the 65. year of age 1135. buried in Redding abbey 



Henry I  

MY Father and my Brother Kings , both gone , 
With acclamations Royal I was crowned : 
And having gained the Sceptre and the Throne , 
I with the name of Beauclerk was renowned : 
The English Laws long lost , I did refound , 
False weights and measures I corrected true . 
The power of Wales in fight I did confound , 
And Normandy my valour did subdue . 
Yet I unmindful whence these glories grew , 
My elder Brother Robert did surprise , 
Detained him , and usurped his Royal due , 
And most vnnat'rally plucked out his eyes , 
Kings live like Gods , but yet like men they die , 
All must pay Nature's due , and so did I  
STEPHEN KING OF ENGLAND , And DUKE OF NORMANDY . 

King Stephen son to Stephen Earl of Blois : and of Adela daughter to William Conqueror : began his reign the 2d. of December , 1135. he reigned 18 years , 11 months , and 18 days , died at the age of 49 years , and lieth buried at Feversham . 



K. Stephen . 

BY wrested Titles and usurping claim , 
Through storms & tempests of tumultuous wars , 
The Crown , ( my fairest mark and fouleft aim ) 
I won and wore , beleaguered round with jars . 
The English , Scots , and Normans all prepares 
Their powers exposing to oppose my powers , 
Whilst this Land laden and or'ewhelmed with cares 
Endures , whilst war , woe , want , and death devours , 
But as years , months , weeks , days , decline by hours , 
Hours into minutes , minutes into naught : 
My painful pomp decayed like fading flowers 
And unto naught was my Ambition brought . 
Thus is the state of transitory things , 
there 's nothing can be permanent with Kings . 
HENRY THE SECOND , KING OF ENGLAND , DUKE OF NORMANDY , Guienne and Aquitaine , etc.  

Henry the 2. surnamed plantagenett . Reigned 34 Years 9 months and 2 days . He died the 6 of July 1189. in the 61 Year of his age was buried at fonteverard in normandy . 



Henry 2.  

TO th' empress Maud I was undoubted heir , 
And in her Right my title being just , 
By justice I obtained the Regal Chair . 
Fair Rosamond I soiled with foul lust , 
For which Heavens justice ( hating deeds unjust ) 
Stirred up my wife and Sons to be my foes : 
Who sought to lay my Glory in the dust , 
And he med me round with cruel wars and woes . 
They poisoned my sweet beauteous tainted Rose , 
By Isabella's device my furious Queen : 
My very bowels against me did oppose : 
Such fruit hath lust , such force hath jealous spleen . 
My cursed crosses made me curse my birth , 
With care I lived , reigned , died , and turned to earth . 
RICHARD THE FIRST , Surnamed CVER DE LYON . KING OF ENGLAND , DUKE OF NORMANDY , Guienne and Aquitaine , etc.  

King Richard surnamed Cordelyon . Was 43 Years old when he had Raigued 9 Years 9 months and 22 days was wounded and died the 6 day of april 1199.  Was buried at fonteverard 



Richard I  

Through my Creator's mercy and his might , 
jerusalem I conquered and set free 
False misbelieving ewes , and Turkish spite 
From jury force perforce I forced to flee . 
The Realm of Cypress was subdued by me . 
Sicilia trembled a : my prowess bold . 
King Tancred bought his peace , and did agree , 
And paid me threescore ounces of fine gold , 
Whilst I abroad wone honours manifold . 
Aspiring john ( my Brother ) vexed my Realm . 
In Austria I was ta'en , and laid in hold : 
Thus floods of grief each way me overwhelm . 
At last I home returned , my Ransom paid , 
My earthly glory in a Grave was laid . 
JOHN KING OF ENGLAND , DUKE OF NORMANDY , Guienne and Aquitaine : LORD OF IRELAND , etc.  

King John , surnamed without land Reigned 17 Years and 7 months died 19 day of october , 1216.  Was buried at worcester in the 51 Year of his age 



K. John.  

Romes' mighty miterd Metropolitan 
I did oppose , and was by him deposed : 
He turned his cursed blessings to his ban , 
And caused me round to be with cares enclosed . 
The English and the Normans me oppos'de , 
And Lewis of France my Kingdom did molest , 
Whilst I to all these miseries exposed , 
Consumed my Kingly days in restless rest . 
At last the Pope was pleased , and I reblest ; 
Peace was obtained , proclaimed I re-inthroaned . 
Thus was my reign with woes oppressed and pressed , 
Blessed cursed , friends , foes , divided and atoned . 
And after seventeen years were gone and passed , 
At Swinstead poisoned , there I drank my last . 
HENRY THE THIRD , KING OF ENGLAND , Lord of IRELAND , DUKE OF NORMANDY , Guienne and Aquitaine , etc.  

King Henry the 3.  Was Crowned at the age of 9 Years the 28 october 1216 he Reigned 56 Years and 20 days , died the 16 of november 1272 tieth buried at Westminster . 



Henry 3  

IN toil and trouble , midst contentious broils , 
I seized the Sceptre of this famous Land : 
then being greatly wasted with the spoils 
Which Lewis had made with his French furious band 
But I with Peers and people bravely manned , 
Repelled , repulsed , expulsed insulting foes . 
My Barons did my Sovereignty withstand , 
And wrapped themselves and me in wars and woes : 
But in each battle none but I did lose , 
I lost my Subject's lives on every side : 
( From Civil wars no better gaining grows ) 
Friends , foes , my people , all , that fought or died . 
My gains was less , my pleasure was my pain . 
These were the triumphs of my troublous Reign . 
EDWARD THE FIRST , KING OF ENGLAND , Lord of IRELAND , Duke of AQVITAINE , etc.  

Eduard the 1. born at westmin was Crowned at westmi : At the age of 33 years . the 18 of September . the 2. year of his reign 1274 He reigned 34 Years 6. months and 14 days . he died at burgh upon the sands . lieth buried at westminster . 



Edward Longshanks . 

MY Victories , my Valour , and my strength , 
My Actions , and my neuer-conquered name , 
Were spread throughout the world in breadth & length 
By mortal deeds , I won immortal Fame . 
Rebellious Wales I finally did tame , 
And made them Vassals to my Princely Son : 
jentred Scotland fierce with Sword and Flame , 
And almost all that Kingdom overrun . 
Still where I fought , triumphantly I won , 
Through Blood and Death my Glory I obtained : 
But in the end when all my acts were done , 
A Sepulchre was all the gain I gained . 
For though great Kings contend for earthly sway , 
Death binds them to the peace , and parts the fray . 
EDWARD THE SECOND , KING OF ENGLAND , Lord of IRELAND , Duke of AQVITAINE , etc.  

King Edward the 2. surnamed Carnaruen was crowned at westminster at the 22. year of his age the 24. of febru : 1308. he Reigned 19 year . 6 months Was deposed the 25 of janiwarius 1326. he was slain : in the castle of barkley in the 43 year of his age . 



Edward 2.  

Soon after was my father's Corpse interred , 
Whilst Fate and Fortune did on me attend : 
And to the Royal Throne I was preferred , 
With Aue Caesar every knee did bend , 
But all these fickle joys , did fading end , 
Peirce Gaveston , to thee my love combined : 
My friendship to thee scarce left me a friend , 
But made my Queen , Peers , People , all unkind , 
I tortured , both in body and in mind 
Was vanquished by the Scots at Bannocks Bourne : 
And I enforced by flight some safety find , 
Yet taken by my Wife at my return , 
A Redhot spit my Bowels through did gore , 
Such misery , no Slave endured more . 
EDWARD THE THIRD , KING OF ENGLAND , And FRANCE , LORD OF IRELAND , etc.  

Eduard the 3. born at winsor . was Crowned at westminster the 2. of feb : 1327. being 15.  Years old Reigned 50. years 4 months 24 days . Died the 21 of June 1377 lieth buired in west : . 



Edward 3  

IN Peace and War , my Stars auspicious stood , 
False Fortune steadfast held her wavering Wheel ; 
I did revenge my Fathers butche'rd blood , 
I forced France my furious force to feel : 
I Warred on Scotland with triumphing Steel , 
Afflicting them with slaughtcring Sword and Fire : 
That Kingdom then divided needs mustreele , 
Betwixt the Bruces and the Balliols' ire . 
Thus daily still my glory mounted higher , 
With black Prince Edward my victorious Son , 
Unto the top of Honour we aspire , 
By manly , Princely , worthy actions done . 
But all my Triumphs , fortunes , strength , and force , 
Age brought to death , and death turned to a Corse . 
RICHARD THE SECOND , KING OF ENGLAND , And FRANCE : LORD OF IRELAND , etc.  

RICHARD the 2. born at Bordeaux Son to Edward Prince of Wales . begann his Reign the 21 of june An o : Dni : 1377. he Raiged 22. years , was Deposed : & died the 14. of February 1399.  First buried at Langley in Hartfordshire . & afterwards at Westminster . 



Richard 2.  

A Sunshine morn , precedes a showry day , 
A Calm at Sea oft times foreruns a Storm : 
All is not gold that soemes so glistering gay : 
Fowl Vice is fairest features Cankerworm , 
So I that was of blood , descent and form , 
The perfect image of a royal stock , 
Unseasoned young a duice did me deform , 
Split all my Hopes against Despairs black rock , 
My Regal name and power was made a mock , 
My Subjects madly in Rebellion rose , 
Mischief on mischief all in troops did flock , 
Opposed , deposed , exposed , enclosed in woes , 
With wavering fortunes , troublously I reigned , 
Slain by soul murder , peace and rest I gained . 
HENRY THE FOURTH KING OF ENGLAND , And FRANCE : LORD OF IRELAND , etc.  

HENRY the 4. born at Bollingbroke in the County of Lincoln , begun his Reign the 26. of September . 1ST Reigned 13. years & 6. months & died in An o : D : 1413.  Of the age of 46. years , buried at Canterbury 



Henry 4.  

From right ( wrong-doing ) Richard I did wrist 
His Crown misguided , but on me misplaced : 
Uncivil Civil Wars my Realm molest , 
And English men did England spoil and waste . 
The Sire the Son , the Son the Father chased , 
Undutiful , unkind , unnatural , 
Both York and Lancaster were raised and razed , 
As Conquest did to either Faction fall . 
But still I gripped the Sceptre and the Ball , 
And what by wrong I wone , by might I wore : 
For Prince of Wales I did my Son install , 
But as my Martial Fame grew more and more , 
By fatal Fate my vital thread was cut , 
And all my Greatness in a Grave was put . 
HENRY THE fifth , KING OF ENGLAND , And FRANCE : LORD OF IRELAND , etc.  

Henry the 5. bagan his Reign . the 20. of March. Was Crowned At Westminster . the 9 of April . 1413.  He Reigned 9 Years . 2 months . died in the castle of Boys ne'er paris the 13 of August . 1422. buried at Westminster . 



Henry 5.  

From my Lancastrian Sire succesively , 
I England's glorious golden Garland got : 
I tempered justice with mild clemency , 
Much blood I shed , yet bloodshed loved not . 
Time my Sepulchre and my bones may rot , 
But ay I 'm can never end my endless fame . 
ON livion cannot my brave acts out blot , 
Or make Forgetfulness forget my name . 
I played all France at Tennis such a Game , 
With roaring Rackets , bandied Balls and Foils : 
And what I played for , still I won the same , 
Triumphantly transporting home the spoils . 
But in the end grim Death my life affailed , 
And as I lived I died , beloved , bewailed . 
HENRY THE sixth , KING OF ENGLAND , And FRANCE : LORD OF IRELAND , etc.  

Henry the 6 of the age of 8 months began his Reign , Tte . 1. of September . 1422.  Crowned at Westminster the 6 of November 1429 afterward Crowned at Paris 7 September 1431 Reigned 38 years 6 months 4 days Buried at Winsore . 



Henry 6.  

Great England's Mars ( my Father ) being dead , 
I , not of years , or year ; but eight months old : 
The Diadem was placed upon my head , 
In royal Robes the Sceptre I did hold : 
But as th' almighties works are manifold , 
Too high for man's conceit to comprehend : 
In his eternal Register enrolled 
My Birth , my troublous Life and tragic End. 
Against me the house of York their force did bend , 
And Peers and People weltered in their gore : 
My Crown and Kingdom they from me did read , 
Which I , my Sire , and Grandsire kept and wore . 
Twice was I crowned , uncrowned , oft blessed , oft crossed , 
And lastly , murdered , life and kingdom lost . 
EDWARD THE FOURTH , KING OF ENGLAND , And FRANCE , LORD OF IRELAND , etc.  

Edward the 4 being 18 years Old . began his Reign the 4 of march 1460 he was crowned 6 of June he Reigned 22 years 1 month 8 days and lieth buried in Windsor . 



Edward 4.  

I York's great heir ( by fell domestic War ) 
Enthroned was , vn-kinged , and reinthroaned : 
Subiecting quite the House of Lancaster , 
Whilst woeful England overburdened , groaned : 
Old Sonless Sires and Childless Mothers moaned : 
These bloody broils had lasted threescore years , 
And till the time we were in peace attoaned , 
It wasted fourscore of the Royal Peers : 
But age and time all earthly things outweares , 
Through terrors , horrors , mischief and debate , 
By trust , by treason , by hopes , doubts and fears , 
I got , I kept , I left and lost the State. 
Thus as disposing heavens do smile or frown , 
So Cares or Comforts wait upon a Crown . 
EDWARD THE fifth , KING OF ENGLAND , And FRANCE , LORD OF IRELAND , etc.  

Edward the 5 being 13 years of age came at london to be crowned the 4 of may 1483.  Was deposed of his Crown by his onnaturall onkel the protecter , last his lyff in the tower his burial is onknowen . 



Edward 5.  

IF birth , if beauty , innocence and youth , 
could make a Tyrant feel one spark of grace , 
My crooked Uncle had been moved to ruth , 
Beholding of my pity-pleading face . 
But what avails to spring from royal Race ? 
What surety is in beauty , strength , or wit ? 
What is command , might , eminence and place , 
When treason lurks where Majesty doth sit ? 
My hapless self had true false proof of it : 
Nipped in my bud and blasted in my bloom : 
Deprived of life by murder , most unfit , 
And for three Kingdoms could not have one Tomb. 
Thus Treason all my glory ouer-toped , 
And ever the Fruit could spring , the Tree was lopped 
RICHARD THE THIRD , KING OF ENGLAND , And FRANCE : LORD OF IRELAND , etc.  

Richard the 3. king of England began his Reign the 22. of June 1483. he Reigned 2 Years 2. months he was slain at bosworth by Henry earl of Richmond . And lieth buried at leicester . 



Richard 3  

Ambition's like unto a quenchless thirst . 
Ambition Angels threw from Heaven to Hell , 
Ambition ( that infernal Hag ) accursed , 
Ambitiously made me aspire , rebel : 
Ambition , that damned Necromantic Spell , 
Made me climb proud , with shame to tumble down . 
By bloody murder I did all expel , 
Whose right , or might , debarred me from the Crown , 
My smiles , my gifts , my favours , or my frown , 
Were feigned , corrupt , vile flattery , death and spite , 
By cruel Tyranny I got renown , 
Till Heaven's just judge me justly did requite . 
By blood I won , by blood I lost the Throne : 
Detested lived ; died loved , bewailed of none . 
HENRY THE SEVENTH , KING OF ENGLAND , And FRANCE : LORD OF IRELAND , etc.  

Henry the 7. began his Reign the 22. of June 1485.  And was Crowned at Westminster the 30 of octob He Reigned 25.  Years . and 8. months . and died the 22. of April . lieth buried at Westminster . 



Henry 7.  

I Was the Man ( by God's high grace assigned ) 
That for this restless Kingdom purchas 't Rest : 
I York and Lancaster in one combined , 
That sundered , had each other long oppressed . 
My strength and policy th' almighty blessed 
With good success , from first unto the last : 
And high jehovah turned to the best , 
A world of perils which my youth o'er past . 
The white and red Rose I conjoined fast 
In sacred Marriages Conjugal band : 
I Traytorstamed , and treason stood aghast 
At me ; strong guarded by my Maker's hand . 
In glory and magnificence I Reigned , 
And fame , love and a tomb was all I gained . 
HENRY THE EIGHT , KING OF ENGLAND , France and Ireland , Defender of the FAITH , etc.  

Henry the 8 Was born at Grenwich Entered his Reign being 18 years of age the 22 of April 1509.  Was Crowned at Westminster the 25. of June following . He Reigned 37. years and 9 months died the 28. of June . buried at Windsor . 



Henry 8.  

TO both the Royal Houses I was Heir ; 
I made but one of long contending twain : 
This Realm divided drooping in despair , 
I did rebinde in my auspicious Reign . 
I banished Romish Usurpation vain . 
In France I Bullen , Turwin , Turney won : 
The Style of Faith's Defender I did gain . 
Six wives I had , three Ans , two Kates , one jane. 
In my expenses Royal , beyond measure , 
Striving in Noble Actions to exceed ; 
Accounting Honour as my greatest Treasure : 
Yet various fancies did my frailty feed , 
I made and marred , I did , and I undid , 
Till all my Greatness in a Grave was hid . 
EDWARD THE sixth , KING OF ENGLAND , France and Ireland , Defender of the FAITH , etc.  

Edward born at Hamton Court at the age of 9 years began his reign the 31 of Janu 1546.  Crowned at Westm : the 20 of februa : following , he reigned 6 years , 5 months died the 6 of Julie buried at westminster 



Edward 6.  

I Seemed in wisdom aged in my youth , 
A Princely pattern ; I reformed the time : 
With zeal and courage I maintained God's truth , 
And Christian faith 'gainst Antichristian crime . 
My Father did begin ; I , in my prime , 
Both Baal and Beliall from this Kingdom drove , 
With concord's true harmonious heavenly chime 
I caused be said and sung God's truth and love . 
From virtue unto virtue still I strove , 
I lived beloved both of God and men : 
My soul unto her Maker soared above , 
My earthly part returned to earth again . 
Thus Death , my fair proceedings did prevent , 
And Peers and People did my loss lament . 
MARY QUEEN OF ENGLAND , France and Freland , Defender of the FAITH , etc.  

Maria nata Grenovici two febru : 1505.  Incipit regnare . 6.  juli : 1553.  Regnavit 5 annos et 4 mensis . Obyt annos nata 45. et 9 mensis 



Queen Mary . 

no sooner I possessed the Royal Throne , 
But true Religion strait was dispossessed : 
Bad Counsel caused Rome , Spain , and I , as one , 
To persecute , to martyr , and molest 
All that the unstained Truth of God professed : 
All such as dared oppugn the powerful Pope , 
With grievous Tortures were oppressed and pressed , 
With Axes , Fire , and Faggot , and the Rope . 
Scarce any Land beneath the heavenly Cope , 
Afflicted was , as I caused this to be : 
And when my fortunes were in highest hope , 
Death at the five years' end arrested me . 
no Bale would serve , I could command no aid , 
But I in prison in my Grave was laid . 
ELIZABETH QUEEN OF ENGLAND , France and Freland , Defender of the FAITH , etc.  

The most excellent Princes Elizabeth . Queen of England , France , and Ireland . Defendor of the Faith etc. She reigned 44 years , died the 24 , of March , 1602 aged 69 , 6 months : and lieth buried at Westminster 



Queen Elizabeth . 

The griefs , the fears , the terrors and the toils , 
The sleights , tricks , snares , that for my life were laid ; 
Pope's prisons , poisons , pistols , bloody broils , 
All these encompassed me ( poor harmless Maid ) 
But I still trusting in my Maker's aid , 
Was still defended by his power divine : 
My Glory and my Greatness was displayed 
As far as Sun and Moon did ever shine . 
God's mingled service I did rerefine 
From Romish rubbish , and from human dross . 
I yearly made the pride of Spain decline : 
France and all Belgin I saved from loss . 
I was Arts pattern , t'armes I was a Patron ; 
I lived and died a Queen , a Maid , a Matron . 
JAMES , Of that name THE FIRST , And First MONARCH of the whole Island of GREAT BRITAIN 

Uniting under one , and the same his most Glorious Crown , the Kingdoms of ENGLAND , SCOTLAND , FRANCE and IRELAND : 

God's immediate VICEGERENT , Supreme HEAD of all persons : 

And Defender of the true , ancient , Christian Faith in these his Empire and Dominions . 

Whom God long preserve . 

The right high and most mighty Monarch JAMES by the grace of God King of Great Britain France and Ireland etc Defendor of the faith 

King James . 

Were all the flattery of the world in me , 
( Great King of Hearts and Arts , Great Britain's King 
Yet all that flattery could not flatter thee : 
Or add to thy renown the smallest thing . 
My Muse ( with truth and freedom ) dares to sing , 
thou art a Monarch loved of God and men . 
Two famous Kingdoms thou to one didst bring , 
And gav'st lost Britain's name , her name again . 
thou causedst Doctors with their learned pen , 
The sacred Bible newly to translate . 
Thy Wisdom found the damned powdered Den , 
That Hell had hatched to overthrow thy state . 
And all the world thy Motto must allow , 
The Peacemakers are blessed ; and so art thou . 
CHARLES' PRINCE OF WALES , etc.  

The most Illustrious Prince Charles Prince of Great Britain and Ireland , Duke of Cornwall , York , and Albany . Earl of Chester , & Kt of the most noble order of the Garter etc.  



Prince Charles . 

Illustrious Offspring , of most glorious Stems , 
Our happy hope , our Royal CHARLES the great , 
Successive Heir to four Rich Diadems , 
With gifts of Grace , and Learning high replete . 
For thee th' almighties aid I do entreat , 
To guide and prospero thy proceedings still , 
That long thou mayst survive a Prince complete , 
To guard the Good , and to subvert the Ill. 
And when ( by Gods determined boundless will ) 
Thy gracious Father shall Immortal be , 
then let thy Fame ( like his ) the world full fill , 
That thou mayst joy in us , and we in thee . 
And all true Britain's prey to God above , 
To match thy life and fortune with their love . 
FINIS . 





Compton Holland excudit  