Tho jolley esq. f. s. a.  





A valorous and perilous sea-fight . 

Fought with three Turkish ships , pirates or men of war , on the coast of Cornwall , ( Or Western part of England ) by the good ship named the Elizabeth , of Plymouth , she being of the burden of 200 tuns , which fight was bravely fought , on Wednesday , the 17 of June last past . 1640.  

London printed by e. p. for Edward Wright , dwelling near Christs-church gate . 1640.  

A valorous sea-fight . 

Master hackluit , in his well composed book of voyages , doth truly relate of many brave attempts , and resolute sea-fights , and withal he doth name the chief commanders and others who valiantly lived and died in the said achievements ; as Sebastian Cabot a Venetian born , brought up in England , Windam , Willobie , chancellor , Grinvill , Cavendish , Gilbert , Chidlie , Frobisher , Hawkins , Clifford , Wingfield , Devoreux , Bascarvill , Drake , Raleigh , who have all left famous remembrances of their valiant adventurous and fortunate services performed by them for the honour of their Prince and country , and their own just commendations to the end of time . And in these later times this kingdom hath produced many brave and able mem , that ( To the admiration of the world ) have ploughed and furrowed the dangerous ocean , and ( Maugre all opposition ) been profitable and victorious , for the service and renown of our nation , such as were and are Pennington , Nicholas , maldam , Weddell , Hyde , and many others , who do deserve to have their names enrowled in the book of fame . So ( For the continuation of this kingdom's renown ) it pleases God to supply us with valiant and undaundted spirits , such as these of whom i am to make mention in this following discourse . 

On the 17. day of June last , a ship of the port of Plymouth , of 200. in burden , ( The name of her being the Elizabeth , and the owner of her is our Master Abraham Jennings , the ship having been in a voyage to New-england , and thence to Virginia , after some 12.  Month's time returned laden from thence , and making their best speed for their arrival at home , they were ( On the day aforesaid ) about two of the clock in the morning , within two leagues near to the Lizzard , which is a small island , a good sea mark on the West part of the mount in Cornwall between Scilly & the main , assaulted furiously by 3 Turkish pirates ( Or men of war ) where there was a most bloody and cruel bickering . The accursed Mahometans , having gotten the wind of the Elizabeth , which was a great advantage for them , their admiral being in burden 230.  Tons , with 22.  Pieces of ordnance in her . The vice admiral was of a greater burden , about 300.  Tons , with 26.  Pieces of ordnance : the rear admiral was in burden 200.  Tons , and had but 8.  Pieces in her . So the Turks had in their three ships 56 : pieces of artillery , the number of their men is unknown . 

On the other side the Elizabeth had but 30. men , and three of that small number were passengers , or ( As they term them planters ) and they had but ten pieces of ordnance aboard , and of those , they could make use of , or ply but five guns , the ship was so pestered with packs , and other carriage between the decks . The Master of the ships name was Master doves , ( Who dwelled in Plymouth ) a man of an excellent and invincible spirit , as the sequel of the fight , and his worthy life , and unfortunate death will show . 

The fight continue about the time between seven and eight hours , and though the English ship had but 3.  Pieces of ordnance ( That could be used ) yet by God's assistance the Master gunner ( Being a skilful valiant and experienced man , he so plied and played upon the miscreants , that he killed many of them . 

The gunners of the ships name is John Whidon . and all the while that the Master of the ship ( Master doves ) most manfully and courageously , did labour and bestir himself , and by his valorous example gave encouragement to all the rest of his company that were in the ship , amongst whom the three passengers which were with us , did most worthy deserving service . The Master still cheered them up , and told them , that ( By God's grace ) he would not give away his ship and himself to those accursed misbelievers , but that he was resolved with Christian courage to fight it out so long as his life lasted . 

And indeed he was as good as his word , for being so long a time furiously assaulted with many ordnance , and about 500 enemies , and also being three times boarded , and entered by the Turks ( Who were also thrice beaten out again ) their ship being fired , and their round house burned , their main-sail was likewise consumed in the flames , and their rigging and cordage cut down and spoilt . At last the Master was slain , ending his days nobly , likewise the masters-mate , and the pilot , and quartermaster were killed outright , they having done as much as men could do against so strong an enemy , kept Master doves company , both in life and death , and in heavenly happiness . 

In this terrible turmoil , there were two of the Turks had got themselves up into the top , and one of the three passengers ( With a musket ) shot at them , and killed them both : one of those slain pirates , was a man of an extraordinary great stature , and for his corpulency , not to be equaled amongst them all ; he being killed , the English did cleave his head , and then they divided it from his carcase , they showed the head and corpse to the Turks , and with renewed courages and unwearied valour they haled to the enemy , and in braving manner said , come aboard you dogs if you dare , and fetch your countryman ; but the Turks finding the business so hot , and the men so resolute , that their damnable courages were queled , that they had no more mind to assault the English ship any more . So they in deriding and shouting to the Turks , cast the dead body overboard , on the one side of the ship , and the cloven head into the sea , on the other . 

There were also three Turks more slain that came aboard . But how many the number of them that were killed is uncertain , therefore let them reckon them . But surely their loss must needs be great , for the Master gunner was so diligent , wary and expert , that it was not perceived that there was a shot lost or spent in vain , and indeed for his skill and courage , he is esteemed not to have many fellows in the West parts of England , for his knowledge in that art . 

The loss on the Christian side , were those four men , which were killed outright ( As is aforesaid ) there were also eight more of them dangerously wounded , whereof one of them is dead , since their arrival at Plymouth ; and ( Praise be given to God ) the other seven are all on the mending hand and indifferent well , so that there is no doubt of their recovery , to health and limbs unmaimed , only their scars will remain , as marks of their valour , and badges of famous reputation . 

The Master gunner , being the chief commander left alive in the ship , did hail to the Turks again , and dared them to come on again and try the other bout . But they had had such proof of his courage and knowledge before in the fight , being so shattered , torn , and gauled ; that they could neither boast of victory , nor durst then venture any more to gain it , for they perceived the gunner's resolution was never to yield , and so they fell to their sails , and tacklin , and very much discontented slunk away , making their moans to Mahomet . 

There were certain hogs , and powltrey , in the Elizabeth ; and in the heat of the fight , ( The ship being much rent and torn with the shot of the enemy ) the poor swine and Pullen were killed , partly with the bullets , but most with the shatters and splinters of shivered planks , and timber of the ship . Wherefore ( In derision and scorn of the Turks , who do abhor and hold all manner of swine's flesh in abomination ) the English mariners lifted up the hogs , and showed them to the Turk , as it were in a merry or jeeringway , to invite them to come aboard of their ship to eat some pork . Thus ( By the merciful assistance of God ) this one poor ship , so weakly manned , and so meanly furnished with artillery or ordnance , against so many , and so great a multitude , ( As were 3.  Ships , 500  Men , and 56.  Pieces , maintain a fight almost 8. hours , and ( With the loss of 3.  Men ) not only kill and spoil a great number of their enemies , but also to escape them , and come off with reputation , ( As it were with conquest , triumph , and victory . It is almost to be thought miraculous and beyond belief , but that the truth of the matter is so plainly manifested that all oposing unbelief is vain and frivolous . 

For after the Turks had quite left them , they began every man to work hard , some to lay the dead corpse as decently and cool as time and place would give them leave , some others ( Who had escaped hurts , or had not received great harms in the fight ) did their best to help , dress and comfort their wounded men : and some of them ( With all speed and diligence ) fell to mending their ropes , cordage , rigging , and sails , which were cut , broken , spoilt , and burned in the fight ; so that no one was idle , every man employed in doing something necessary , that ( By God's guidance ) the ship and goods arrived safe in the harbour , or port of Plymouth . the next morning , which was Thursday , the eighteenth day of June last 1640.  

The bodies of the four men that were slain aboard the Elizabeth , were brought on shore , and in seemly manner buried . And at their funerals they had two learned , acute , and gratulatorie sermons , the one of them was preached at the Master of the ships funeral , by the archdeacon of Exeter , who is vicar of Plymouth , and the other was preached ( At the masters-mates funeral ) by Master Thomas Bedfourd , bachelor in divinity , and lecturer of Plymouth , and this May suffice for sufficient testimony of the certainty of this former relation . 

But if there be any that be yet doubtful or diffident in this case , let them ( For their further satisfaction ) read this following examination , of John Whiddon , the valiant and well deserving gunner , whom my pen cannot praise enough , nor these ingrateful times gratify him ; read but his examination as followeth , and be confirmed in the truth , for this is a true copy of it , which was sent up from Plymouth , to London , to the right honourable the Lords of his majesty's most honourable privy counsel . 

The examination of John Whiddon of Plymouth , in the county of Devon , gunner , had and taken at Plymouth aforesaid , before Robert gobs , merchant , major of the borough of Plymouth aforesaid , and one of his majesty's justices of the peace , within the said borough , the nineteenth day of June , 1640.  

The said examinant saith , that on Wednesday last about two of clock in the morening , being the 17 of this instant June , he being gunner of a ship called the Elizabeth , of Plymouth , of two hundred tuns burden , or thereabouts , having ten pieces of ordnance aboard her , and coming from Virginia , bound for Plymouth , two leagues off of the lizard , they met three Turkish men of war , who weathred and kept the said Elizabeth from the shore , and gave her chase , and saith , that the admiral was a ship of 250 tuns burden or thereabouts : and had 22 pieces of ordnance aboard her , and the vice-admiral was a ship of 300 tuns , and had 26 pieces of ordnance ; and the rear-admiral was a ship of 200 tuns , and had eight pieces of ordnance aboard her , and believeth that heretofore she was a prize , and at first they all showed both Dutch and English colours , and had at least 500 men aboard them , who between three and four of the clock in the morning , came up with them and boarded them , and continue fight with them , until eleven or twelve of the clock that day ; during which time , the company of each of the said Turkish men of war , boarded them three times , and fired their round house , killed their Master , Master's mate , the pilot , and quartermaster , and hurt eight other of their company , fired their main sail , cut down all their riggin , and with their great shot did them and their ship a great deal of hurt and damage , and afterwards did leave them ; presently after within two leagues , or thereabouts off of the shore , this examinant , and the company of the said Elizabeth , discovered eleven small vessels floating on the stream , without sails , or any men in them at all , which this examinant , the gunner of the ship , doth very certainly believe were taken by the said Turkish men of war , and their company carried away by them , and doth say , that upon the eighteenth of this instant month of June , about four of the clock in the morning , they came into the harbour of Plymouth . 

A friendly , true , deserved commendation and encouragement of all mariners , and the noble art of navigation with the most excellent and necessary use of shipping . 

The use of ships and shipping , is of most worthy and memorable antiquity . For the blessed patriarch Noah , built an ark , ( By the commandment of God ) of which ark , Noah was admiral , Master , and pilot.  that ark was then the militant church , the whole congregation being but 8 persons , and yet though they were but few , they were not all sound in religious piety , there was a Cham amongst them : all the persons of the world , that had not grace to come aboard of the ark were drowned , wherein was prefigured that as many as will not come , and be of God's church , are like to be cast away . 

And as the ark was tossed and weather-beaten upon the troublesome waves of the all-sea world ( Or universal deluge ) till such time as she happily grounded on the mountain of Ararat in Armenia , gen. 8.4 . And so shall the church be continually turmoiled with tempests of tribulations , seas of sorrow , storms of strife , she being like a good peaceable ship most inestimably richly laden , is daily assaulted by 3. wicked pirates , ( The world , the flesh , and the devil ) who with their associates and vassals , ( The ocean or sea of Rome , the schismatical gulf of Separatism , and the rough lake of nonconformism , ) she hath not any anchoring , rest , or mooring at all , but upon the mountain of holiness , the rock of righteousness , the true cornerstone , Christ Jesus . 

Our saviour himself , did not only pass the sea or lake of Genezareth , but he also did there ( In the ship ) most miraculously command , and styled the raging winds and seas , and he did grace one ship so much , that he preached out of the said ship , or another , to the persons that stood on the bank of the sea . mat. 8.23 . mat. 13.2 . mar. 4.36 . luk. 8.22 . And the apostles ( For the enlarging and divulging their ministry , which was the means of the knowledge of salvation ) did make use of ships , as it appeareth in divers places of scripture . 

A ship well governed at sea , is an epitome of a well guided church , & commonwealth on the land , and it is a thing to be wished , that the earth were as free from some sins , as the salt water is . For in a ship at sea , it is a rare matter , to see a man play the brutish parts of a glutton , or drunkard . There are no wrangling lawyers , nor wicked projectors , a usurer or a catchpole are as rare to be found there , as it is to find chastity in the stews . In a ship is abstinency from swearing , and incontinency , and twice a day there is ( Or aught to be ) prayer & thanksgiving offered up to God . 

Ships , are the impregnable wooden walls of great Britain and Ireland . and the winged flying and floating castles , forts , & fortifications for defence against foreign invasion & domestical rebellion : they were of that serviceable use in the reign of King Edgar , that it is said that he did often sail round about this island with 1000 ships . 

King Solomon had his cedar brought ( For the building of the temple , by sea to Joppa . 2. chron. 2.16 . And he had also brought him in ships from Ophir , 450.  Talants of gold . 2. chron. 8.18 . Besides algummim wood , ( Of which trees there were no more to be seen to this day ) 1.  king. 10.12 . Besides , precious stones and jewels , were all brought by such mariners and ships as Hiram King of Tyrus lent to King Solomon . 

It is recorded that the warlike virago Queen Semiramis , had 2000  Sail of ships and other vessels , when she made war against Cyrus' King of Persia , Mark Anthony ( At the battle of Actium ) with Cleopatra his Egyptian concubine Queen , had 800. sail of ships and galleys , against Octavius Augustus Caesar , and Caesar overcame that great number with 250 ships ; read plutarcks' lives , page 1000  William the conqueror came out of Normandy , and invaded England with 896. ships . Red Stow's chronicle : King Charles of France , fought with 1200.  Ships against King Richard the second , King of England ; in revenge of an overthrow by sea that was given to the French by King Edward the third , who was King Richard's grandfather . In the year 1571.  At the battle of Lepanto ( Which is a gulf or sea near Corinth , in Greece ) between the united Christians and the Turks , on the seventh of October , the Christian fleet being of great and small , but 206.  Sayle . The Turks were in number of ships and galleys 333. in the 14. year of Queen Elizabeth's reign , when Selimus the second of that name was Turkish Emperor . Then and there ( Aforesaid ) was a bloody battle fought where ( To the great joy and safety of all Christendom ) the Christians in five hours won a notable and memorable victory , and very few of the miscreant Turks , went home to carry news to Constantinople . read Knoles Turk's history , or else read Stowe , page 670.  

And it ought thankfully ever to be remembered , the great and wonderful victory that God vouchsafed to give us , from the Spanish invasion 1588. in the 31. year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth , the Spanish armado being 128.  Vessels for war ( Besides victuallers ) the English navy being ( One with another ) 104. sail , and there was a supply of 340. ships more which the Prince of Parma ( Alexander Fernesius ) was to bring for the Spanish aid , and England's ruin . But wind , weather , and the Hollanders kept Parma and his fleet in the havens of gravelling , Dunkirk , Newport , and some other ports of Flanders , so that by God's assistance , the valour and valiant service of the English mariners was so prevailing , that the Spaniards , were beaten , battered , slain , taken , sunk , and so shattered , tattered , and scattered , there were not many of them left to make report in Spain , of their entertainment in England . 

Thus having showed partly the antiquity of shipping , with the services which they do for , and in matters of war , so it is fit to be considered what commodious uses are made of shipping , and mariners in time of peace . 

It is manifest that as God hath been mercifully , liberally , bountiful , to all nations and persons of the world , giving to each climate and country means for the maintaining of life , yet he hath not given all kinds of commodities to any one place , kingdom or dominion . But for the society of mankind he hath ordained negotiation commerce and traffic . The gold and silver jewels of India , the honey , wax , hemp , and furs of Russia ; the winds , oils , spices , drugs , sugars , silks , stuffs , copper , cotton , mashes , yards , pitch , rosin , tar , turpentine , fruits , fish , coals , and million of commodities more ( I had almost forgotten tobacco ) from America , and some rattles , babies , and hobby-horses from Holland ) all these , were it not for shipping , mariners , merchandise , and traffic , we ( In England ) were like to want , besides million of commodities more , which are endless and impossible by me to be named ; and other nations would be destitute of our lead , tin , leather , clothe , tallow , beer , and i know not how many other pretty things which we do vent , venture , and spare , to all the realms and regions almost of the whole world . By which means customs are increased and paid , peace and unity maintained between nation and nation , merchants enriched , mariners and seamen bred and maintained , and many thousands of arts , sciences , trades , crafts , mysteries , and occupations , do live well , and innumerable numbers of poor labouring persons are set on work . 

True valour is both invincible and impregnable , and ( Not savouring of dull mortality ) in spite of death is immortal . It knows that the only life is to live well . It shows that happiness consists in wealth , for thieves May steal that , wife , parents , children , kindred , friends , & our acquaintance May die , & all earthly goods May be spoilt & consumed by fire , water , time , or some natural or accidental way or other ; but true valour is only long-lived , for it guides a Christian courageously all his life from whence it conducts to an honourable death , and death cannot hold it , but delivers it to fame , fame , lays it up in the register of time , and time leaves it to everlasting eternity . To which in all my best wishes i do give both the dead and the living that were in this former related sea-fight ; or have died or will dare to die for their Christian faiths , Prince , and country : i mean not rashness , anger , fury , or desperate madness , for lions , bears , bulls , boars , dogs , tigers , cocks , and such unreasonable creatures , will fight , snarl , scratch , bite , tear , rend , and destroy one another . But if it be asked wherefore they do it , they do neither know or can tell . But true valour indeed doth know that God hath put an immortal soul into a mortal body ( Or transitory tenement ; to inhabit therein till such time as the ( Lord of life ) great landlord of all things , doth ( At his pleasure ) command the tenant forth of a poor house of clay , to an everlasting mansion and perpetual habitation of happiness . 

And as God delivered the Israelites out of Egypt , most miraculously , as his almighty power protected David , from Saul & Absalon , Daniel from the hungry fierce lions , Noah from the almost all devouring flood , Jonah from the whale , the three children from the fiery furnace , Job from the dunghill , Nabuchadnezzar from beasts and exile ; Joseph from his brethren's malice , and Potiphar's fury , Manasses from the dungeon , Jeremie from captivity , England from Spain's invasion , and Rome's powder plot , so did he most wonderfully preserve this poor ship ( The Elizabeth of Plymouth ) and the valiant men therein from apparent danger and destruction . For the which , and all other , his infinite undeserved mercies , to him alone be given all honour , and glory , amen . 

John Taylor . 

Finis . 







