nonsense upon sense : or sense , upon nonsense : choose you either , or neither . 

Written upon white paper , in a brown study , betwixt Lammas day and Cambridge , in the year aforesaid . 

By John Taylor . 

London , printed in the year , 1651.  

Nonsense upon sense , etc , 

Mount meekly low , on blue presumptuous wings , 
Relate the force of fiery water springs , 
Tell how the Arctic and Antarctic pole 
Together met , at Hockley in the hole : 
How Aetna and Vessuvius , in cold blood , 
Were both drowned in the Adriatic flood . 
Speak truth ( Like a diurnal ) let thy pen 
Chameleon like , rouse lions from their den , 
Turn frantic woolpacks into melting rocks , 
And put Olympus in a tinder box . 
Report how Russian cats do bark like dogs , 
And Scythian mountains are turned Irish bogs . 
Feast Ariadne with Tartarian Tripes , 
Transform great cannons to tobacco-pipes : 
Make Venus like a negro , white as jet . 
And puffepaste of the tomb of Mahomet . 
Then mounted on a windmill , presently 
To Dunstable in Darby shire I 'll fly : 
From thence I 'll take the chariot of the sun 
And swim to Scotland , and bring news what 's done . 
From thence I 'll soar to silver Cinthia's lap , 
And with Endymion take a nine years' nap : 
There I 'll drink healths with smug faced Mulciber 
At all the twelve signs in the hemisphere . 
Tush tell not me these things are past dispute , 
I 'll from th' Hesperides bring golden fruit : 
Such as the poet's palfrey Pegasus , 
Fetched from the fertile molehill Caucasus . 
't is not the Persian gulf , or Epshams' well , 
Nor Westminster's sweet plum broth ( Made in hell ) 
Can change my resolution ; i have vowed , 
To speak with silence , and to write aloud , 
That bulls of Basan , and the Circean swine , 
Shall all dance Trenchmore at these works of mine . 
Rouse up thou ghost of Guzman , and apply 
Thyself to me , and let 's write Tempe dry : 
Be ruled by me , we 'll empty all Helicon , 
In scribbling 'gainst the whore of Babylon ; 
The Dunsmore Cowes milk shall make sillibubs , 
And our religion shall be brought in tubs . 
Make haste unto the fair called Bartholomew , 
And thence , from the heroic mongrel crew , 
Take the fine Gugaw hobby horses all , 
Which we will man , and then a counsel call , 
And conquer Callice , Kent and Christendom , 
Knock down the Turk , and bravely ransack Rome . 
What can be done more ? what more can be said ? 
Let 's play at blindman-buff for ginger bread : 
we 'll have a dish of Dabs' in Fish-street dressed , 
And with the lobsters Lady we will feast . 
For as the gout is but a pleasing itch . 
The best bear-garden bull dog , was a bitch . 
We have both eight , and eighteen parts of speech , 
Whereby i find ash burns as well as beech . 
Gargantuas' scull is made a frying pan , 
To fry or follow the Leviathan , 
That Gogmagog , Nick Wood or Mariot , 
Nor Creatan , Miloe , or Iscariot , 
Were not such valiant stomached men as those 
That eat the devils gouty pettitoes . 
Hark , hark , how from the South fierce Boreas rores ; 
Give me a sculler , or a pair of oars , 
I 'll make the orient and the occident , 
Both friends at Smithfield in the wild of Kent . 
For now Tom holders mare hath broke her crupper , 
Dress me a dish of ae-dipthongs to supper . 
The Dean of Dunstable hath bought and sold 
Twelve lies new printed , for two groats in gold . 
't is almost past the mamory of man 
Since famous Arthur first in court began : 
Yet though King Lud did reign in troynovaunt , 
Will Summer was no kin to John a Gaunt . 
What news from Trippolie ? wat•ho•s there ho : 
The West wind blows South North at Jericho . 
Steere well and steady , boys look look to th' helm : 
Fetch gooseberries that grow upon the elm : 
Like cormorants let 's live upon the air , 
And of a whirlpool make a marble chair . 
Blind men May see , and deaf men all shall hear , 
How dumb men talk because cow hides are dear . 
Go to th' Utopian kingdom and relate , 
That to their King these lines i dedicated : 
Bid him take note of me , and understand , 
He hath not such a poet in his land . 
Down by the dale with milk and cream that slowes . 
Upon a hill ( Below the valley ) grows 
Hungarian peacocks , white as crimson geese , 
There sat a rat upon a holland cheese . 
No sooner did blind Bayard see the sight : 
Two beauteous ugly witches took their flight 
To tell the King of China wondrous news 
How all Scotch knaves were hanged , and English Jews . 
Th' Athenian Hydra , and the bird torpedo 
Were catched in France , in mousetraps near Toledo . 
A Scolopendra coming from Picked-hatch 
Made drunk a constable , and stole the watch . 
Do what you can Madge owlet is an owl : 
And beans with buttermilk is rare wild fowl . 
The cobbler's daughter , we three both together 
we 'll match : he 'll give a thousand pieces with her ; 
Besides the smoke of keinsam , and bell-swagger , 
Who oft at Mims did use his dudgeon dagger . 
Then shall the Pericranians of the East . 
South , North , and West with every bird and beast ; 
All knuckle deep in Paphlagonian sands 
Inhabit Transylvanian Netherlands . 
't is th' only gallant way to gain promotion , 
To squeeze oil from the cinders of devotion , 
Translate our roundhead turnigs into Carrers , 
And turn the lowest cellars to high garrets . 
Let Neptune be a shepherd , and let Vulcan 
Make haste to Greenland , and there drink his full can . 
Titus' Andronicus hath writ a treatise 
Of molehills in the entrails of Dame Theatis , 
Wherein a man May learn before he looks 
To catch mince-pies , with neither nets or hooks . 
There policy with practice cut and dried 
Were carted both in triumph through Cheapside . 
If Monday hang himself , no further seek , 
Henceforward Tuesday shall begin the week . 
No more of that i pray , i am afeared 
there 's not one hair upon Diana's beard . 
Great Agamemnon late combined with Hector , 
To preach at Amsterdam an Irish lector , 
Which shall convert the horse , the ass and mule , 
And all the beasts in Hipperborean Thule . 
If sunshine will with shadows but consent , 
we 'll make the winter of our discontent 
To force fierce crook-back into better tune , 
And turn December's heat to frost in June . 
When this external substance of my soul 
Did live at liberty , i caught wild fowl , 
I was a caitiff in the court of Spain , 
And played at shuttlecock with Charlemaigne . 
Then i did magnify and mundify , 
Than i the fairy Queen did putrify , 
And purify again , and dignify , 
All such as did her greatness deify , 
Females did edify and fructify , 
And amplify and coldly gratify . 
The lake of Learna i did clarify , 
My verse the Aethiop Queen did beautify , 
With rage my patience i would qualify , 
I can both certify and testify 
How death did live , and life did mortify : 
Fear always did my courage fortify , 
he 's crafty that his wits can rectify : 
To vilify , make glad and terrify , 
And with course words old debts to satisfy , 
That man , I 'll ratify and notify , 
To be one that himself will justify , 
And fie , foe , fum , concludes him with oh fie . 
Thus from complexions i have minerals drawn , 
Brave captain fumble laid his sword to pawn 
To ransom Jeffery chausers cypress gown , 
Thersites with a rush knocked Ajax down ; 
Imperious Momus wrote th' Atlantic story 
Of wars betwixt Achilles and John Dory : 
'T was dedicated to the isle of Lundy . 
An emblem •ight of transit gloria mundi . 
Let not the distances of place molest us , 
Abydos is not forty miles from Sestus : 
As Hero loved Leander I 'll agree , 
Though he and she were mad , what 's that to me ? 
't is likely Cleopatra and Antonius 
Met , but saw not the cardinail Barronius : 
The Capitol , and silken rack tarpeyus 
In a Seadan to Lichfield shall convey us ; 
And like a wheelbarrow we 'll cut and curry , 
And fetch good news from Shropshire and from Surry : 
there is no eunuch of the race of Brutus , 
That either can confute us , or cornute us . 
Old Solon was no jester , nor no Jyber , 
And English Thames is better than Rome's Tiber : 
I took a camel , and to Naples went i , 
Of pickled sausages i found great plenty ; 
The gudgeon catcher there , o'er toped the nobles , 
And put the viceroy in a peck of troubles : 
Brave tag rag multitude of omnium gatherum , 
Shuffle 'em together , and the devil father 'em : 
But now and then was squeezed a rich delinquent , 
By which good means away the precious chink went : 
Renowned was the rascal Massennello , 
In fifteen days he was raw , ripe , and mellow : 
Laugh , laugh , thou whining fool Heraclitus , 
And weep thou grinning ass Democratus : 
The grey horse is the better mare by half , 
The bull at Bear-garden , and Waltham's calf 
Are reconciled , but not concluded fully 
Who pleaded best . Demosthenes or Tully : 
I am indifferent , fill the other can , 
Logic hath art to make an ape a man : 
I weeping sing , to think upon the quibblins 
'Twixt Roman , and imperial Guelphs and giblins , 
How Munster's John a leide , and knipperdoling 
Were barbarous barbers in the art of poling . 
From sense and nonsense , i am wide , quoth Wallice , 
But not so far as Oxford is from Callice : 
Give me a leash of merry blades , right bilboes , 
True tattered rogues , in breech , shirts , skirts , and elbows , 
and each of them will make a fit disciple , 
To ride up Holborn to the tree that 's triple . 
A man May think his purse is turned a Round-head , 
When all the crosses in it are confounded : 
't is said that poetry a thriving trade is , 
And gets a world of wealth from Lords and Ladies , 
The devil they do , false shameful loon thou liest , 
And when thou canst no longer live , thou diest . 
Lend me rhamnussnes Flanders blade , I 'll lash 
The sober centaurs , turn great oaks to ash : 
A long devil's broth , be sure you bring a spoon , 
Our mornings shall begin at afternoon ; 
And Minos , Aeacus , nor Rhadamantus 
May roar and rant , but never shall out rant us . 
As we are temporal , let 's be temporisers , 
We scorn to be surprised , we 'll be surprizers : 
Let 's make grim Pluto stink , the welkin rumble , 
And Hollophernes bluster , now and grumble , 
Rending up mighty thistles by the roots , 
Because an ostler stole away his boots ; 
Then with á multiplying galley pot , 
I 'll know the projects of the crafty Scot ; 
And then he shall be forced to hide his head 
In tenebris , in Poland , or in swead . 
Fough , this tobacco stinks ; thou dirty hag 
Abato fair , I 'll put thee in a bag . 
Search Asia , Africa , and America , 
To find the goddess Berecinthia , 
And know how Pirramus and Thisbe fell 
Together by the ears , late in Bridewell . 
Words are but wind in term time , but vacations 
Are fit to publish silent proclamations . 
There was a business never understood , 
The woman's suit in law was just and good : 
She lost the day , this did her cause disgrace , 
The lawyer put some ill into her case . 
Before I 'll live this life , I 'll take a knife , 
And drown myself , and than what needs a wife ? 
Strange things are done by art and human power : 
Quinborough castle landed near the tower . 
Much like a prodigy old time played rex : 
A Kentish castle came to Middlesex . 
May not a man called Newgate dwell at Highgate , 
And wed a widow at the pie at Algate ? 
Therefore let us like or dislike presbytery , 
It will work finely , if it once besquitter ye . 
Bring me a salamander from Surat in France , 
The Alps and the Pirenian hills shall dance . 
In Greenwich Parke there smiling Nioby 
Shall laugh and lie down like an oyster pie . 
Fame is a lying slut , she told me tales , 
That in October Christmas came from Wales : 
Believe it , take the wings of Icarus , 
And walk to Hounsditch , and to Erebus , 
There tell them plainly how the case stands here , 
And bring us word how matters do go there . 
Unto the market I 'll run presently , 
And there a peck of troubles i will buy , 
One told me they would multiply and grow ; 
All England with them i will plant and sow : 
which , as they ripen daily I 'll take care 
That every living soul shall have a share . 
I 'll serve myself first , and I 'll have such store 
In time of need to serve a thousand more . 
But i forget my theme , oh soul offence ! 
This nonsense hath a taste of too much sense : 
The ass , goose , woodcock , buzzard , and the gull , 
Beat out their brains , and put them in my scull ; 
And tell the men of Gotham 't is thought fit 
The wise men there should lend me all their wit . 
For nonsense i will tax all Christendom , 
Great Emperors and Kings shall pay me some . 
And many a major , or justice of the peace 
Will give me tribute and the tax increase 
To such a height , that Cardinals from Rome 
Cuckolds and constables shall pay me some : 
Strong Hull , with fata i hell , and Hallifax , 
Shall naturally bring me toll and tax . 
The mighty stock of nonsense i will win , 
Shall be the universal magazine 
For universities to work upon , 
The rich philosophers admired stone ; 
Then i make poetsrich , and us'rers poor ; 
And thus resolved , at this time write more . 
This dedication is humbly directed to a living man , quartered into four offices , ( viz. ) a scavenger , a beadle , a cobbler , and half a constable . 

to the high and mighty davidius vulcanus , Duke and dominator of the dunghills , and absolute , resolute , dissolute scavenger of the town and territories of Gravesend in Norfolk , great Master and Baron of the Wheelebarrow , the only farmer , transporter , Lord of the soil , and privy searcher of all mixens , and muckhils , simple or compound , in the liberties aforesaid . Cleanser , clearer , and avoider of the most turpitudinous , merdurinous , excremental offals , muck and garbage . Refiner , purger , clarifier , purifier , mundifier , Excluder , and Expulser of putrifactious and pestiferous contagions ; the potentissimo , excellentissimo , invader , scatterer , disperser , consumer and confounder of offensive unsavoury savours , smells , scents , and vapours : great sultan , sultan , and grand signior over all varieties of stinks and stinkards ; most triumphant termagant , unresistible conqueror and commander of the major and minor ( the great and the less ) Turditanians , chief corregidor and beadle of all the precinct , sole Transplanter , terrifier , controller , and corrector of beggars and vagabonds . The terrible hue and cry Cryer , chief court Cryer , jail-keeper , and only confiner of the hogs ; chief and most frequent vigilant watchman , demi constable , and image of authority , the most accomplished cobbler , exquisite translater , and exact reformer of oppressed , decayed , wicked and oppressed seals : and the only justiciary rectifier , underlayer and setter upright of such brethren and sisters , as do go aside , and tread their foot awry in these days of vanity , and paths of iniquity : in hope ( great Sir ) i have not abated you of the least tittle of your title , your honourable stile being so high , that no Christian , pagan , heathen , Turk , Jew , infidel , cuckold or cannibal , can never climb to the top of it , there being a late report that your multiplicity and many affairs of state have distarbed your rest , and impaired your health , insomuch as it is thought your pericranion is crazed or cracked , and you thereby in danger to fall into a callenturian disease , which is to be doubted May produce a vertigo in your head , whereby your wit May be troubled with a superfluous flax , which May prove a molestation to yourself , and the whole town , that hath in itself , and in every place round about it , more troubles than they can well bear . But if their hard fortune should be , that when you are working to your own ends , and that you should call for your awl , and death should mistake and bring you your last , whereby such a privy member as yourself Might be publicly lost ; it is feared , grief would overflow the whole town , and that some of the townsmen ( with the help of their wives ) would run stark horn mad : to prevent this great detriment of such a loss as that town May undergo in this time of scarcity of wit , wisdom , and wise men ; for fear you should fall into the dangerous diseases of the mubble-fubbles , or the grumbling in the gizzard : therefore ( 10 drive away dumps ) and to give you some recreation , i have made bold to present your greatness with this dedication , which if you will vouchsafe but to read and understand , and in so doing you shall do more for the auhour , than he ever was , or shall do himself . 

J. to 

Allandro pasqueto Mallatrumpa entangrino liuroe . 

Ilvento chioli , Mauritambull Teda fulgare , 
Antro della campo il danto cordi sublima 
Pantathos , stremo standina eschine vandri 
Bene in shendo , tercia penthe dissadi . 
Mecrops , sans sida vocifera Randa bavinea , 
Allatendrea quanto , eltrada Pizminov venta , 
Mega Pollimunton , Theorba quasie qaicunque 
tripolina typhoon , quabacondono sapho . 
Terra tragmus sophy , sunt diacalcitheo geata . 
Avostre Obserdandi Zhean de fistye Cankie de Sallamanca Andalowsia . 

Or thus you May English it , in the transcending praise of the author , and his book . 

Till Phoebus' blustering blasts shall cease to blow , 
And Aeolus shall hide his radiant rays , 
Till Vulcan's forge be framed of Scythian snow , 
And Neptune like a shepherd spend his days ; 
When Saturn shall sell mousetraps , and allow 
Mars to fing madrigals , and round delays : 
Then shall thy book and thee be out of date , 
And scorn the fury of consuming fate . 
To your worthiness in all observance devoted . John Defistie Cankie of Sallamanca in Andalusia . 



Finis . 














