Superbiae Flagellum , OR , THE WHIP OF PRIDE . 

By JOHN TAYLOR . 

LONDON , Printed by G. ELD : 1621.  

To the Right Worshipful , Worthy , and Learned Gentleman , Sr. THOMAS RICHARDSON Knight , Serjcant at Law , and Speaker in the High Court of Parliament , etc.  

A double Anagramme . 

THOMAS RICHARDESONN . AS MAN HONOURED CHRIST , SO CHRIST HONOURED A MAN  

Your name includes , that As man honoured Christ , So God again through Christ honoured a man : For if man truly honour the most Highest then Christ to honour man both will and can . Right worthy Sir , this in your name is true , You honour Christ , and Christ hath honoured you . 

RIGHT WORSHIPFUL , 

But that I am assured that your Noble disposition , in all parts is suitable to the inside of this Book , I should never have dared to dedicate it to your Patronage : for as it is a Divine Poem , so hath your Worship a religious heart , as it hath an honest intention , so have you a breast ever full of such thoughts , which bring forth worthy actions : as it a Whip or Scourge against all sorts of Pride , so have you ever been an unfeigned lover of Courteous humanity and humility , I humbly beseech your Worship , ( although the method and stile be plain , ) to be pleased to give it favourable entertainment , for the honesty that is in it , and the dutiful affection of the Author , 

Who is most obsequiously obliged to your Worship , 

JOHN TAYLOR . 

To no matter who , no great matter where , yet to be read there is matter why , although not much matter when . 

IT is no matter into whose hands or censure this my Superbiae Flagellum , or Whipping , or Stripping of Pride fall into , if it come into the view of true Nobility or Gentry , I know it will be charitably accepted . If into the hands of degenerate youngsters , that esteem Pride more than all the Liberal Sciences , who accounted the four Cardinal virtues , inferior to their own Carnal vices , such a one will put me off with a scornful tush , a pish , or a mew , and commit my Book to the protection of Aiax . If a wiseman read it , I know it will be discreetly censured ; if a Fool , his Bolt is soon shot , and I am armed against it ; if a Learned man peruse it , he will bear with my bad Scholarship ; if an unlearned , I care not for his opinion ; if a man of knowledge view it , he will pardon my ignorance ; if an ignorant Ass see it , he will bray out his own ; if an honest Richman spy it , he will be the poorer in spirit though not in purse ; but if a proud Dives handle it , he will esteem it worse than his dogs ; if a proud Courtier read it , he will tear it to tatters ; whilst a Generous Affable Gentleman , will lovingly entertain it . If beauty chance to behold it , it will bid it welcome , if Pride stand not in the way ; if a strong man that is not proud of it , grow acquainted with the contents of my meaning , I think it will content him ; if Parents , or children , or all , or any body , that are not poisoned with pride , do but see or hear it distinctly read , and understand it with judgement , I am persuaded it will pass and repass , with friendly usage , but if any of the contrary faction come within the Air of it , they will use it in some sort , as bad as the hangman may use them . And so much for , To no matter who . 

It is no great matter where this be read , for as a good man ( being banished ) is never out of his country , because all countries are his , so my Book in Church , Court , City , Country , Castle or Cottage , is one and the same ; it may perhaps alter the place where it comes from worse to better , but the place can never alter the honest intents of it from better to worse . Therefore no great matter where . 

To be read there is matter , why , because it strikes at the root of a most deadly sin , which almost as bad as an universal deluge , hath overflowed the most part of the world ; and though the Preachers on Earth , ( Gods Trumpets , and ambassadors from Heaven ) do diligently and daily strike at this abomination , with the eternal sword of the everlasting Word , yet what they cut down in the day , like Mushrooms , it grows up again thick and threesold in the night , for whilst the husbandman sleeps , the envious man sows tares . 

wherefore , I having a talon of knowledge lent me , by which I know that I must render an account one day , how I have employed it , and having Written near forty several pamphlets in former times , I purpose henceforward ( God willing ) to redeem the time I have so misspent , employing my Pen in such exercises ( which though they be no free from a relish of mirth , yet they shall be clear from profanation , scurrility , or obsceneness I do know Pride is at such a height , that my Molehill Muse can never by mineing at her foot , shake her head , for where Divinity prevails not , Poetry in meddling doth but show the Sun's brightness with a Candle . Yet forasmuch as I know that Pride cast Angels out of Heaven , made devils in hell , threw man out of Paradise , was a main causer of the drowning of the first World , is a devowrer of this world , and shall ever be accursed in the world to come , by this knowledge , I have with a mixed invective mildness , showed in this Book the vanities of all sorts of Pride , not that I hope for amendment , but to show my honest intendment . 

I have seen six or seven fashion hunting Gallants together sit scorning , and deriding a better man than any of themselves , only because either his Hat was of the old Block , or that his Ruff was not so richly laced , his Cloak hath been too plain , his Beard of the old translation , his Boots and Spurs of the precedent second edition , and for such slight occasions a man hath been slighted , jeered and wondered at , as if he had been but a Zany to the fashion , or a man made for the purpose for them to whet their scorn upon , and therefore to read this , there is a matter why . 

It is not much matter when , for be it read on Friday the Turks Holiday , on Saturday the jews Sabbath , on Sunday the Lord's day , or on any day or all days , nights or hours , there is Divinity with Alacrity , Poetry with honest mirth , and every thing so interwoven , one with another , that if it please not the generality , yet I hope in particularity it will be tolerably censured by all that hate Pride , and love humility . And therefore , not much matter when . 

JOHN TAYLOR . 

A FEW LINES , TO SMALL PURPOSE , against the Scandalous Aspersions , that are either maliciously , or ignorantly cast upon the Poets and Poems of these Times . 

There doth a strange , and true opinion run , 
That Poots write much worse than they have done : 
And how so poor their daily writings are , 
As though their best inventions were thread bare . 
And how no new things from them now doth spring , 
But all hath refrence from some other thing . 
And that their daily doings do reveal , 
How they from one another silch and steal , 
As if amongst themed were a statute made , 
That they may freely use the thieving trade . 
And some there are that will not stick to say , 
That many Poets living at this day , 
Who have the Hebrew , Latin , Greek , at will , 
And in th' Italian and thè French have skill , 
These are the greatest thieves they say , of all 
That use the Trade ( or Art ) Poetical . 
For ancient Bards , and Poets in strange tongues , 
Compiled have their verses and their songs : 
And those to whom those tongues are rightly known , 
Translating them , make others verse their own , 
As one that steals a Cloak , and presently 
Makes it his own , by altering of the dye . 
So whole boookes , and whole sentences have been 
Stolen , and the stealers , great applause did win , 
And by their filching thought great men of fame , 
By those that knew not the right Author's name . 
For mine own part , my Conscience witness is , 
I never was guilty of such theft as this , 
Unto such robbery I could never reach , 
Because I understand no foreign speech . 
To prove that I am from such filching free , 
Latin and French are heathen-greeke to me , 
The Graecian , and the Hebrew Charactars' , 
I know as well , as I can reach the Stars . 
The sweet Italian , and the Chip Chop Dutch , 
I know the man i' th' Moon can speak as much . 
Should I from English Authors , but purloin , 
It would be soon found counterfeited coin . 
then since I cannot steal , but some will spy , 
I 'll truly use mine own , let others lie . 
Yet to excuse the writers , that now write , 
Because they bring no better things to light : 
't is because bounty from the world is fled , 
True liberality is almost dead . 
Reward is lodged in dark oblivion deep , 
Bewitched ( I think ) into an endless sleep , 
That though a man in study take great pains , 
And empt his veins , and puluerize his brains , 
To write a Poem well , which being written 
Wthall his judgement , Reason , Art , and Wit , 
And at his own charge , print and pay for all , 
And give away most free , and liberal 
Two , three , or four , or five hundred books . 
For his reward he shall have nods and looks ; 
That all the profit a man's pains hath got , 
Will not suffice one meal to feed a Cat. 
Yet Noble Wcstminster , thou still art free , 
And for thy bounty I am bound to thee : 
For hadst not thou , and thy Inhabitants , 
From Time to Time relieved and helped my wants , 
I had long since bid Poetry adieu 
And therefore still my thanks shall be to you . 
Next to the Court , in general I am bound 
To you , for many friendships I have found . 
There ( when my purse hath often wanted bait ) 
To fill or feed it , I bave had receit . 
So much for that , I 'll now no more rehearse , 
They show their loves in prose , my thanks in verse , 
When death , Maecenas did of life deprive , 
Few of his Noble Tribe were left alive , 
This makes Invention to be mean and hard , 
When Pride and Avarice doth killreward . 
And yet me thinks , it plainly doth appear , 
men's writings are as good as ever they were . 
Good lines are like a Banquet ill employed , 
Where too much feeding hath the stomach cloyed . 
Good verses fall sometimes ( by course of fate ) 
Into their hands that are prejudicate . 
And though , the Writer never so well hath penned , 
Yet they 'll find fault with what they cannot mend . 
Thus many a learned well composed line , 
Hath been as Pearl that 's cast before a swine . 
Or more familiarly to make compare , 
Like Aquavitae given unto a Mare . 
These fellows , ( glutted with variety ) 
Hold Good lines in a loathed satiety , 
Whiest paltry Rhyming , Libels , jigs , and jests , 
Are to their appetites continual feafts . 
With which their fancies they do feed and fill , 
And take the Ill for good , the Good for ill . 
Whilst like to Monkeys , ( scorning wholesome meat ) 
They grredily do poisonous spiders eat . 
So let them feed until their humours burst , 
And thus much bold to tell them here I durst . 
That Poetry is now as good as ever , 
If bounty , to relieve her would endever . 
men's minds are worse than they have been of yore , 
Inuention's good now , as it was before . 
Let liberality awake , and then 
Each Poet in his hand will take a pen , 
And with rare lines enrich a world of paper , 
Shall make Apollo , and the Muse's caper . 
FINIS . 

Superbiae Flagellum , or the Whip of Pride . 

When all things were as wrapped in sable night , 
And Ebon darkness muffled up the light : 
When neither Sun , or Moon , nor Stars had shined , 
And when no fire , no Water , Earth or Wind , 
no harvest , Autumn , Winter , when no Spring , 
no Bird , Beast , Fish , nor any creeping thing , 
When there was neither Time nor place , nor space , 
And silence did the Chaos round embrace : 
then did the Archworkmaster of this All , 
create this Massy Universal Ball. 
And with his mighty word brought all to pass , 
Saying but Let there Be , and done it was . 
Let there be Day , Night , Water , Earth , Herbs , Trees 
Let there be Sun , Moon , Stars , fish , fowl that flees , 
Beasts of the Field , he said but , Let there be , 
And all things were created as we see . 
Thus every sensible and senseless thing , 
The High-creators Word to pass did bring : 
And as in viewing all his works he stood , 
He saw that all things were exceeding good . 
Thus having furnished Seas , and Earth , and Skies ; 
Abundantly with all varieties , 
Like a Magnificent and sumptuous Fcast , 
For th' entertainment of some welcome Guest , 
When Beasts and Birds , and every living Creature , 
And the Earth's fruits did multiply by Nature ; 
then did th' eternal Trinity betake 
Itself to Council , and said , Let us make , 
Not Let there be , as unto all things else , 
But LET US MAKE MAN , that the rest excels ; 
According TO OVERDO IMAGE LET US MAKE 
MAN , and then did th' almighty red Earth take , 
With which he form Adam , every limine , 
And ( having made him ) breathed life in him . 
Lo , thus the first Man never was a Child , 
no way with sin original defiled : 
But with high Supernat'rall Understanding , 
He over all the World had sole commanding . 
Yet though to him the Regency was given , 
As Earth's Lieutenant to the God of Heaven , 
Though he commanded all Created things , 
As Deputy under the King of Kings ; 
Though he so highly here was dignifide , 
To humble him , not to be puffed with Pride , 
He could not brag or boast of high born birth , 
For he was form out of slime and earth : 
no Beast , fish , worm , fowl , herb , weed , stone , or tree , 
But are of a more ancient house than he ; 
For they were made before him , which proves this 
That their Antiquity is more than his . 
Thus both himself , and his beloved Spouse , 
Are by Creation of the younger house , 
And whilst they lived in perfect Holiness , 
Their richest Garments were bare Nakedness , 
True Innocency were their chiefest weeds , 
( For Righteousness no Masque or Visor needs . ) 
The royal'st robes that our first Parents had , 
Was a free Conscience with Uprightness clad ; 
They needed never to shifted ; the clothes they wore 
Was Nakedness , and they desired no more ; 
Until at last , that Hell-polluting sin , 
With Disobedience soiled their Souls within , 
And having lost their holiness Perfection , 
They held their Nakedness an Imperfection . 
then ( being both ashamed ) they both did frame 
Garments , as weeds of their deserved shame . 
Thus , when as sin had brought God's curse on man 
then shame to make Apparel first began , 
Ever man had sinned , most plain it doth appear , 
He neither did , or needed Garments wear , 
For his Apparel did at first begin , 
To be the Robes of penance for his sin . 
Thus all the brood of Adam , and of Eve , 
The true use of Apparel may perceive , 
That they are Liveries , Badges , unto all 
Of our sins , and our Parents woeful fall . 
then morethen mad , these madbrained people be 
( Or else they see , and will not seem to see ) 
That these same Robes ( with Pride ) that makes them swell 
Are tokens that our best desert is hell . 
Much like unto a Traitor to his King 
That would his Country to destruction bring , 
Whose Treasons being proved apparently , 
He by the Law is justly judged to die , 
And when he looks for his deserved death , 
A Pardon comes and gives him longer breath , 
I think this man most madly would appear 
That would a halter in a glory wear , 
Because he with a halter merited 
Of life , to be quite disinherited 
But if he should vaingloriously persist 
To make a Rope of silk or golden twice , 
And wear 't as a more honourable show 
Of his Rebellion , than course hemp or tow , 
Might not men justly say he were an Ass , 
Triumphing that he once a Villain was , 
And that he wore a Halter for the nonce , 
In pride that he deserved hanging once ? 
Such with our Heavenly father is the Case , 
Of our first Parents and their sinful Race , 
Apparel is the miserable sign , 
That we are Traitors to our Lord divine , 
And we ( like Rebels ) still most pride do take 
In that which still most humble should us make , 
Apparel is the prison for our sin 
Which most should shame , yet most we Glory in ; 
Apparel is the sheet of shame as 't were 
Which ( for our penance ) on our backs we bear , 
For man Apparel never did receive , 
Till he eternal Death deferued to have . 
And thus Apparel to our sense doth tell 
Our sinnes'gainst Heaven , and our desert of Hell. 
How vain is it for man , a clod of Earth , 
To boast of his high progeny , or Birth , 
Because ( perhaps ) his Ancestors were good , 
And sprung from Royal , or from Noble blood , 
Where Virtuous worth did in their minds inherit , 
Who gained their Honours by Desert and Merit ; 
Whose service for their Country never failed , 
Who ( justly ) lived beloved , and died bewailed ; 
Whose Affability , and Charity , 
Guided with pious true sincerity , 
Who to their states loved all their lives to join 
Love before Lands , Compassion before Coin ? 
Yet when they died , left wealth , place , state , and name 
To Heirs , who bury all in Pride & shame , 
But as the Sacred Truth most truly faith , 
no man is saved by another's Faith ; 
So though some honourable Rascals have 
Turned their good Fathers to their timeless grave , 
And like Ignoble noble Reprobates , 
Possess their names , possessions and estates , 
Yet ( for they want their Virtues and Deserts ) 
They are but Bastards to their better parts . 
Manasse ; was good Hezechiahs' son , 
And with his Crown into all Vice did run ; 
The Sire the title of good King did gain , 
The son 's Abominations all did stain ; 
Honour is better well deserved then had , 
To have it undeserved , that honour 's bad . 
In Rome an ancient Law there sometimes was , 
Men should through Virtue unto Honour pass : 
And 't is a Rule that evermore hath been , 
That honour 's best which a man's self doth win . 
't is no Inheritance , nor can it run 
Successively from Father to the Son ; 
But if the Father nobly were inclined , 
And that the Son retain his worthy mind , 
If with his Father's goods he doth possess 
His Goodness , all the world must then confess , 
That that Son's Honour doth itself display 
To be the Father's equal every way . 
Thus good men's Honours can no Honour be 
To their degenerate posterity , 
But 't is a man's own Virtue , or his Vice , 
That makes his Honour high or low in price . 
Of Birth , or Parents , no man can be proud , 
Pride of Apparel here is disallowed , 
Pride of our riches is most Transitory , 
Pride of our Beauty is a fading Glory : 
Pride of our wisdom is most foolish folly ; 
Pride of our holiness is most unholy , 
Pride of our strength is weakness in our thought , 
And Pride in any thing will come to naught . 
Pride hath been Author of the worst of Evils , 
Transforming glorious Angels , into Devils , 
When Babel's Tower 'gan proudly to aspire , 
With tongues confusion , they were paid their hire . 
Through Pride the King of Babel's glory ceased , 
And for seau'n years it turned him to a beast : 
And Baltazar that next him did succeed , 
Lost life , and left his Empire to the Mede , 
For Pride , to Tyre and Zidons' wicked Kings 
The Prophet a most just destruction brings . 
Herod midst his ungodly glory vain , 
Through Pride was eaten up with worms , and slain . 
Great Alexander , King of Macedon 
Disdained to be his father Phillip's son , 
But he from jupiter would be descended , 
And as a god be honoured and attended , 
Yet Bain'de at Babylon he proved but man , 
His godhead ended foolish as 't begun . 
There was in Sicily a proud Physician , 
Menecrates , and he through high ambition , 
To be a god himself would needs prefer , 
And would ( forsooth ) be named jupiter , 
King Dionysius making a great feast , 
This foole-god daigned there to be a guest , 
Who by himself was at a table placed , 
( Because his godhead should the more be graced ) 
The other Guests themselves did feed and fill , 
He at an empty table still , sat still . 
At last with humble low Sir Reverence , 
A fellow came with fire and frankinscence , 
And offered to his godship , ( saying then ) 
Perfumes were fit for gods , and meat for men : 
The god in anger rose incontinent 
Well laughed at , and an hungered , home he went. 
The Roman Emperor Domitian 
Would be a god , was murdered by a man 
Caligula would be a god of wonder , 
And counterfeit the lightning , and the thunder ; 
Yet every Real heavenly Thundercracke , 
This caitiff in such fear and terror strake , 
That he would quake , and shake , & hide his head 
In any hole , or underneath his bed . 
And when this godless god had many slain , 
A Tribune dashed out his ungodly brain . 
And thus th' Almighty still ' 'gainst Pride doth frown 
And casts Ambition headlong tumbling down 
Great Pompey would be all the world's superior , 
And Caesar unto none would be inferior ; 
But as they both did live ambitiously , 
So both of them untimely deaths did die . 
The one in Egypt had his final fall , 
The other murdered in the Capital . 
A number more Examples are beside , 
Which shows the miserable fall of Pride : 
And do men think to go to Heaven from henc● 
By Pride , which cast the Angels headlong thrnce 
Or do they through their Pride suppose to dwel● 
With God , when Pride did make the Devils in he●● 
It is a Vice which God abhors and hate's , 
And ' 'gainst it doth denounce most fearful threats 
O , what a hellish vanity is 't then , 
That doth bewitch vain women , and vile men , 
That rather than their Pride and they will sever , 
They will be severed from their God for ever ? 
I will not say but Wisdom , Beauty , Health , 
Strength , Courage , Magnanimity , and Wealth , 
●mpiress and Kingdoms , rule of Sea , and Land , 
Are Blessings given by God's all-giving hand ; 
But not because on whom they are bestowed , 
Should in the stead of Humbleness wax proud , 
Or with vain glory have their hearts upheaved , 
●or why ? what ere they have they have received : 
And therefore Christian Kings their styles do grace 
King By the Grace of God , of such a place ; 
Because by his especial providence 
They hold Majestical Pre-eminence . 
And as there is distinction of Estates , 
Some Emp'rours , Kings , and mighty potentates , 
Superiors and Inferiors , each degree , 
As Gods foreknowing Knowledge did foresee : 
Yet he did not bestow his bounteous Grace , 
To make the great men proud , or mean men base ; 
Abundant wealth he to the Rich doth lend , 
That they the poor should succour and defend . 
He hath given strength and vigour to the strong , 
That they should guard the weak from taking wrong : 
To some he knowledge doth and wisdom grant 
Because they should instruct the Ignorant , 
But unto no man God his gifts doth give , 
To make him proud , or proudly here to live . 
For Pride of state , birth , wisdom , beauty , streng●● 
And Pride in any thing , will fall at length , 
But to be proud of Garments that we wear , 
Is the most foolish pride a heart can bear . 
For as they are the Robes of sin and shame , 
Yet more may be considered in the same : 
Be they compact of silk , or cloth of Gold , 
Or cloth , or stuffs ( of which there 's manifold 
Let them be laced and faced , or cut , or plame , 
Or any way to please the wearers brain , 
And then let him or her that is so clad , 
Consider but from whence these stuffs were h●● 
How Mercers , Drapers , silkmen were the jayle●● 
And how the Executioners were Tailors , 
That did both draw and quarter , slash and cut , 
And into shape , mishapen Remnants put . 
Consider this , and you will grant me than 
That Garments are the workmanship of man 
Which being granted no man can deny , 
But that it is most base Idolatry , 
T' adore or worship a proud paltry knave , 
Because the Mercer's shop hath made him brave 
Or is it not a foolish vile mistaking , 
To Honour things that are a Tailors making 
●ake a vow , that never whilst I live 
Reverence to Apparel will I give ; 
Some goodness in the wearer I 'll expect , 
Or else from me he shall have small Respect ; 
●in him virtue , and true worth I see 
He shall have heart and hand , and cap and knee . 
't is laudable there should be difference made 
Betwixt a Courtier , and a man of Trade : 
For sense or Reason never would allow , 
A Prince to wear a habit for the Blow . 
Nor that a Carter vainly should aspire , 
To thrust himself into the Court attire . 
Distinctions of Office , and Estates 
Should habit men according to their rates , 
Thus I rich Garments no way do condemn , 
But I say no man should be proud of them . 
In Rome , a worthy Law there once was made 
That every man , of each degree and Trade , 
Some mark or Badge , about him still should bear 
Whereby men knew what all men's callings were . 
The Consuls bearing the Imperial sway , 
( To whose command the rest did all obey ) 
In token they had power to save or spill , 
Had Rods and Axes born before them still . 
The Censors , Tribunes , Aediles , and the Praetor's 
The Provosts , Questors , and the Conseruators 
And as their offices were sundry varied , 
So were they known by things before them carri●● 
The Mercer in his hat did wear some tough , 
Or shred of Silk , or Gold , his trading stuff ; 
Drapers a piece of List , Weavers a quill , 
Or Shuttle , and the Millers wore a Mill. 
And as men sundry callings did apply , 
So they wore Emblems to be known thereby 
But if that Law were but enacted have , 
How like a plucked crow , would Pride sppn appe●● 
Some Tailors would be very mad no that , 
To wear each one a Bodkin in his hat ; 
there 's many a wealth Whoremaster would sk●● 
And stamp , and start , if he should wear a whip 
But yet if every thief of each degree , 
Were bound to wear a halter , God bless me : 
A Butcher still should wear a Calf or Bull , 
Myself ( a Waterman ) an Oar or Skull . 
And so of every trade both high and low , 
Men ( by their badgs ) would their functions kno●● 
And if this Law the State would but allow , 
Some would wear calf's skins , that wear velu● no●● 
then jack and jill , and john a Drones his issue , 
Would not be trapped thus in Gold and Tissue . 
't is strange a coxcomb should be crammed with pride 
Because he hath got on a Satin hide : 
A Grogreine outside , or a silver Case , 
Some fourercene groce of buttons , and Gold lace ; 
When as perhaps the corpse that carries all , 
Hath more diseases than an Hospital , 
And ( which is worst of all ) his Soul within , 
Stinks before God , polluted with all sin . 
Rome's great Arch-tyrant Nero , amongst all 
The matchless vices he was taxed withal , 
( The which in Histories are truly told , ) 
Was said t' have shoe ties all wrought o'er with gold , 
If in an Emperor ( that did command 
Almost the whole world , both by Sea and Land , 
Who countermanded Indian mines and gems , 
jewels , and almost all earth's Diadems , ) 
To wear gold shoestrings were a noted crime , 
What may it then be called at this time , 
When many , below Ostlers in degree , 
Shall ( in that point ) be deck'r as brave as lie ? 
Thus pride 's an over weening self opinion , 
A soul destroyer , come from Hell's dominion ; 
Which makes vainglorious fools , & new found mad●● 
Forget they are of Eve's good brood and Adams . 
But yet though Pride be a most deadly sin , 
What numbers by it do their livings win ? 
A world of people daily live thereby ; 
Who ( were it not for it ) would starve and die , 
Thus ( by corruption of the time ) this Devil 
Is grown a good , bad , necessary evil . 
She is the Mercers only fruitful crop , 
She is the Silkman , and th'embroderers prop ; 
She is the Haberdasher's chiefest Stock , 
She feeds the Hat-sellers with block on block ; 
She makes the Dyers daily live to die , 
And die to live , and get great wealth thereby ; 
She ( every Winter ) doth the Draper feed , 
With food and fucll She supplies his need . 
She is the Tailor's goddess ; and upon her 
He daily doth attend to do her honour ; 
All the inventions of his studious pate , 
He at her shrine doth ever consecrate , 
He takes the world for fashions that excel , 
From Germany , from France , from Spain , from hell 
And would himself be out of fashion quite , 
But that Pride in new fashions doth delight , 
Silkweavers ( of the which abundance are ) 
Were 't not for Pride would live , & die most bare : 
Sempsters with ruffs & cuffs , & quoifes , & cawls , 
And falls , ( were 't not for pride ) would soon have falls . 
The Shoemaker's neat , spanish , or polony , 
Would have but single-soaled receipt of money . 
The sweet Perfumers , would be out of favour , 
And hardly could be saviours by their savour . 
The glittering jeweller , and lapidary , 
( But for Pride's help ) were in a poor quandary , 
The goldsmith's plate would stand upon his shelf , 
and 's Rings & Chains he might wear out himself . 
Thus Pride is grown to such a height , I say , 
That were she banished , many would decay : 
For many hundred thousands are you see , 
Which from Pride only , have meat , clotheses , & fee : 
no marvel than she hath so many friends , 
When as such numbers on her still depends , 
Pride is their Mistress , she maintains them still , 
And they must serve her , or their case is ill . 
But as so many numbers numberless , 
Do live and flourish hcere by Pride's excess : 
So are there more upon the other side , 
Toiled and tormented still to maintain Pride . 
The painful Ploughman's pains do never cease , 
For he must pay his Rent , or lose his lease , 
And though his Father and himself before , 
Have oft relieved poor beggars at their door ; 
Yet now his Fine and Rent so high is reared , 
That his own meat and clothes are scarcely cleared 
Let him toil Night and Day , in light and dark , 
Lie with the Lamb down , rise up with the Lark 
Dig , delve , plough , sow , rake , harrow , mow , lordship , fell 
Plant , graft , hedge , ditch , thresh , winnow , buy & sell 
Yet all the money that his pains can win , 
His Landlord hath a purse to put it in . 
What though his cattle with the Murrain die , 
Or that the Earth her fruitfulness deny ? 
Let him beg , steal , grieve , labour and lament , 
The Quarter comes , and he must pay his Rent ; 
And though his Fine and Rent be high , yet higher 
It shall be raised if once it doth expire : 
Let him and his be hunger-starved and pined , 
His Landlord hath decreed his bones to grind : 
And all this cark and care , and toil of his , 
Most chiefly for this only purpose is , 
That his gay Landlord may wear silk & feather 
whilst he poor drudge can scare get freeze or leather 
Because his Landlady may dog the fashion , 
Hce's racked and tortured without all compassion ; 
Because his Landlord's Heir may have renown 
Of Gentle , though the Father be a Clown : 
Because his landlord's daughters ( decked with pride ) 
With ill got portions may be Ladyfide . 
In brief , poor tenants pinch for clothes and food 
To dawb with pride their landlords & their brood . 
The time hath been ( and some alive knows when ) 
A Gentleman would keep some twenty men , 
Some thirty , and some forty , less or more , 
( As their Revenues did supply their store . ) 
And with their Charities did freely feed 
The Widow , Fatherless , and poor man's need , 
But than did Pride keep residence in Hell , 
And was not come upon the earth to dwell : 
then Love and Charity were at the best , 
Expressed in Action , not in words professed . 
then conscience did keep men in much more awe , 
Than the severest rigour of the Law , 
And then did men fear God ( with true intent , ) 
For 's Goodness , not for fear of punishment . 
But since the Leprosy of Pride hath spread 
The world all over , from the foot to head : 
Good bounteous house keeping is quite destroyed , 
And large revenues other ways employed . 
Means that would four men meat and means allow , 
Are turned to garters , and to roses now , 
That which kept twenty , in the days of old , 
By Satan is turned satin , silk , and gold , 
And one man now in garments he doth wear , 
A thousand acres , on his back doth bear , 
Whose ancestors in former times did give , 
Means for a hundred people well to live . 
Now all is shrunk , ( in this vainglorious age ) 
T'atire a coach , a fooreman , and a page , 
To dice , drink , drabs , tobacco , hawks & hounds , 
These are th' expense of many thousand pounds , 
Whilst many thousands starve , and daily perish , 
For want of that which these things used to cherish . 
There is another Pride , which some profess , 
Who pinch their bellies , for their backs excess : 
For though their guts through want of fodder clings , 
That they will make sweet filthy fiddle strings ; 
Yet they will suffer their maws pine and lack , 
To trap with rich comparisons the back . 
These people , ( for their Pride ) do justice still , 
Upon themselves , although against their william 
They do in their own stomaches , try , examine , 
And punish outward Pride , with inward famine . 
But sure the people can be good for nothing . 
Whose reputation only lies in clothing : 
Because the hangman oft may execute , 
A thief or traitor in a Satin suit , 
And that suit which did from the gallows drop , 
May be again hanged in a Brokers shop , 
And then again hanged , and bought , and worn , 
And secondly ( perhaps ) to Tyburn born : 
And so at sundry times , for sundry crimes , 
The Hangman may sell one suit sixteen times , 
And every Rascal , that the same did fit , 
To be exceeding pocky proud of it . 
And all this while , ( if I be not mistook ) 
It rests unpaid for , in the Mercer's book . 
Thus many simple honest people have , 
Giun worship to a Brokers wardrobe slave , 
Thus Tyburn ornaments may be the chief , 
To grace a graceless arrant whore , or thief . 
A Servingman , I encased clothes have seen , 
That did himself so strangely overween , 
That with himself he out of knowledge grew , 
And therefore all his old friends he misknewe , 
Until at last his Glory did decease , 
His outside faced with tatters , rags and grease , 
then did the changing time , the youth transform 
From Pride to be as lowly as a worm . 
A many of these fellows may be had , 
that 's meek or proud , as clothes are good or bad . 
I leave true Noble Gentry all this while , 
Out of the reach of my invective stile , 
't is fit that those of worthy race and place , 
Should be distinguished from the Vulgar base . 
Particulars I'll not to question call , 
My Satire is 'gainst Pride in general . 
Soft Raiment is in Princes Court's allowed , 
Not that the wearers should thereof be proud ; 
For worth and wisdom knows most certainly , 
That Hell gives Pride , and Heaven Humility , 
And be their garments never so rare or rich , 
They never can make Pride their hearts bewitch . 
then if all sorts of men considered this , 
Most vain the pride of any raiment is , 
For neither sea , land , fish , fowl , worm , or beast , 
But man's beholding to the most and least . 
The silly Sheep puts off his coat each year , 
And gives it to forgetful man to wear : 
The Ox , Calf , Goat , and Deer do not refuse 
To yield their skins , to make him boots & shoes , 
And the poor Silkworm labour's night and day 
T' adorn and garnish man with rich array : 
Therefore if men of this did rightly think , 
Humility would grow , and Pride would shrink . 
Fowls of the Air do yield both fans & plumes 
And a poor Civet Cat allows perfumes . 
The Earth is ripped and boweled rend and torn , 
For Gold and silver which by man is worn : 
And sea and land are raked , and searched & sought , 
For jewels too far fetched , and too dear bought . 
Thus man's beholding still ( to make him trim ) 
Unto all creatures , and not they to him . 
Nature ( without man's help ) doth them supply , 
And man without their help would strave and dic . 
If men ( I say ) these things considered well , 
Pride then would soon be tumbled down to hell . 
Their golden suits that make them much renowned , 
Is but the guts and garbage of the Ground : 
Their Civet ( that affords such dainty scents ) 
Is but a poor Cats sweeting Excrements ; 
Their rarest jewels ( which most glister forth ) 
Are more for outward show then inward worth , 
They are high valued at all times , and season , 
But for what reason , none can give a reason , 
The best of them , like whores , have ever been , 
Most fair without , and full of bane within . 
And let a great man wear a piece of glass , 
It ( for his sake ) will for a Diamond pass ; 
But let a man that 's of but mean degree , 
Wear a fair Diamond , yet it glass must be . 
This valuing of a jewel is most fit , 
It should not grace a man , man should grace it . 
A good man to his suit is a repute , 
A knave's repute lies only in his suit . 
And for a stone , that but 3. drams hath weighed , 
Of precious poison , hundred have been paid . 
And who can tell how many lives were lost , 
In fetching home the Babbles of such cost ? 
( For many of them are as dear bought . 
As if they from Acheldama were brought . ) 
Yet some rush through ( fantasique pates to please ) 
Rocks , sands , & change of air , rough winds & seas 
Storms , tempests , gusts , flaws , pirates , sword , & fire , 
Death , or else slavery , ( never to retire . ) 
And thus Pride's various humours to suffice , 
A number hazard these calamities . 
When our own Country doth afford us here , 
jewels more precious , nothing nigh so dear . 
A whetstone is more necessary sure , 
A grindstone much more profit doth procure : 
But for a millstone , that 's a jewel rare , 
With which no other stone can make compare . 
The loadstone is the means to find the rest , 
But of all stones the millstone is the best . 
Free stones and artificial bricks I grant , 
Are stones , which men in building cannot want : 
And the flintstone can yield us fire and heat , 
But yet the millstone yields us bread to eat . 
The tilestone keeps us dry , the roadstone bides , 
And holds fast Boats , in tempests , winds , & tides , 
The chalkstone serves for lime , or for account 
To score , how reckon do abate or mount . 
Pebbles , and gravel , mend high ways I know , 
And ballast ships , which else would overthrow . 
And this much I 'll maintain here with my pen , 
These are the stones that most do profit men : 
These , these are they , if we consider well , 
That Saphires , and the Diamonds do excel , 
The Pearl , the Em'rauld , and the Turkess blew , 
The sanguine Coral , Ambers golden hue , 
The Crystal , jacinth , Achate , Ruby red , 
The Carbuncle , Squared , Cut , and Polished , 
The Onyx , Topaz , jaspar , Hematite , 
The Sable jet , the Touch , and Chrysolite ; 
All these considered as they are indeed , 
Are but vain toys that doth man's fancy feed ; 
The stones I named before , do much more good 
For building , sailing , lodging , firing , food . 
Yet jewels for their lawful use are sent , 
To be a lustre , and an ornament 
For State , magnificence , and Princely port , 
To show a Kingdom's glory , at the Court ; 
And God ( I know ) ordained them to be worn , 
Superior States to honour and adorn , 
And for the uses they were made are good , 
If ( as they should be ) they are understood : 
T' adorn our persons they are still allowed , 
But not to buy too dear , or make us proud . 
The Holy Ghost in Exodus recites , 
How Aaron ( High Priest of the Israelites ) 
Twelve several stones did on his Breastplate bear , 
Which of the twelve Tribes a remembrance were ; 
But they were mystical , prophetic tropes , 
And figures of Salvations future hopes . 
But God did never give or Gold or gem , 
Or jewel , that we should take pride in them . 
The Devil laughed lately at the stinking stir , 
We had about Hic Mulier , and Haec ●ir 
The Masculine apparelled Feminine , 
And Feminine attired Masculine , 
The Woman-man , Man-woman , choose you whether , 
The Female-male , Male-female both , yet neither ; 
Hells Pantomimics that themselves bedights , 
L●ke shameless double sexed Hermophradites , 
Virago Roaring Girls , that to their middle , 
To know what sex they were , was half a Riddle , 
Brave trimmed & trussed , with daggers & with dags , 
Stout Captain Maudlin's feather bravely wags , 
Lieutenant Dol , and valiant Ensign Bess , 
All armed with impudence and shamelessness ; 
Whose Calves egg starch may in some sort be taken 
As if they had been hanged to smoke like Bacon , 
Whose borrowed hair ( perhaps ) not long before 
Dropped from the head of some diseased Whore , 
Or one that at the Gallows made her Will , 
Late choked with the Hangman's Pickadill . 
In which respect , a Sow , a Cat , a Mare , 
more modest than these foolish Females are . 
For the bruit beasts ( continual night and day ) 
Do wear their own still ( and so do not they . ) 
But these things have so well been banged & firked 
And Epigrammed and Satyrd , whipped and Ierked , 
Cudgeled and bastinadoed at the Court , 
And Comically stag'de to make men sport , 
lyged , and ( with all reason ) mocked in Rhyme , 
And made the only scornful theme of Time , 
And Ballad-mongers had so great a task , 
( As if their muses all had got the laske . ) 
That no more time therein my pains I 'll spend , 
But freely leave them to amend , or end . 
I saw a fellow take a white loaves pith , 
And rub his masters white shoes clean therewith 
And I did know that fellow , ( for his pride ) 
To want both bread and meat before he died . 
Some I have heard of , that have been so fine , 
To wash and bathe themselves in milk or wine , 
Or else with whites of eggs , their faces garnish , 
Which makes them look like visors , or new varnish 
Good bread , and oatmeal hath been spilt like trash 
My Lady polecats dainty hands to wash : 
Such there hath been , but now if such there are , 
I wish that want of food may be their share . 
Some practice every day the Painter's trade , 
And strive to mend the work that God hath made . 
But these deceivers are deceived far , 
With falsely striving to amend , they mar : 
With deu'lish daubing , plast'ring they do spread , 
Deforming so themselves with white and red , 
The end of all their cunning that is shown , 
●s God will scarcely know them for his own . 
●n a great frost , bare breasted , and unlaced , 
I have seen some as low as to their waist : 
One half attired , the other half stark bare , 
Shows that they half ashamed , half shameless are , 
Half , ( or else all ) from what they should be erring , 
And neither fish or flesh , nor good red herring . 
I blowed my nails when I did them behold , 
And yet that naked Pride would feel no cold . 
Some every day do powder so their hair , 
That they like Ghosts , or Millers doc appear : 
But let them powder all that ere they can , 
Their Pride will stink before both God & man 
ther was a trade's man's wife , which I could name 
( But that I 'll not divulge abroad her shame ) 
Which a strong legion of good garments wore , 
As gowns and petticoats , and kirtles store . 
Smocks , headtires , aprones , shadows , shaparoons 
( Whimwhams , & whirligigs to please Baboons 
jewels , rings , ooches , brooches , bracelets , chains 
( more than too much to fit her idle brains ) 
( Besides , she paid ( not counting muffs & ruffs ) 
Four pounds six shillings for two pair of cuffs 
't will make a man half mad , such worms as those 
The general gifts of God should thus engross . 
And that such numbers want their needful use , 
Whilst hellish Pride perverts them to abuse . 
Now a few lines to paper I will put , 
Of men's Beards strange and variable cut : 
In which there 's some do take as vain a Pride , 
As almost in all other things beside . 
Some are reaped most substantial , like a brush , 
Which makes a Natural wit known by the bush 
( And in my time of some men I have heard , 
Whose wisdom have been only wealth & beard 
Many of these the proverb well doth fit , 
Which says Bush natural , more hair then wit. 
Some seem as they were starched stiff and fine 
Like to the bristles of some angry swine : 
And some ( to set their love's desire on edge ) 
Are cut and prun'de like to a quickset hedge . 
Some like a spade , some like a fork , some square , 
Some round , some mowed like stubble , some stark bare , 
Some sharp Steletto fashion , dagger like , 
That may with whispering a man's eyes out pike ; 
Some with the hammer cut , or Roman T , 
Their beards extravagant reformed must be , 
Some with the quadrate , some triangle fashion , 
Some circular , some oval in translation , 
Some perpendicular in longitude , 
Some like a thicket for their crassitude , 
That heights , depths , bredths , triform , square , oval , round , 
And rules Geo'metricall in beards are found , 
Besides the upper lip 's strange variation , 
Corrected from mutation to mutation ; 
as 't were from tithing unto tithing sent , 
Pride gives to pride continual punishment . 
Sun ( spite their teeth ) like thatched eves downward grows 
And some grows upwards in despite their nose . 
Some their mustatioes of such length do keep , 
That very well they may a manger sweep : 
Which in beer , ale or wine they drinking plunge , 
And suck the liquor up , as 't ' were a Sponge ; 
But 't is a Slovens beastly Pride , I think , 
To wash his beard where other men must drink . 
And some ( because they will not rob the cup , 
Their upper chaps like pot hooks are turned up , 
The Barbers thus ( like Tailors ) still must be , 
Acquainted with each cuts variety : 
Yet though with beards thus merrily I play , 
't is only against Pride which I inveigh : 
For let men wear their hair or their attire 
According as their states or minds desire , 
So as no puffed up Pride their hearts possess , 
And they use Gods good gifts with thankfulness . 
there 's many an idle shallow pated Gull , 
Thinks his own wisdom to be wonderful : 
And that the State themselves do much forget , 
Because he in authoritie's not set : 
And having scarely wit to rule a Cottage , 
Thinks he could guide a kingdom with his dotage . 
True wisdom is man's only guide and guard , 
To live here , to live better afterwards . 
It is a rich man's chief pre-eminence , 
And 't is a poor man's stay , and best defence . 
But worldly wisdom is the ground of all 
The mischiefs that to man did ever fall . 
God's wisdom is within the Gospel hid , 
Which we to* search , are by our Saviour bid . 
Thus Pride of human wisdom is all vain , 
And foolish fancies of man's idle brain . 
Pride of our knowledge , we away must throw 
For he knows most , which least doth seem to know 
One Apple from the tree of life is more , 
then from the tree of knowledge half a score ; 
't is good for us to know our Master's will , 
But the not doing it , makes knowledge ill . 
there 's many know , the Just in heaven shall dwell , 
Yet they unjustly run the way to hell . 
The life Eternal no way can be won , 
But to know God , and jesus Christ his Son . 
Christ , ( to his people ) by his word and passion , 
Taught men the joyful knowledge of salvation . 
I rather had by knowledge , raise my chance , 
then to be poor with barb rous ignorance ; 
Yet better 't were I nothing understood , 
then to know goodness , and to do no good . 
Thus knowledge , worthy is of dignity , 
But not to make the knowers proud thereby . 
For if men would , to know themselves endever , 
Pride of their knowledge would infect them never . 
Pride of our riches is a painful pleasure , 
Like sumpter horses laden with rich treasure , 
So Misers bear their wealth as they are able , 
Till Death the ostler makes the grave their stable . 
there 's some take pride in treasure basely got , 
Have it , yet want it , as they had it not ; 
And though to get it , no vile means they spare , 
To spend it on themselves they seldom dare ; 
How can a base extortionizing Boar , 
Get riches ill , and give God thanks therefore ? 
't is all one , if a thief , a bawd , a witch , 
Or a Bribe taker should grow damned rich , 
And for their trash , got with their hellish pranks , 
The hypocriticke slaves will give God thanks . 
no let the litter of such whelps , 
Give thanks to th'deuill ( author of their helps ) 
To give God thanks , it is almost all one , 
To make him partner in extortion . 
Thus if men get their wealth by means that 's evil , 
Let them not give God thanks , but thank the devil . 
Yet wealth the gift of God hath ever been , 
But not such wealth that 's only got by sin ; 
Nor any wealth if men take pride therein . 
And those who put their foolish confidence 
In riches , trusting to their false defence ; 
Those that with Mammon are bewitched so , 
Our Sauiour'gainst them threats a fearful Woe . 
Humility with riches may be blessed , 
But pride 's a poison God doth still detest . 
Pride of our learning 's vain , it doth appear , 
For though men study many a weary year , 
And learned as much , as possibly the brain , 
Or scope of man's Inventions may attain , 
Yet after all their studies , truth doth show , 
Much more is what they know not , than they know , 
To learn by bad men's vices , vice to shun , 
By good men's good , what should by us be done , 
This is the learning we should practise most , 
Not to be proud thereof , or vainly boast . 
A Prince's favour is a precious thing , 
Yet it doth many unto ruin bring ; 
Because the havers of it proudly use it , 
And ( to their own ambitious ends ) abuse it . 
If men that are so stately and so strange , 
Would but remember how time oft doth change , 
And note how some in former times did spread , 
By their examples they would take some heed , 
For as a cart wheel in the way goes round , 
The Spoak that 's highest is quickly at the ground , 
So Envy , or just cause , or misconceit , 
In Prince's Courts , continually do wait , 
That he that is this day Magnifico 
To morrow may go by ●●eronimo 
The spokes that now are highest in the wheels , 
Are in a moment lowest by the heels . 
Haman was proud , past reasons bounds or scope , 
And his vainglory ended in a rope , 
And his ten sons , in duty to obey 
Their father , followed him the self same way . 
Those men that harbour Pride within their breast , 
Do seldom end their days in peace and rest . 
But if they do , disgrace and shame withal , 
Are the chief waiters on their funeral . 
Where honour is with noble virtue mixed , 
It like a Rock stands permanent and fixed , 
The snares of envy , or the traps of hate 
could never , nor shall ever hurt that state : 
Like Adamant it doth beaten back the battery , 
Of spiteful malice , and deceiving flattery , 
For it with Pride can never be infected , 
But humbly is supernally protected , 
Such with their Kings shall ever be beloved , 
And like to fixed stars , stand fast , unmoved . 
Those that are proud of beauty , let them know , 
Their Pride is but a fickle , fading show . 
A smoke , a bubble , a time-tosted toy , 
A Luna like , sraile , ever changing joy . 
For as a tide of flood , slowed to the height , 
Do●h ( in a moment ) fall to ebbing strait : 
So beauty , when it is most fair and fine , 
( Like new plucked flowers ) doth presently decline . 
That man or woman's virtue doth excel , 
If with their beauty chastity doth dwell : 
But Pride of beauty is a mark most sure , 
That th'owners' of it , use it to procure 
The Paphian pastime , and the Cyprian game , 
The sports of Venus , and the acts of shame , 
To breed the heat of Cupid's lustful flame . 
oft beauty hath fair chastity displaced , 
But chastity , hath beauty ever graced . 
For 't is a Maxim , those have ever been , 
That are most fair without , most fowl within . 
Too oft hath beauty , by disloyalty , 
Branded itself with lasting infamy , 
That one frail creature , ( nobly will descended ) 
( Proud of her fairness ) foully hath offended , 
And on her honse and kindred , laid a blot , 
That the dishonour never will be forgot . 
But a fair feature virtuously : nclined , 
A beauteous outside , and a pious mind , 
Such are Gods Images Epitomies , 
And Cabinets of heanens blessed treasuries : 
And therefore be thy feature , fair or foul , 
Let inward virtues beautify the soul . 
Pride of our strength , shows weakness in our wit , 
Because the Colic , or an Ague fit , 
The toothache , or the pricking of a pin , 
oft let's the strength out , and the weakness in . 
The Tribe of Dans great glory , * Sampsons' strength 
By a weak woman was o'erthrown at length . 
And sure there 's many do themselves much wrong 
In being proud because they are made strong , 
For a great number living now there are , 
Can wrestle , throw the sledge , or pitch the bar , 
That on their backs four hundred weight can bear 
And horse shoes ( with their fifts ) in sunder tear , 
Yet never use their strength in any thing , 
To serve their God , their country , or their King. 
But with outrageous acts their lives pursue , 
As if God gave them strength but as their due , 
As though they like the Giants could remove , 
And hurl great mountains at the head of jove , 
Or like Gargantua , or Polypheme , 
Or Gogmagog , their boisterous fancies dream , 
That they more wonders by their strength can do , 
then Hercules could ever attain unto . 
Let those Goliahs' , that in strength take pride , 
Know that the Lord of Hosts doth them deride , 
And what they are ( that proudly brag and swell 
Of strength ) let any man but note them well , 
If hurt or sickness make their strength decay , 
A man shall never see such Cows as they . 
Being strong , their minds on God they never set ; 
In weakness , instly he doth them forget : 
Strength , thus like headstrong lads they do abuse it , 
For want of Reasons bridle how to use it . 
Pride of our child's vain ; our proper stem 
Must either die from us , or we from them . 
If our examples of the life we live 
Enrich them not more than the gifts we give , 
If ( disobedient ) they despise mstruction , 
And will perversely run into destruction ; 
Much better had it been , we had not been 
Begetters of such Imps of shame and sin . 
Children no duty to such Parents owe , 
Who suffer vice their youth to overgrow , 
Neglect to teach thy son in younger years , 
He shall reject thee in thy hoary hairs , 
The way to make our children us obey , 
Is that ourselves from God run not astray , 
Such measure to our maker as we meet , 
't is just , that such , we from our children get . 
th' Apostle Paul exhorteth more and less , 
To be all children in maliciousness : 
That is to say , as children harmless be , 
So we should from maliciousness be free . 
Thus Pride of birth , apparel , wealth , strength , state , 
And Pride of human wisdom God doth hate : 
Of knowledge , learning , beauty , children and 
The Pride of Prince's favour cannot stand . 
And Pride in any thing shall evermore , 
Be barred and shut from heavens Eternal door , 
For whosoever will believe and look , 
Shall find examples in the sacred book : 
That God hath euer'gainst the proud withstood , 
And that a proud heart never came to good . 
He saith Pride is* destruction , and again 
That Pride is* hateful before God and men : 
How Pride's beginning is from God to fall , 
And of all sin is the* original . 
Who taketh hold on Pride , in great affliction 
Shall be o'erthrown , filled with God's malediction . 
Pride was not made for man , man hath no part 
In Pride , for God abhorreth a proud heart , 
And ' 't is decreed by the Almighty's doom , 
That Pride unto a fearful fall shall come . 
A person that is proud , never pleased God yet : 
For how can they please him whom they forget ? 
Yet as before I said , again I 'll say , 
That Pride to such a height is grown this day : 
That many a thousand thousand family , 
Were 't not for Pride would beg , or starve and die . 
And the most part of them are men of might , 
Who in Pride's quarrel will both speak and fight : 
I therefore have no hope to put her down , 
But Satyre-like , to tell her of her own . 
There is another Pride which I must touch , 
It is so bad , so base , so too too much : 
Which is , if any man's good fortune be , 
To rise to Honourable dignity , 
Or through infirmity , or wilfulness , 
Men fall unhappily into distress . 
That Libelers do spirit their wits like froth , 
To rail at Honour , and dishonour both . 
These Mongrel whelps are ever snarling still , 
Hating men's goodness , glorying in their ill , 
Like bloodhound Curs they daily hunt and sent , 
And rhyme and jig on others detriment : 
Supposing it a very virtuous thing , 
To be an arrant Knave in libelling . 
Forsooth these Screech-owls would be called the wits , 
Whose flashes fly abroad by girds and fits : 
Who do their mangy Muses magnify : 
Making their sport of men's calamity , 
But yet for all their hateful hellish mirth , 
They are the vilest cowards on the earth : 
For there 's not one that doth a libel frame , 
Dares for his ears subscribe to it his name . 
't is a base brutish pride to take a pen , 
And libel on the miseries of men ; 
For why all men are mortal , weak and frail , 
And all , from what they should be fall and fail . 
And therefore men should in these slip'ry times 
Bewail men's miseries , and hate their crimes : 
Let him that stands take heed he doth not fall , 
And not rejoice in men's mishaps at all . 
It is too much for Libelers to meddle , 
To make their Muse a Hangman or a Beadle : 
At men's misfortunes to deride and jest , 
To add distress to those that are distressed . 
As I do hold men's vices to be vile , 
So at their miseries I 'll never smile , 
And in a word ( lest tediousness offend ) 
Alibeller's a Knave , and there 's an end . 
Thus having of Pride's various forms related 
And how of God , and good men it is hated : 
I think it fit some Lines in praise to write , 
Of Virtues which to Pride are opposite . 
For vice with show of Virtue blinds the eye , 
And Virtue makes vice known apparently . 
When falsehood is examined and compared 
With Truth , it makes truth have the more regard . 
The Crow seems blackest when the Swan stands near 
And goodness makes the ill most bad appear : 
So virtues that are contrary to vices , 
Make them contemptible , and base in prices : 
Humility , if it be well embraced , 
It makes disdainful Pride , disdained , disgraced : 
Humility is a most heavenly gift , 
The Stayre that doth ( to Glory ) men up lift . 
None but the meek and lowly humbled spirit 
Shall true eternal happiness inherit : 
Those that are humble honour God always , 
And only those will he to honour raise . 
If thou be'st great in state , give thanks therefore 
And humble still thyself , so much the more . 
He that is humble , loves his Christian brother , 
And thinks himself inferior to all other ; 
Those that are meek the Lord shall ever guide , 
And teach them in his ways still to abide . 
For though the Lord be high , he hath respect 
Unto the lowly , whom he will protect . 
Humility , and lowliness goes on , 
Still before honour , ( as saith Solomon ) 
He that is humble here and free from strife , 
Shall for reward have glory , wealth , and life . 
He that himself doth humble , certainly , 
Our Saviour saith shall be exalted high . 
He that with Christ will wear a glorious Crown 
Must cast himself , ( as Christ did ) humbly down 
And like to the rebounding of a ball , 
The way to rise , must first be , low to fall . 
For God the Father will accept of none , 
That put not on the meekness of his Son : 
If Proudly thou do lift thyself on high , 
God and his blessings , from thee , still will fly : 
But if thou humble , meek , and lowly be , 
God and his blessings will come down to thee . 
●f thou wouldst travel unto heaven , then know , 
●umility's' the way that thou must go . 
●f in presumptuous paths of Pride , thou tread , 
't is the right wrong way that to hell doth lead . 
●now that thy birth , attire , strength , beauty , place , 
●re given unto thee by God's special grace : 
●now that thy wisdom , learning , and thy wealth , 
Thy life , thy Prince's favour , beauty , health , 
●nd whatsoever thou canst goodness call , 
●as by God's bounty given unto thee all . 
●nd know that of thine own thou dost possess , 
●othing but sin , and woeful wretchedness , 
Christian's Pride should only be in this , 
When he can say that God his Father is . 
When grace and mercy , ( well applied ) afford , 
●o make him brother unto Christ his Lord 
When he unto the holy Ghost can say , 
●hou art my Schoolmaster , whom I 'll obey ; 
When he can call the Saints his fellows , and 
●●y to the Angels , for my guard you stand , 
This is a laudable , and Christian Pride , 
〈◊〉 know Christ , and to know him crucified . 
This is that meek ambition , low aspiring , 
Which all men should be earnest in desiring : 
Thus to be proudly humble , is the thing , 
Which will us to the state of glory bring . 
But yet beware ; Pride hypocritical , 
Puts not humilities cloak on at all : 
A lofty mind , with lowly cap and knee , 
Is humble Pride , and meek hypocrisy . 
Ambitious minds , with adulating looks , 
Like courteous Crowne-aspiring* Bullinbrookes' ; 
As a great ship ill suited with small sail , 
As judas meant all mischief , cried All haibe , 
Like the humility of Absalon : 
This shadowed Pride , much danger waits upon 
These are the counterfeit ( God fave ye Sirs ) 
That have their flattries in particulars , 
That courteously can hide their proud intents , 
Under varieties of compliments . 
These vipers bend the knee , and kiss the hand , 
And swear , ( sweet Sir ) I am at your command . 
And proudly make humility a screw , 
To wring themselves into opinions view . 
This Pride is hateful , dangerous , and vile , 
And shall itself ( at last ) itself beguile . 
Thus Pride is deadly sin , & sin brings shame , 
Which here I leave to hell , from whence it came 
FINIS . 





If any man fetch his slory higher , let him take my book for naught . In perfect Holiness and Righteousness . 〈◊〉  ●say 14. 4.  Daniel 4.  Daniel 5.  The Medes and Persians . Acts 12. ●osephus ●●b . 19 ●●p . 7.  Acts 8.  Plutarch●n ●n the life ●f Alexander . ●e was ●pysned at Babylon . 1.  Cor. 4.   A Tailor is but a man ; therefore it is Idolatry to worship his workmanship   The ●old of ●lood that ●he jews' ●ought with the ●hirty pei●eses of sil●er , which ●udas●rought ●rought ●acke alaine after ●e betrayed Christ , Mat. 27. 7.  Acts 1. 19   A millstone is a poereles jewel .  Two invective pamphlets against the monstrous and shapeless disguises of men and women .  Female Soldiers . Against Pride of worldly wisdom . 1.  Cor. 2. 7.  Against Pride of human knowledge   joh. 17. 3  :  Luke 1. 73  Against Pride of riches .  Luk. 2  Against Pride of Learnin  Against b'ing proud of Princ favours . Comparison . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 of 〈◊〉  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 of 〈◊〉  ●udges' ●19 . Against Pride of our havir children . Toby 4.  Eccle. 10.   Proverbs 16.  Pro. 29.  Eccle. 29.  Matt. 23.  Luke 14. 18  Luke 1. ludeth 9   Against libelers . Most of these libelers have an Itching vein of Rhyming , which with much scratching makes scurvy lines & so from itch to seratch , from scratch to scurvy , & from scurvy to seabbed they proceed in time , with their botching , to be termed ( by knaves and fools ) scald Poets . The praise of Humility  Eccle. 19   Phil. 2. 3.   Psal ; 25. 9   Ps. 138. 6.   Prou. 22. 4.   Mat. 23. 12.  A Pride which is fit for all estates . King Henry the 4.  