A Verry Merry Wherry-ferry-voyage : OR York for my Money : 

Sometimes Perilous , sometimes Quarrellous , Performed with a pair of Oars , by Sea from London , by JOHN TAYLOR , and JOB PENNELL . 

And written by I T.  

LONDON . Imprinted by Edw : Allde . 1622.  

As much Happiness as may be wished , attend the Two hopeful , Imps of Gentility and Learning , Mr. RICHARD and GEORGE HATTON . 

You forward Pair , in Towardly Designs , 
To you I send these sowsde Salt-water Lines : 
Accept , Read , Laugh , and breath , and to 't again , 
And still my Muse , and I , shall yours Remain . 
john Taylor . Prologue . 

I Now intent a Voyage here to write , 
From London unto York , help to Indite 
Great Neptune ! lend thy Aid to me , who pa● 
Through thy tempestuous Waves with man● a blas● 
And then I●● true describe the Towns , & me● 
And manners , as I went and came again . 
A very Merry Wherry-ferry-voyage , Or , York for my Money . 

THE Year which I do call as others do , 
Full 1600. adding Twenty two : 
The Month of july , that 's for ever famed , 
( Because 't was so by julius Caesar named , ) 
Just when six days , and to each Day a Night , 
The dogged Dog-days had begun to bite , 
On that day which doth blessed Remembrance bring , 
The name of an Apostle , and our King , 
On that remarkable good day , Saint james 
I undertook my Voyage down the Thames . 
The Sign in Cancer , or the Ribs and Breast , 
And Aeolus blue sweetly West Southwest . 
then after many farewells , Cups and Glasses , 
( Which oftentimes hath made men worse than Asses ) 
About the waste or Navel of the Day , 
Not being dry or Drunk , I went my way . 
Our Wherry somewhat old , or struck in age , 
That had endured near 4. years' Pilgrimage , 
And carried honest people , Whores , and Thiefs , 
Some Sergeants , Bailiffs , and some under-shrieves , 
And now at last it was her lot to be 
Th'aduent'rous bonny Bark to carry me . 
But as an old Whore's Beauty being gone 
Hides Nature's wrack , with Artlike painting on : 
So I with Colours finely did repair 
My Boats defaults , and made her fresh and fair . 
Thus being furnished with good Wine and Beer , 
And Bread and Meat ( to banish hungers fear ) 
With Sails , with Anchor , Cables , Skulls and Oars , 
With Card and Compass , to know Seas and Shores , 
With Lantern , Candle , Tinderbox and Match , 
And with good Courage , to work , ward , and watch , 
Well maned , well shipped , well victualled , well appointed , 
Well in good health , well timbered and well jointed : 
All wholly well , and yet not half Foxed well , 
'twixt Kent , and Essex , we to Gravesend fell . 
There I had welcome of my friendly Host , 
( A Gravesend Trencher , and a Gravesend Tost ) 
Good meat and Lodging at an easy Rate , 
And rose betimes although I lay down late . 
Bright Lucifer the messenger of Day , 
His burnished twinkling splendour did display : 
Risen cheeked Aurora hid her blushing face , 
She spying Phoebus' coming gave him place . 
Whilst Zephyrus , and Auster , mixed together , 
Breathed gently , as fore-boding pleasant weather . 
Old Neptune had his Daughter Thames supplied , 
With ample measure of a flowing Tide , 
But Thames supposed it was but borrowed goods , 
And with her Ebbs , paid Neptune back his Floods . 
then at the time of this Auspicious dawning , 
I roused my men , who Scrubbing , stretching , yawning , 
Arose , left Gravesend , Rowing down the stream , 
And near to Lee , we to an Anchor came . 
Because the Sands were bare , and Water low , 
We rested there , till it two hours did Flow : 
And then to travel went our Galley foist , 
Our Anchor quickly weighed , our sail soon hoist , 
Where thirty miles we passed , a mile from shore , 
The water two foot deep , or little more . 
Thus passed we on the brave East Saxon Coast , 
From 3. at morn , till 2. at noon almost , 
By Shobury , Wakering , Foulness , Tittingham , 
And then we into deeper water came . 
There is a crooked Bay runs winding far , 
To Maulden , Esterford , and Colchester , 
Which cause 't was much about , ( to ease men's pain ) 
I left the Land , and put into the main . 
With speed , the crooked way to scape and pass , 
I made out strait for Frinton , and the Nasse . 
But being 3.  League's then from any Land , 
And holding of our Main sheate in my hand , 
We did espy a coal-black Cloud to rise , 
Forerunner of some Tempest from the Skies ; 
Scarce had we sailed a hundred times our length , 
But that the wind began to gather strength : 
Stiff Aeolus , with Neptune went to Cuffs , 
With huffs , and puffs , and angry counterbuffs , 
From boisterous Gusts , they fell to fearful flaws , 
Whilst we betwixt wind & water , near Death's jaws 
Tossed like a Cork upon the mounting main , 
Up with a whiff , and strait way down again , 
At which we in our minds much troubled were , 
And said God bless us all , what Weathers here ? 
For ( in a word ) the Seas so high did grow , 
That Ships were forced to strike their topsailes low , 
Mean time ( before the wind ) we scudded brave , 
Much like a Duck , on top of every wave . 
But nothing violent is permanent , 
And in short space away the Tempest went. 
So farewell it ; and you that Readers be 
Suppose it was no welcome Guest to me : 
My Company and I , it much perplexed , 
And let it come when I send for it next . 
But leaving jesting , Thanks to God I give , 
' was through his mercy we did scape and live . 
And though these things with mirth I do express , 
Yet still I think on God with thankfulness . 
Thus ceased the Storm and weather 'gan to smile , 
And we Rowed near the shore of Horsey I 'll . 
then did Illustrious Titan seem to steep 
His Chariot in the Western Ocean deep : 
We saw the far spent Day , withdraw his light , 
And made for Harwich , where we lay all night . 
There did I find an Hostess with a Tongue , 
As nimble as it had on Gimmols hung : 
't will never tyre , though it continual toiled , 
And went as you're , as if it had been Oiled : 
all 's one for that , for aught which I perceive , 
It is a fault which all our Mothers have : 
And is so firmly grafted in the Sex , 
That he 's an Ass that seems thereat to vex . 
Apollo's Beams began to gild the Hills , 
And West Southwest the wind the Welkin fils . 
When I left Harwich , and along we Rowed 
Against a smooth Calm flood that stiffly flowed , 
By Bawdsey Haven , and by Orford Nasse , 
And so by Aldbrough we at last did pass . 
By Lestoffe , we to Yarmouth made our way , 
Our third day's travel being Saturday , 
There did I see a Town well fortified , 
Well governed , with all Nature's wants supplied , 
The situation in a wholesome air , 
The Buildings ( for the most part ) sumptuous , fair , 
The people courteous , and industrious , and 
With labour makes the Sea enrich the land . 
Besides ( for aught I know ) this one thing more , 
The Town can scarcely yield a man a Whore : 
It is renowned for fishing far and near , 
And sure in Britain it hath not a Peer . 
But noble Nash thy fame shall live always , 
Thy witty Pamphlet , the red Herrings praise 
Hath done great Yarmouth much renowned right , 
And put my Artless Muse to silence quite : 
On Sunday we a learned Sermon had , 
Taught to confirm the good , reform the bad ; 
Acquaintance in the Town I scarce had any , 
And sought for none , in fear to find too many , 
Much kindness to me by mine Host was done , 
( A Mariner named William Richardson ) 
Besides mine Hostess gave to me at last 
A Cheese , with which at Sea we broke our fast , 
The Gift was round , and had no end indeed , 
But yet we made an end of it with speed : 
My thanks surmounts her bounty , all men sees 
My Gratitude's in Print : But where 's the Cheese ? 
So on the Monday , betwixt one and twain , 
I took my leave , and put to Sea again . 
Down Yarmouth Road we Rowed with cutting speed , 
( The Wind all quiet , Arms must do the deed ) 
Along by Castor , and Sea-bord'ring Towns , 
Whose Cliffs & shores abide stern Neptune's frowns , 
Sometimes a mile from land , and sometimes two , 
( As depths or sands permitted us to do ) 
Till drawing toward night , we did perceive 
The wind at East , and Seas began to heave : 
The rolling Billows all in fury Roars 
And tumbled us , we scarce could use our Oars : 
Thus on a Lee shore , darkness 'gan to come , 
The Sea grew high , the winds 'gan hiss and hum : 
The foaming curled waves the shore did beat , 
( As if the Ocean would all Norfolk eat ) 
To keep at Sea , was dangerous I did think , 
To go to land I stood in doubt to sink : 
Thus landing , or not landing ( I supposed ) 
We were in peril round about enclosed ; 
At last to Row to shore I thought it best , 
Amongst many evils , thinking that the least : 
My men all pleased to do as I command , 
Did turn the Boats head opposite to land , 
And with the highest Wave that I could spy , 
I bade them Row to shore immediately . 
When straight we all leaped overboard in haste , 
Some to the knees , and some up to the waste , 
Where suddenly twixt Owl-light and the dark , 
We plucked the Boat beyond high water mark . 
And thus half sowsde , half stewed , with Sea and sweat , 
We land at Cromer Town half dry , half wet . 
But we supposing all was safe and well 
In shunning Silla , on Charybdis fell : 
For why some women , and some children there 
That saw us land , were all possessed with fear : 
And much amazed , ran crying up and down , 
That Enemies were come to take the Town . 
Some said that we were Pirates , some said thieves , 
And what the women says , the men believes . 
With that four Constables did quickly call , 
Your aid ! to Arms you men of Cromer all ! 
then straightway forty men with rusty Bills , 
Some armed in Ale , all of approved skills , 
Divided into four stout Regiments , 
To guard the Town from dangerous Events ; 
Brave Captain Peascod did the Vanguard lead , 
And Captain Clarke the Rearward governed , 
Whilst Captain Wiseman , and hot Captain Kimble , 
Were in the main Battalions fierce and nimble : 
One with his squadron watched me all the night , 
Lest from my lodging I should take my flight : 
A second ( like a man of special note ) 
Did by the Sea side all night watch my Boat , 
The other two , to make their names Renowned , 
Did Guard the Town , and bravely walk the Round . 
And thus my Boat , myself , and all my men , 
Were stoutly Guarded , and Regarded then : 
For they were all so full with fear possessed , 
That without mirth it cannot be expressed . 
My Invention doth Curvet , my Muse doth Caper , 
My Pen doth dance out lines upon the Paper , 
And in a word , I am as full of mirth , 
As Mighty men are at their first son's birth . 
Me thinks Moriscoes are within my brains , 
And Heyes and Antiques run through all my veins : 
Heigh , to the tune of Trenchmoore I could write 
The valiant men of Cromers sad affright : 
As Sheep do fear the Wolf , or Geese the Fox , 
So all amazed were these senseless blocks : 
That had the Town been fired , it is a doubt , 
But that the women there had pissed it out , 
And from the men Reeked such a fearful sent , 
That People three miles thence mused what it meant , 
And he the truth that narrowly had sifted , 
Had found the Constables , had need t' have shifted . 
They did examine me , I answered than 
I was john Taylor , and a Waterman , 
And that my honest fellow job and I , 
Were servants to King james his Majesty , 
How we to York , upon a Mart were bound , 
And that we landed , fearing to be drowned : 
When all this would not satisfy the Crew , 
I freely opened my Trunk , and bade them view , 
I showed them Books , of Chronicles and Kings , 
Some Prose , some verse , and idle Sonnetting , 
I showed them all my Letters to the full , 
Some to York's Archbishop , and some to Hull , 
But had the twelve Apostles sure been there 
My witnesses , I had been ne'er the near . 
And let me use all Oaths that I could use , 
They still were harder of belief than jews . 
They wanted faith , and had resolved before , 
Not to believe what ever we said or swore . 
They said the world was full of much deceit , 
And that my Letters might be sergeant : 
Besides , there 's one thing bred the more dislike , 
Because mine Host was known a Catholic . 
These things concurring , people came in Clusters , 
And multitudes within my lodging Musters , 
That I was almost worried unto death , 
In danger to be stifled with their breath . 
And had mine Host took pence a piece of those 
Who came to gaze on me , I do suppose , 
no jack an Apes , Baboon , or Crocodile 
' E'er got more money in so small a while . 
Besides , the Peasants did this one thing more , 
They called and drank four shillings on my score : 
And like unmannered Mongrels went their way , 
Not spending aught , but leaving me to pay . 
This was the household business , in mean space 
Some Rascals ran unto my Boat apace , 
And turned and tumbled her , like men of Gotham , 
Quite topsy turuy upward with her bottom , 
Vowing they would in tatters piecemeal tear , 
The cursed Pirates Boat , that bred their fear ; 
And I am sure , their madness ( to my harm ) 
Tore a Board out , much longer than mine arm . 
And they so bruised , and split our Wherry , that 
She leaked , we cast out water with a Hat. 
Now let men judge , upon these truths revealing , 
If Turks or Moors could use more barbarous dealing , 
Or whether it be fit I should not write , 
Their envy , foolish fear , and mad despite . 
What may wise men conceive , when they shall note 
That five unarmed men , in a Wherry Boate , 
Naught to defend , or to offend with stripes 
But one old sword , and two Tobacco Pipes , 
And that of Constables a Murnivall , 
Men , women , children , all in general , 
And that they all should be so valiant , wise , 
To fear we would a Market Town surprise ! 
In all that 's written I vow I am no liar , 
I muse the Beacons were not set on fire . 
The dreadful names of Talbot , or of Drake , 
Never made the foes of England more to quake 
then I made Cromer , for their fear and dolour , 
Each man might smell out by his Neighbours Collor . 
At last the joyful morning did approach , 
And Sol began to mount his flaming Coach , 
then did I think my Purgatory done , 
And rose betimes intending to be gone ; 
But holla , stay , 't was otherways , with me 
The mess of Constables were shrunk to three 
Sweet Mr. Peascods double diligence 
Had horsed himself , to bear intelligence , 
To justices of Peace within the land , 
What dangerous business there was now in hand , 
There was I forced to tarry all the while , 
Till some said he road four and twenty mile , 
In seeking men of worship , peace and quorum , 
Most wisely to declare strange news before 'em . 
And whatsoever tales he did recite , 
I 'm sure he caused Sir Austin Palgrave , Knight , 
And Mr. Robert Kempe a justice there 
Come before me , to know how matters were . 
As conference 'twixt them and I did pass , 
They quickly understood me , what I was : 
And though they knew me not in prose and looks , 
They had read of me in my verse , and books , 
My businesses accounted I there did make , 
And I and all my Company did take , 
The lawful Oath of our Allegiance then , 
By which we were believed for honest men . 
In duty , and in all humility 
I do acknowledge the kind courtesy 
Of those two Gentlemen : for they did see , 
How much the people were deceived in me . 
They gave me Coin , and Wine and Sugar too , 
And did as much as lay in them to do 
To find them that my Boat had torn and rend , 
And so to give them worthy punishment . 
Besides Sir Austin Palgrave , bade me this , 
To go but four miles , where his Dwelling is , 
And I and all my Company should there 
Find friendly Welcome , mixed with other Cheer . 
I gave them thanks , and so I 'll give them still , 
And did accept their Cheer in their goodwill . 
then 3. a Clock at afternoon and past , 
I was Discharged from Cromer at the last . 
But for men shall not think that Enviously 
Against this Town I let my Lines to fly : 
And that I do not lie , or scoff , or fable , 
For them I will write something Charitable . 
It is an Ancient Market Town that stands 
Upon a lofty Cliff of mouldering Sands : 
The Sea against the Cliffs doth daily beat , 
And every tide into the Land doth eat , 
The Town is Poor , unable by Expense , 
Against the raging Sea to make defence : 
And every day it eateth further in , 
Still wasting , washing down the sand doth win . 
That if some Course be not ta'en speedily , 
The town 's in danger in the Sea to lie . 
A goodly Church stands on these brittle Grounds , 
Not many fairer in Great Britain's Bounds : 
And if the Sea should swallow 't , as some fear , 
't is not Ten thousand pounds the like could Rear , 
no Christian can behold it but with grief , 
And with my heart I wish them quick relief . 
So farewell Cromer , I have spoken for thee , 
Though thou didst much unkindly deal with me , 
And honest Mariners , I thank you there 
Laboriously you in your arms did bear 
My Boat for me three furlongs at the least , 
When as the tide of Ebb was so decreased , 
You waded , and you launched her quite a float , 
And on your backs you bore us to our Boate. 
Th'vnkindnes that I had before , it come 
Because the Constables were troublesome : 
Longed to be busy , would be men of action , 
Whose labours was their travels satisfaction , 
Who all were born when wit was out of Town , 
And therefore got but little of their own : 
So farewell Peascod , Wiseman , Kimble , Clarke , 
Four sons of Ignorance ( or much more dark ) 
You made me lose a day of brave calm weather , 
So once again farewell , fare ill together . 
then longest the Norfolk Coast we Rowde outright 
To Blakeney , when we saw the coming night , 
The burning eye of day began to wink , 
And into Thetis lap his Beams to shrink : 
And as he went stained the departed sky , 
With red , blue , purple , and vermilion dye . 
Till all our Hemispere laments his lack . 
And mourning night puts on a Robe of black , 
Bespangled diversely with Golden sparks , 
Some movable , some Seaman's fixed marks . 
The milky way that blessed Astrea went , 
When as she left this earthly Continent , 
Showed like a Crystal causeway to the Thrones 
Of jove and Saturn , Paved with precious Stones . 
Old Occeanus , Neptune , Innachus , 
And two and thirty huffecapt Aeolus , 
Had all ta'en truce and were in League combined , 
no billows foaming , or no breath of Wind ; 
The solid Earth , the Air , the Ocean deep 
Seemed as the whole world had been fast asleep . 
In such a pleasant Even as this came I 
To Blackney , with my Ship and Company : 
Whereas I found my Entertainment good 
For welcome , drinking , lodging , and for food . 
The morrow when Latona's Sun 'gan rise , 
And with his Light illumines mortal eyes : 
When Cocks did Crow , and Lambs did bleat & blea , 
I mounted from my Couch , and put to Sea. 
Like Glass the Ocean's face was smooth and calm , 
The gentle Air breathed like Arabian Balm : 
Gusts , storms and flaws , lay sleeping in their Cells 
Whilst with much labour we Rowed o'er the Welles . 
This was our greatest Day of work indeed , 
And it behooved us much , to make much speed , 
For why before that Day did quite expire 
We passed the dangerous Wash , to Lincolnshire . 
And there in 3. hour's space and little more 
We Rowed to Boston , from the Norfolk shore : 
Which by Report of people that dwell there , 
Is six and twenty mile or very near . 
The way unknown , and we no Pilot had , 
Flats , Sands and shoals ; and Tides all raging mad , 
Which Sands our passage many times denied , 
And put us sometimes 3. or four miles wide , 
Besides the Flood Runs there , with such great force , 
That I imagine it outruns a Horse : 
And with a head some 4. foot high , that Rores , 
It on the sudden swells and beats the Shores. 
It tumbled us a Ground upon the Sands , 
And all that we could do with wit , or hands , 
could not resist it , but we were in doubt 
It would have beaten our Boats bottom out . 
It hath less mercy than Bear , Wolf , or Tiger , 
And in those Countries it is called the Hyger . 
We much were unacquainted with those fashions , 
And much it troubled us with sundry passions : 
We thought the shore we never should Recover , 
And looked still when our Boat would tumble over . 
But He that made all with his word of might , 
Brought us to Boston , where we lodged all night . 
The morrow morning , when the Sun 'gan Peep . 
I waked and rubbed mine eyes , and shaked off sleep , 
And understanding that the River went , 
From Boston , up to Lancolne , and to Trent , 
To Humber , Owse , and York , and ( taking pain ) 
We need not come in sight of Sea again . 
I liked the motion , and made haste away 
To Lincoln , which was 50. mile , that day . 
Which City in the 3.  King Edward's Reign , 
Was th' only Staple , for this Kingdom's gain 
For Leather , Led , and Wool , and then was seen 
Five times ten Churches there , but now fifteen , 
A brave Cathedral Church there now doth stand , 
That scarcely hath a fellow in this Land : 
't is for a Godly use , a goodly Frame , 
And bears the blessed Virgin Maryes name . 
The Town is Ancient , and by Course of Fate , 
Through Wars , and Time , defaced and Ruinated , 
But Monarchies , and Empires , Kingdoms , Crowns , 
Have rose or fell , as Fortune smiles or frowns : 
And Towns , and Cities , have their portions had 
Of time-tost Variations , good and bad . 
There is a Proverb , part of which is this , 
They say that Lincoln was , and London is . 
From thence we passed a Ditch of Weeds and Mud , 
Which they do ( falsely ) there call Forcedike Flood : 
For I 'll be sworn , no flood I could find there , 
But dirt and filth which scarce my Boat would bear , 
't is 8. miles long , and there our pains was such , 
As all our travel did not seem so much , 
My men did wade , and draw the Boat like Horses , 
And scarce could tug her on with all our forces : 
Moiled , toiled , mired , tired , still labouring , ever doing , 
Yet were we 9 long hours that 8. miles going . 
At last when as the Day was well nigh spent , 
We got from Forcedikes floodles flood to Trent . 
e'en as the Windows of the Day did shut , 
Down Trents swift stream to Gainsborough we put , 
There did we rest until the morning Star , 
The joyful doors of Dawning did unbarre : 
To Humber's churlish streams , our Course we framed , 
So Named , for Drowning of a King so named . 
And there the swift Ebb tide ran in such sort , 
The Wind at East , the Waves broke thick and short , 
That in some doubts , it me began to strike , 
For in my life , I never had seen the like . 
My way was up to York , but my intent 
Was contrary , for from the fall of Trent 
I fifteen mile went downwards East Northeast , 
When as my way was upward West Southwest . 
And as against the Wind we madly venture , 
The Waves like Pirate's board our Boat and enter , 
But though they came in fury , and amain 
Like thiefs we cast them overboard again . 
This Conflict lasted two hours to the full , 
Until we got to Kingston upon Hull : 
For to that Town I had a Proved friend , 
That Letters did and Commendations send 
By me unto the worthy Magistrate , 
The Mayor , and some of 's brethren , in that State. 
Besides I had some Letters , of like Charge 
From my good Friend , the Master of the Barge 
Unto some friends of his , that they would there 
Give me Hull Cheese , and welcome and good Cheer . 
Sunday at Mr. Mayor much Cheer and Wine 
Where as the Hall did in the Parlour Dine , 
At night with one that had been Shrieve I Supped 
Well entertained I was , and half well Cuped : 
On Monday noon , I was invited than 
To a grave justicer , an Alderman , 
And there such Cheer as Earth and Waters yield , 
Showed like a Harvest in a plenteous Field . 
Another I must thank for his Goodwill , 
For he Pressed on to bid me welcome still . 
There is a Captain of good Life and Fame 
And , God with us , I oft have called his Name : 
He welcomed me , as I had been his fellow 
Lent me his silken Colours , Black and Yellow , 
Which to our Mast made fast , we with a Drum 
Did keep , till we to York in Triumph come . 
Thanks to my loving Host and Hostess Pease 
There at mine Inn , each Night I took mine ease : 
And there I got a Cantle of Hull Cheese 
One Evening late , I thank thee Macabees . 
Kind Roger Parker , many thanks to thee , 
thou show'dst much undeserued love to me , 
Laid my Boat safe , spent time , Coin and endeavour , 
And mad'st my money counted Copper ever . 
But as at Feasts , the first Course being past , 
Men do reserve their Dainties till the last , 
So my most thanks I ever whilst I live 
Will to the Mayor , and his brethren give , 
But most of all , to shut up all together 
I give him thanks that did Commend me thither , 
Their Loves ( like Humber ) overflowed the banks , 
And though I Ebb in worth , I 'll flow in Thanks . 
Thus leaving off the Men , now of the Town 
Some things which I observed I 'll here set down : 
And partly to declare its praise and worth , 
It is the only Bulwark of the North. 
All other Towns for strength to it may strike , 
And all the Northern parts hath not the like , 
The people from the Sea much Wealth have won , 
Each man doth live as he were Neptune's Son . 
Th'antiquity thereof a man may Reed 
In Reverend Cambdens' works , and painful Speed : 
How in King Edward's Reign first of that Name 
then called Wike . then did they Kingston frame , 
And then the Townsmen cut a River there , 
An excellent Haven , a Defence or Peer : 
Built with excessive Charge , to save it from 
Fierce Humber's Raging , that each Tide doth come . 
From time to time , more Greatness still it gained , 
Till lately when the Eight King Henry Reigned , 
He made it greater , by his oft Resort , 
And many times kept there his Royal Court , 
He Walled it well , built Battlements , and Gates , 
And ( more with Honour to augment their States ) 
He built two Blockhouses , and Castle strong 
To Guard the Town from all Inuasive wrong . 
He gave them much Munition , Swords , Shafts , Bows , 
And Brazen Ordnance , as the world well knows , 
Which Guns he gave them for the Town's defence , 
But were in 88 all borrowed thence , 
With promise they again should be sent back , 
But the performance ever hath been slack . 
Now in this Iron age , their Guns I see , 
Are mettle like the Age , and Iron be : 
And glad they would be if they could obtain , 
To change that mettle , for their own again . 
Four well built Gates , with bolts , and locks & bars 
For ornament or strength , in Peace or Wars : 
Besides to keep their Foes the further out , 
They can Drown all the Land 3. miles about . 
't is plentifully served with Flesh and Fish , 
As cheap , as reasonable men can wish . 
And thus by God's grace , and man's industry , 
Dame Nature , or men's Art doth it supply . 
Some 10. years since Fresh water there was scant , 
But with much Cost they have supplied that want : 
By a most excellent Waterwork that 's made , 
And to the Town in Pipes it is conveyed , 
Wrought with most Artificial engines , and 
Performed by thou art of the Industrious hand 
Of Mr. William Maltby , Gentleman , 
So that each man of Note there always can 
But turn a Cock within his House , and still 
They have Freshwater always at their will , 
This have they all unto their great Content , 
For which they each do pay a yearly Rent . 
There is a Proverb , and a Prayer withal , 
That we may not to three strange places fall : 
From Hull , from Hallifax , from Hell , 't is thus , 
From all these three Good Lord deliver us.  
This Praying proverb 's meaning too set down , 
Men do not wish deliverance from the Town : 
The Towns Named Kingston , Hulls the furious River 
And from Hulls dangers , I say , Lord deliver . 
At Hallifax , the Law so sharp doth deal , 
That who so more than 13.  Pence doth steal , 
They have a jynn , that wondrous quick and well , 
Sends Thiefs all Headless unto Heaven or Hell. 
From Hell each man says , Lord deliver me , 
Because from Hell can no Redemption be : 
Men may escape from Hull and Hallifax , 
But sure in Hell there is a heavier tax , 
Let each one for themselves in this agree 
And pray , From Hell good Lord deliver me . 
The Proverb and the Prayer expounded plain , 
Now to the Orders of the Town again : 
I think it merits praise for Government , 
more than all Towns in Britain's Continent , 
As first their Charity doth much appear , 
They for the Poor have so provided there , 
That if a man should walk from Morn till Night , 
He shall not see one Beggar ; nor a Mite 
Or any thing shall be demanded ever , 
But every one there doth their best endeavour 
To make the Idle work , and to Relieve 
Those that are Old and past , or Sickness grieve . 
All Poor men's Children have a House most fit 
Whereas they Sow , and Spin , and Card , and Knit , 
Where all of them have something still to do , 
As their Capacities will reach unto , 
So that no Idle person , Old or Young 
Within the Town doth harbour or belong . 
It yearly Costs Five hundred pounds besides , 
To fence the Town , from Hull and Humber's tides , 
For Stakes , for Bavins , Timber , Stones and Piles , 
All which are brought by Water many miles , 
For Workmen's labour , and a world of things 
Which on the Town excessive Charges brings . 
All which with peril , industry and sweat , 
They from the bowels of the Ocean get . 
They have a Bridewell , and an excellent skill 
To make some people work against their will : 
And there they have their Lodging and their meat , 
Clean Whips , and every thing exceeding neat , 
And thus with fair or foul means always , they 
Give idle persons little time to Play. 
Besides for every Sea or Marine cause 
They have a House of Trinity , whose Laws 
And Orders do Confirm , or else Reform 
That which is Right , or that which wrongs deform . 
It is a Comely built well ordered place , 
But that which most of all the House doth grace , 
Are Rooms for Widows who are Old and poor , 
And have been Wives to Mariners before . 
They are for houseroom , food or lodging , or 
For firing , Christianly provided for , 
And as some dye , some do their places win , 
As one goes out , another doth come in . 
Should I in all things give the Town it 's due , 
Some fools would say I flattered , written untrue : 
Or that I partial in my writings were , 
Because they made me welcome , and good cheer : 
But for all those that have such thoughts of me , 
I rather wish that them I hanged may see , 
then that they justly could report , that I 
Did Rhyme for victuals , hunger to supply . 
Or that my Muse , or working brains should beat , 
To flatter , fawn , or lie , for drink or meat : 
Let Trencher-poets scrape , for such base veils , 
I 'll take an Oar in hand when writing fails ; 
And betwixt the Boat and Pen , I make no doubt , 
But I shall shifted to pick a living out , 
Without base flattery , or false Coined words 
To mowldy Madams , or unworthy Lords ; 
Or whatsoever degree , or Towns , or Nations 
I ever did , and still will scorn such fashions . 
Hearesay , sometimes upon a lie may light , 
But what I see and know , I dare to write . 
Mine eyes did view before my Pen set down , 
These things that I have written of this Town . 
A new built Customhouse , a fair Town Hall , 
For solemn meetings , or a Festival : 
A Mayor , twelve Aldermen , one Sheriff , Recorder , 
A Town-clerk , altogether in one order , 
And uniformity do govern so , 
They need not flatter friend , or fear a foe . 
A Sword , a Cap of maintenance , a Mace 
Great , and well Gild , to do the Town more grace : 
Are born before the Mayor , and Aldermen , 
And on Festivities , or high days than 
Those Magistrates their Scarlet Gowns do wear , 
And have six Sergeants to attend each year . 
Now let men say what Town in England is , 
That truly can compare itself with this : 
For situation , strength , and government , 
For charity , for plenty , for content , 
For state ? and one thing more I there was told , 
Not one Recusant , all the Town doth hold , 
Nor ( as they say ) there 's not a Puritan , 
Or any nosewise fool Precisian , 
But great and small , with one consent and will , 
Obey his Majesty's Injunctions still . 
They say that once therein two sisters dwelled , 
Which inwardly the prick of Conscience felt , 
They came to London , ( having wherewithal ) 
To buy two Bybles , all Canonical , 
th' Apocryphas did put them in some doubt , 
And therefore both their Books were bound without , 
Except those two I never did hear of any 
At Hull , though many places have too many . 
But as one scabbed sheep a flock may mar , 
So there 's one man , whose nose did stand a jar : 
Talked very scurvily , and looked askew , 
Because I in a worthy Townesmans' Pew , 
Was placed at Church , when ( God knows ) I never thought , 
To sit there , I was by the Owner brought . 
This Squire of low degree , displeased than , 
Said , I at most was but a Waterman . 
And that they such great kindness setting forth , 
Made more a' th flesh , then ever the broth was worth : 
Which I confess , but yet I answer make , 
'T was more than I with manners could forsake : 
He sure is some high minded Pharisie , 
Or else infected with their Heresy , 
And must be set down in their Catalogues , 
They loved the highest seats in Synagogues . 
And so ( perhaps ) doth he , for aught I know 
He may be mounted when I sit below : 
But let him not a Waterman despise , 
For from the water he himself did rise , 
And winds and water both on him hath smiled 
Else , the great Merchant he had ne'er been styled : 
His Character I finely will contrive , 
he 's scornful proud , and tattling talkative : 
A great Engrosser of strange speech and news , 
And one that would sit in the highest pues , 
But bate an Ace , he 'll , hardly win the game , 
And if I list , I could rake out his name . 
Thanks Mr. Maior , for my Bacon Gammon , 
Thanks Roger Parker for my small fresh Salmon , 
'T was excellent good , and more the truth to tell ye , 
Boiled with a fine Plumpudding in the belly . 
The sixth of August , well accompanied 
With best of Townsmen to the waters side , 
There did I take my leave , and to my Ship 
I with my Drum and Colours quickly skip . 
The one did dub a dub and rumble , brave 
The Ensign in the air did play and wave : 
I launched , supposing all things had been done , 
Bounce , from the Block-house , quoth a roaring Gun , 
And waving Hats on both sides , with content 
I cried Adieu , adieu , and thence we went. 
Up Humber's flood that then amain did swell , 
Winds calm , and water quiet as a Well : 
We Rowde to Owse , with all our force and might , 
To Cawood where we well were lodged all night . 
The morrow , when as Phoebus 'gan to smile , 
I forward set to York , eight little mile : 
But two miles short of York I landed than , 
To see that reverend Metropolitan , 
That watchful Shepherd , that with Care doth keep , 
th' infernal Wolf , from Heaven's supernal Sheep : 
That painful Preacher , that most free Almes-giver , 
That though he live long , is too short a liver : 
That man whose age the poor do all lament , 
All knowing , when his Pilgrimage is spent , 
When Earth to Earth returns , as Nature's debtor , 
They fear the Proverb , Seldom comes the better . 
His Doctrine and example , speak his due , 
And what all people says , must needs be true . 
In duty I most humbly thank his Grace , 
He at his Table made me have a place , 
And meat and drink , and gold he gave me there , 
Whilst all my Crew i t'h Hall were filled with cheer : 
So having dined , from thence we quickly passed 
Through Owse strong Bridge , to York fair City last , 
Our drowning scaped , more danger was ensuing , 
'T was Size time there , and hanging was a brewing : 
But had our faults been never so Capital , 
We at the Vintner's bar durst answer all . 
then to the good Lord Maior I went , and told 
What labour , and what dangers manifold , 
My fellow and myself had passed at Seas , 
And if it might his noble Lordship please , 
The Boat that did from London thither swim 
With us , in duty we would give to him . 
His Lordship pausing , with a reverend hum , 
My friend ( quoth he ) to morrow morning come , 
In the mean space I 'll of the matter think , 
And so he bade me to go near and drink . 
I drank a Cup of Claret , and some Beer , 
And sure ( for aught I know ) he KEEPS good cheer . 
I gave his Lordship in red guilded leather , 
A well bound Book , of all my Works together , 
Which he did take . 
There in the City were some men of note , 
That gladly would give money for our Boat : 
But all this while good manners bade us stay , 
To have my good Lord Mayor yea , or nay . 
But after long demurring of the matter , 
He well was pleased to see her on the water , 
And then my men Rowde half an hour or more , 
Whilst he stood viewing her upon the shore . 
They bore his Lordship's Children in her there , 
And many others , as she well could bear . 
At which his Honour was exceeding merry , 
Saying it was a pretty nimble Wherry : 
But when my men had taken all this pains , 
Into their eyes they might have put their gains . 
Unto his Shop he did perambulate , 
And there amongst his Bars of Iron sat . 
I asked him if he would our Boat forgo , 
Or have her , and his Lordship answered , No. 
I took him at his word , and said God buy , 
And gladly with my Boat away went I 
I sold the Boat , as I supposed most meet , 
To honest Mr. Keys , in Coney street : 
He entertained me well , for which I thank him , 
And gratefully , amongst my friends I 'll rank him . 
My kind remembrance here I put in paper , 
To worthy Mr. Hemsworth there , a Draper , 
amongst the rest he 's one that I must thank , 
With his good wife , and honest brother Franke. 
Now for the City , 't is of state and Port , 
Where Emperors & Kings have kept their Court , 989. year , the foundation 
Was laid , before our Saviour's incarnation , 
By Ebrank who a Temple there did rear , 
( And placed a Flammin to Diana there , 
But when King Lucius here the Sceptre swayde 
The Idols level with the ground were laid , 
then Eleutherius , Rome's high Bishop placed , 
An Archbishop at York , with Titles graced . 
then after Christ , 627.  
Was Edwin baptised by the grace of heaven , 
He plucked the Minster down , that then was wood , 
And made it stone , a deed both great and good . 
The City oft hath known the chance of wars , 
Of cruel foreign , and of homebred jars . 
And those that further please thereof to read , 
May turn the volumes of great Hollinshead . 
't is large , 't is pleasant and magnificent , 
The Norths most fertile famous ornament : 
't is rich and populous , and hath indeed 
no want of any thing to serve their need . 
Abundance doth that noble City make 
Much abler to bestow , then need to take . 
So farewell York , the tenth of August then 
Away came I for London with my men . 
To dinner I to Pomfret quickly road , 
Where good hot Venison stayed for my abode , 
I thank the worshipful George Shillito , 
He filled my men and me , and let us go . 
There did I well view over twice or thrice , 
A strong , a fair , and ancient Edifice : 
Re-edified , where it was ruined most 
At th' high and hopeful Prince of Wales his cost . 
I saw the room where Exton and his rout 
Of Traitors , Royal Richard's brains beaten out : 
And if that King did strive so many blows , 
As hacks and hues upon one pillar shows , 
There are one hundred slashes , he withstood , 
Before the villains shed his Kingly blood . 
From Pomfret then , unto my noble friend , 
Sir Robert Swift at Doncaster we wend , 
An ancient Knight , of a most generous spirit , 
Who made me welcome far beyond my merit . 
From thence by Newarke , I to Stamford past , 
And so in time to London at the last . 
W●●●ere friends and neighbours , all with loving hearts , 
Did welcome me with pottles , pints , and quarts . 
Which made my Muse more glib , and blithe to tell 
This story of my voyage . So farewell . 
An Epilogue . 

Thus have I brought to end a work of pain , 
I wish it may requite me with some gain : 
For well I wot the dangers where I veneered , 
no full baged man would ever durst have entered : 
But having further shores for to discover 
Hereafter , now my Pen doth here give over . 
FINIS . 





 The year of our Lord   july was named so by Caesar.  The Dog-days were 6. days entered .  I observe signs , winds , Tides , days , hours , times , Situations & manners .  Noon if you 'll take it so .  Boats are like Barber's Chairs Hackneys or Whores : common to all estates .  These star Sands are called the Spi●ss .  It hath not a fellow in England for fishing . 

A Book called the praise of the red Herring . 

 And a ship Carpenter .  We were in a puzzle .  We were like Flounder alive in a frying Pan , that leaped into the fire to save themselves .  These were the names of the cumbersome Cromorian Constables .  People did come thither 3. or 4. miles about , to know what the matter was .  I had as good to have said nothing .  Diligent Officers .  The dancing on the Ropes , or a Puppet play , had come short of his take , accounting time for time .  This was more than I could willingly afford .  And the sword was rusty with Salt-water , that it had need of a quarter's warning ere it would come out .  OH brave sent .  He would have had us to have stayed 3. or four days with him .  They longed for employment , and rather than be idle , would be ill occupied .  The God of Rivers , Springs , Brooks , Fords , & Fountains .  We Rowed above 100 miles that day .  Sands lying crookedly in our way , making us go 3. or four miles about at low water .  It is so called in Mr. D●aytons' second part of Polyalbion , in his treatise of Humber .  It is a passage cut through the land 8. miles from Lincoln into Trent , but through either the people's poverty or negligence it is grown up with weeds , and mud , so that in the Summer it is in many places almost dry .  I went 15. mile out of Trent , down Humber , on purpose to see Hull , when my way was quite contrary .  Hull Cheese , is much like a loaf out of a Brewer's Basket , it is Composed of two simples , Malt and Water in one Compound , and is Cousin german to the mightiest Ale in England .  The meaning of those marks are only known to the Townsmen there .  An ingenious man named Machabeus .  Mr. I.I.  The River of Hull is 20. miles in length , cut with men's labour to the infinite Commodity of the Country .  He built another fair Water , at York , of Freestone , which doth the City exceeding service .  A Proverb   Mark , for all is true .  I write not by hearsay .  But I was ever better with forks to scatter , then with Rakes to gather , therefore I would not have the Townsmen to mistake chalk for Cheese , or Robert for Richard.  At Bishopsthorpe , where the Right reverend Father in God , Toby Matthew Archbishop of York his Grace , did make me welcome .  There is some odds between keeping & spending .  here I make a full point , for I received not a point in exchange .  I thought it my duty ( being we had come a dangerous voyage ) to offer our Boat to the chief Magistrate . For why should not my Boat be as good a monument as Tom Coriats' everlasting over-trampling land-conquering Shoes , thought I ?  And forgot to say , I thank you good fellows .  A substantial worthy Citizen , who hath been Sheriff of York , and now keeps the George in Cunney street .  Ebrank was the 5.  K. of Britain , after Brutus .  An Archflammin which was as an Idolatrous high Priest to Diana .  Edwin and his whole family were baptised there on Easter day the 12. of April 627.  Yourkshire the greatest Shire in England , and 308. miles about . Speed.  Pomfre● Castle .  Prince Charles .  Sir Peirce of Exton Knight .  King Richard the second murdered there . 