



¶ An Armado , or Navy , of 103.  Ships & other Vessels ; who have the Art to Sail by Land , as well as by Sea.  

Morally Rigged , Manned , Munitioned , Appointed , Set forth , and Victualled , with 32. sorts of Ling : with other Provisions of Fish & Flesh.  

By John Taylor . 

The Names of the Ships , are in the next Page . 

Anno Millimo , quillimo , trillimo . 

LONDON , Printed by E. A. for H. Gosson . 1627.  

¶ The names of the Ships , with the number of their Squadrons . 

1 The Lordship whose Squadron were of Ships & other Vessels , 12. in al.  
2 The Scholarship with 10. others in all . 
3 The Ladyship , with 12. others . 
4 The Goodfellow SHIP , with 12. others . 
5 The Appprentice SHIP , with 4. others . 
6 The Courtship , with 11. others . 
7 The Friendship , with 4. others . 
8 The Fellowship , with 5. others . 
9 The Footman-ship , with 5. others . 
10 The Horsemanship , with 4. others . 
11 The Surety-ship , with 7. others . 
12 The Wor-ship , with 3. others . 
13 The Woodmanship , with 7. others . 
Besides , there were 7. other needless Ships which were in the nature of voluntaries , or hangers on upon the Navy , ●s namely , The Mary Cary-knave , the Knaves - 〈◊〉 , the Superfluous , the Careless , the Idle , the Coxcomb ▪ the Braggart . And what man soever he be , that hath , or doth not sail in some one Ship of this my Fleet , Let him come to me and I will Ship him , and allow him double wages 

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFULLL , AND truly Generous Sir JOHN FEARNE Knight . 

Noble Sir , 

The world sufficiently knows that you ●nowewhat Ships and shipping are ; that you have ploughed the dangerous OH can , and surrowed over the rugged bosom of Neptune : yet nevertheless I know that you never 〈◊〉 notice of my old and weatherbeaten 〈…〉 , being bu●lt without either timber or Iron , rigged without ropes or ●●rdage , whose Ordinance are discharged without 〈◊〉 or powder , whose victuals are ●●the bread , drink , fish , flesh , or good Red-herring , whose voyages are 〈◊〉 performed with wind and water , yet ever in action like a perpetual motion ; but when you shall please to savour me so much as to peruse and survey my strange Fleet or Armado , you will then perceive that yourself hath sailed in ( or at the least ) boarded most of my Ships of note : for you are well acquainted with the LORDSHIP , you are a friend to the SCHOLARSHIP , you have laid the LADYSHIP aboard , you have entered the APRENTISHIP , you are well known in the COURTSHIP , you have sailed in the Good - FELLOWSHIP , you love the FRIENDSHIP , you affect the FELLOWSHIP , you know the Footman - SHIP , you are skilled in the HORSEMANSHIP , you have had a principal Cabin in the SURETYSHIP , you have surprised & taken the WORSHIP , and you know what belongs to the WOODMANSHIP , the WARDSHIP , and STEWARDSHIP ; I due for some reasons not meddle with all , and I think you have seldom or never had any dealings with them : the some of all is , I most humbly desire your Worship's pardon , for my abrupt Dedication , assuring you that it was only my love and duty that put me on , without any expectance of Patronage , protection or reward : and so with my best wishes for the perpetuity of your present and ever future felicity , I rest , 

Your Worships to command whilst I have being , IO : TAYLOR . 

The description how the whole Navy is victualled with thirty two sorts of Ling , besides other necessaries . 

First , thirty thousand couple of Change-ling , appointed only for the diet of such fellows who had honest parents , and are themselves changed into very Rascals . Secondly Dar-ling , this fish was dearer than fresh Salmon ( for it was consecrated to the Goddess Venus ) it was of that high price that some men have consumed their whole Lordships , Manners & credit , in two or three years only in this kind of diet , therefore it is not a dish for every man's tooth , for none but brave Sparks , rich heirs , Clarissimoes and Magnificoes , would go to the cost of it . Thirdly , Shave-ling , which was only for the diet of Priests , Monks , & Friars . Fourthly , Fondling , this fish was for Cockneys , and other pretty youths , over whom their parents were so tender , that a man might perceive by their manners , they had been better fed then taught . Fi●tly , Tippling , a dish for all men . Sixtly , Underling , this fish was shipped for witty younger brothers , poor Scholars that hath neither friends or money . Seaventhly , Starveling , this Ling was only for the Bark beggarly , which was maned with old discarded Servingmen , and maimed cassiered Soldiers and Mariners . Eightly , Strip-ling , provided for Pages , Lackeys , and Footboys . Ninethly , Foo-ling , a dish for every man's diet , Tenthly , Swaddling , against stomach , but yet a dish of good use . Eleventh , Grumb-ling , a discontented kind of fish for the poorer sort of people to chaw upon , for when they do think themselves wronged by their Superiors and dare not utter their minds openly , than they feed upon Grumb-ling . Twelfth , Wrang-ling , this Ling was salted by 16.  Pettifoggers , in a long troublesome Term : it is held to be a lasting dish , and will serve the whole Fleet with their posterities , to the second and third generation . Thirteenth , Troub-ling was provided by certain double diligent Constables , to the mollestation of their sleepy watch , and the charge of many a man that would quietly have gone to their lodging . Fourteenth , Prowe-ling , is a plentiful fish , upon which many thousands do live , but by using it too much , it chokes a great number : and as fishermen do bait their hooks with one fish to catch others , so is this Ling ( for the most part ) taken with three other sorts of Ling , as with juggling , Brabbling , Braw-ling , until by hook or by crook it is taken with Ang-ling ; I have seen many of these Prowle-ling fishermen end their lives like Swans ( in a manner singing ) and sometimes making their wills at Wapping , or looking through a hempen window at St. Th●mas Water or the three legged instrument near ●adamg●●n . There were many other sorts of Ling sent to the Navy which ( to avoid prolixity ) I will but name , as Quarrell-ling was for the diet of some of the Noble Science , some for Roaring boys , and Rough-hewd Tittery tues . The nineteenth sort of Ling was Fumb-ling , which is for their diets who have been long married and can get no children . The twenteeths was Ming-ling , which was for Wine-marchants , Vintners , Brewers , and Apothecaries . jumb-ling and Tumb-ling , for the keepers and Cupid●an haunters of vaulting houses . Fid LING , Fuddling , and Stumb-ling from the Schools of Dancing , and Drinking . The twenty sixth sort of Ling was Bungler LING , which was the fare of Quacksalvers , Mountebanks Ratcatching Watercasters , and also for all bo●●hing Artificers and cobbling Tradesmen . Mumb-ling was for those that had no need of the Tooth-drawer . Ster-ling money was at such a Scant-ling , 

Why these Ships are called SHIPS . 

I have little to say to the Reader , because I neither know him or his conditions , therefore to avoid lying and slattry in putting the styles of Christian , Gentle , courteous , friendly , learned or honest , upon the Atheiste , barbarous , hateful , Ignorant , or dishonest , the Reader gets no Epistle at all of me : If he be good and well inclined it is the better for himself , and if otherwise , it shall not be much the worse for me , there 's the point : now the reasons why all these words or names of my Moral Navy are called SHIPS , or do all end with the word or syllable SHIP , as Lord SHIP , Lady SHIP , Friend SHIP and the like etc.  The reasons I take to be these which followeth , and as I imagine most significate ; first the whole life of man is as a SHIP under sail , for , be it either day or night , storm or calm , light or dark , hot or cold , winter or summer , yet the SHIP is in her course ever going on her voyage : so likewise Man , let him go , sit , stand , ride , run , work , play , sleep or wake , yet he is still going onward in his mortal passage . A SHIP is ever in need of repairing , so is a man either in body , mind or goods . A Ship is ever unsteady ; a Man is always mutable : Some SHIPS are hard to be steered ; some men are harder to be guided . Some Ships bear so great a sail that they bear their Masts by the Board and make all split again ; some Men do spread such a Clue in a calm , that a sudden storm half sinks them and tears all . Some SHIPS are so favoured by the wind that they make rich voyages , & quick returns ; some men are so fortunate that wealth and promotions do fall in their mouths . Some SHIPS runs through many a storm , with much danger , and yet are so unlucky that they do never make good voyage ; some Men ( being born under a three penny planet ) can neither by pains , watching , labour or any industry be worth a groat . Some SHIPS by being overladen have been cast away , some men by taking in too much have been forced to cast all away . SHIPS do wallow and heave and set upon the Sea ; Men do stumble , reel and stigger on the land . Some Ships have their cracks & imperfections gaily hid with painting ; some Men have their bad intents coloured over with hypocrisy , and their diseased carcases covered with good clothes . Some SHIPS do bring profitable commodities , and some bring babbles , toys and tri●leses ; some Men do enrich a kingdom with their wisdom , authority , and practise in virtue : and some men do disgrace and Impoverish a Monarchy by solly , ill employed power , and sottishness in vanity . Some SHIPS will run to leeward extremely if the wind be scant , and some again will bravely beat it out to windward and weather it , so some Men will shrink from their friends or from themselves , in a storm of trouble or poverty , and some few again will bear up stiff , constantly contemning & opposing the brunts of fortune . Some SHIPS are taken by others and made prizes ; some Men are captived by others and made slaves . Some SHIPS are commended more for their Bulk & beauty , then for any good service ; and some Men are more applauded for their fortunes , then for any good conditions . If I would insist longer on these comparisons , I could enlarge my Induction to the bounds of a Pamphlet : therefore I will conclude it with King Solomon's similitude , wisdom 5.  C. 10. that man's life passeth as a SHIP that passeth over the waves of the water : therefore I wish all men to be provided , as good SHIPS should be : let HOPE be their Anchor , let Faith be their Cable , let charity & love be their Card & Compass , till they come happily to the Haven of GRAVESEND , and from thence to that blessed harbour which hath no END . 

john Smith of his friend Master JOHN TAYLOR and his Armado . 

Arm , Arm , Arm , Arm , great Neptune rouse , awake 
And muster up thy monsters speedily : 
Boreas unto thy blustering blasts betake , 
Guard , guard yourselves , from Tailor's policy , 
Rocks , shoals , Lee-shores , o help them Goodwin sands , 
For this new Fleet runs over Seas and Lands . 
and 's now so victua'ld , rigged and yarely plies , 
It threatens all the waters , air and skies , 
Truth in his Navy such a power doth lead , 
The Devil , Hell , vice and all , the Fleet may dread . 
And well it may , if well you understand , 
So rare a Fleet , was never made nor maned . 
The Master's name was Petrus Vainglorious , his Mate Hugo Hypocrisy , men that have Steered the course in the Lordship many hundred years : The Boatswain and his Mate were Scoff and Derision , with Gripe the Steward , Avarice the Purser , & Laurence Delay the Paymaster ; kinsman to Tom Long the Carrier : which three last are thought to be very arrant Knaves , who have spoilt the Government of the whole Ship. In Brief , the Gunner , Cockswaine , Swabber , and Shipboys were plentifully stored with pride , flattery and other the like Gentlemen like virtues . 

The Ships that went in the same Regiment or Squadron with the Lordship , were these that follow . Namely . 

1 The Ambition , 
2 The Presumption , two stout Ships of very lofty Sail and great Burden . 
3 The Oppression , a Ship of Account and Estimation . 
4 The Costly , a Ship of great Charge . 
5 The Mutable , a brave Ship , but in no course steady . 
6 The Selfelove , a great Ship , but of small service . 
7 The Delight , a fair Ship to the eye . 
8 The Hopewell , a Ship of great expectation . 
9 The Debt , a Ship of great Burden and much Receipt . 
10 The Satisfaction , a large long Ship , a very cart , a slug and slow of sail . 
11 The Promise : a Ship very unsteady , yet her sails everful . 
The Scholar - SHIP with her Regiment . 

This Ship is a very Ancient Ship , and was built at the first , and hath been ever since Repaired with Infinite cost , pains and Study . She hath been of that worthy Estimation , that the greatest Monarches , Kings , Princes , and Estates of the world , have made it their chiefest felicity to sail in her : all famous Divines and Philosophers have steered her and been steered by her . Some of her greatest Mariners have been much troubled with plurifies , pluralities I would say , and some have been great Merchants a Steeple fair , but it was in the old time when Simo - Money , was as good as ready Mony. The Arts Mathematical & metaphysical have been the Rich Prizes and Purchases of her Painful Voyages : and now at this present ( though the world be much altered with her ) She tries her fortunes in this adventurous Navy . The Captain's name was Sapience , the Master Experience , his mate Knowledge , and every other officer Correspondent , being muniti●nd and victualled for the enterprise she set sail , with her squadron or Regiment of Ships here under named . 

1 The Serious a Ship laden with Gravity . 
2 The Foresight a Ship worthy of much regard . 
3 The Desert a Ship of great service and small payment . 
4 The Industrious ▪ a good profitable Ship.  
then there attended her five small Pinnaces and Frigates , namely , the Dogmatist , the Captious , the Prejudicate , the Carper , and the Critic . These five were maned with young Bachelors of Art , Puny Inns of Courtmen , and humorous Poets , who with their continual cudgelling one another with broken verses , had almost beaten Priscian's brains out . 

All these three were of most especial use and service for the Ladyship whose chief charge and employment was to wear , eat , and drink the best ; and withal not to pester , wrong or oppress the Fleet , with good examples of directions , 

The Goofellow - SHIP with her Regiment . 

This Ship is very old , and much out of reparations : She hath been of such use and employment , that she hath sailed into all Countries of the inhabitable world ; she only is the greatest traveller , for there is not a Haven or Harbour under the Sun , but she hath cast Anchor in it . Wine Merchants , Vintners , Brewers & Victuallers , have thrust themselves into whole Lordships , by the often returns , lading and unlading of this Ship ; yet now she is so weatherbeaten with the storms of Time , and so windshaken with too much use , that through want she is not able to bear half the ●ayle which she formerly hath done . 

In the golden age , when Saturn reigned , ( long before the two wrangling words thine & Mine , had set the world together by the ears ) then was the Good-fellowship in such request , that all estates and conditions sailed in her , than her voyages and quick returns ( her lading being for the most part hearty love and true affection ) did maintain and keep such unity , that whosoever was not a Mariner or Sailor in her , was esteemed as a Branded stigmatizd infamous person . 

But at last her Navigators began to steer another course : for some of them had learned the Art of covetousness , and with a devilish kind of Bawdrye , called usury and extortion , made gold & silver engender and beget yearly so much and so much in the hundred , when Tailors , like so many wicked Spirits , flew from one Country to another , bringing home more fashions than would kill a hundred thousand horses ; when for the maintenance of those fashions , the Earth was equally shared & divided amongst the people , ( some all , and some not a foot ) with Hedges , Ditches , Bownds , Mownds , Walls and Marks ; when my Lady Rusty began to take such a thrifty order , that all the meat in the Kitchen should be cheaper , than the washing and Painting of her Visage , ( if you allow the powdering of her bought or borrowed Periwig into the bargain ) when the world came to this pass , than this Good ship , this Goodfellow Ship being forsaken of her best Pilotts , Masters , and Mariners , all her Sailors in little time declined to be no better than Swabbers , so that through want of skilful managing and reparation , and with extreme age , she is nothnig so serviceable as she hath been , yet as she is , she sets forward with her best ability in this Voyage . The Captain's name was Hercules Dumplin , a Norfolk Gentleman , the Master Giles Gammon , was born at Rumford , the rest of the Mariners it were needless to name them . 

The other Ships and vessels that were in the same Regiment with the Good fellowship , were these . 

1 The Drunken Sisse , a great Ship , it is though she was built at Middleborough ; but howsoever , she hath made many voyages into England : she is so beloved , that she needs not press any man to serve in her : for all sorts of people do daily come aboard of her , & freely , and voluntarily offer stir their best seru , ce , so that it is a wonder to see how bravely she is maned ; and ( many times ) women do take their turns at helm , and steer their courses as well as men . She is a Ship contrary to all other Ships , for she rolls , reels and tumbles , most of all when she is in a calm harbour ; and the more lading she takes in , the more unstedy she is ; for if the Sea be as calm a milke-pan , ●et is she ever tossing , which makes her Mariners Sea-sick , and subject to much casting . Her Ordinance are Gallons , Pottles , Quarts , Pints , and the miser's Gallon : with three hooped pots , Cans , Goddards : in the which Artillery , almost every one hath the skill to charge & discharge , maintaining the fight as long as they can either stand or understand . The Master of her is an Amsterdamed man , his name is Cornelius van Broken gulch ; the Master Gunner was one Denis Whirl●poole , a man of Doepe , with Gulf the Purser Swallow the Botswaine , and Swill the Steward . 

2 The second Ship in the Regiment with the Good-fellowship , , was the Sow of Flushing , she was a vessel unseemly to the eye , but yet serviceable . 

3 The Carouse , a Ship of hot service , and as the Spider sucks the sweetness of the fairest flowers , converting their juice into poison , so the Sailors in this Ship have taken a use to drink other men's healths , to the amplifying of their own diseases . 

4 The Quaff , a quick smart Ship , much of the bulk and carriage of the Carouse . 

5 The Biss●e of Breda , a small Ship , yet in continual service , her worst fault is , she is so low built , that her Mariners can hardly keep themselves dry . 

6 The Sleeper of Rotterdam , a great Ship of exceeding necessary use , and much employment , she is to the whole Regiment , in the nature of an Hospital or spital , for when any of them are wounded , Potshot , jug-bitten , or Cup-shaken , so that they have lost all reasonable faculties of the mind , and in a manner are so mad , that they dare speak felony , whistle treason , and call any Magnifico a mongrel ; in such desperate cases as this , the distracted parties are brought aboard the Sleeper , where Time like a good Cloath-worker , with setting a good nap upon their threadbare eyes , their wits that were spent and like Northern Cloth shrunk in the wetting , are speedily recovered . 

So likewise for the limbs and members of the body , she is the only , Aesculapian Tabernacle ; and to speak the truth , St. Winifride's Well , the Bath of Spa●● , are not to be compared to this Ship , for speedy ease and cure : for I have seen many that were so dim-sighted , that they could not see their way at noonday , and others have been so defective in their speech , that they could not speak one wise word ; and others so lame of their legs , that they could neither go or stand , and with a few hours lying aboard of this easy Ship , their sights , speech , and legs have been all recovered . 

7 The Whiff , a small Pinnace of Varina . 

8 The Puff , a Bark of Virginia . 

9 The Vapour , a Frigotte of Trinidado . 

10 The Snuff , a Carvel of Bermoodoes' . 

11 The Bark Beggarly , before mentioned , maned with old cashired Soldiers , Mariner's , and Servingmen , Negligent Tradesmen , with some few Courtiers , whose diet is only Statue - Ling.  

The Apprentice - SHIP . 

This Ship is very slow of sail , so that a man may make two East India voyages , or girdle the terrestrial Globe twice about ( as Sir Francis Drake did once ) before she can make a return ; The Compass whereby she shows her course is for ( the most part ) in our Troynovantine Ocean , within the sound of Bowe-bell ; instead of a Map or Carte , she is directed by an Indenture , whereby she hath more knowledge in the time to come , than any Witch or Conjurer ; for by only looking on it , the least Ship-boy that 's in her can tell when her voyage will be done ; she is a vessel that is both singular and single , for none but single persons must board her ; and ( to avoid double dealing ) , she hath banished Matrimony out of her quarters for seven years or more ; her Mariners do ( against their wills ) endure much hardness , as hunger , thirst , heat , cold , watching , toil and travel ; yet many times they are allowed more Lamb and Ribroste than they would have ; yet by patience and long suffering , many of them do chance to be preferred ( in time ) to sail in the Lordship , Courtship , Surety-ship , or some other bottom of Honour or eminency ; for they claim a freedom of all Trades whatsoever , and are so mystical in their diversities of mysteries , that no one man living can describe them : yet for the most part ) weight and measure are their guides , by weight from the Scruple to the Dram , to the Tun , to the three Tons , and to the three hundred thousand million : and by measure from the half quarter Pint to the whole quarter Sack ; from less than the Inch to the Ell , to the Furlong , to the Firmament , and down to the bottom of the Cellar , to the Ocean and the Tayle●s' hell , who indeed are accounted the best bread men in the Ship , and such as go through stitch with what they take in hand . There are diverse functions which never do come aboard of this Ship , as Cuckolds , Wittols , and others which I could name : but to supply these wants , she is seldom unfurnished of young lying Knaves , Whores , and thieves , who ( as the cockle grows among the wheat ) do sail in the Apprentice-ship , and share as much benefit as most of her labouring Mariners . She hath small attendance , for indeed she is the only bounden servant in the Navy , only there is a sluggish vessel called the Tedious that sails with her , with four small Pinnaces , as 1 The Lodge . 
2 The Diet . 
3 The Wash . 
4 The Wring . 


And sometime double , single ; or no apparel is allowed to the Sailors when the voyage is ended . 

The Court - SHIP with her Regiment . 

Courtship , is a vessel of Royal and magnificent burden , of eminent Command , and invincible force , if she be well maned , carefully rigged , discreetly ballaced and wisely steered ; she is of that impregnable strength , that neither the storms of saucy censure , the Gusts of Mallapart babbling , the flaws of Envy , the Tempests of Temporizing tale-bearers , or the smooth calms of Flattery , can make her sail to any other Harbour then the famous Ports and Havens of Virtue , Honour and perpetual happiness . 

But ( to use Sea-tearmes and Phrases ) there are a Crew of unprofitable Steale-sharers , peremptory Hot-shots , idle Flat-sheates , and unseruiceable useless Loose-guise , that do attempt to board this worthy admired Ship , and so having boarded her , ( like Drones ) they eat and live upon the labours and deserts of the painful industrious Mariners ; these are the youths that after they have foisted themselves into so●e mean place or Office , though it be but a Swabber , Liar or Liars Mate ( always provided that they have sworn themselves into good clotheses ) then let all their acquaintance and friends stand further off , for the●● 〈◊〉 : themselves to be no more mortal , so that a man ha● fair better speak to the Material owner of the Ship himself , then to any of these Pucke-foysts : yet there is 〈◊〉 show of zeal in their salutation to any one they meet , for the word God s●●e ye , is as common as the Air 〈◊〉 ●hem , b●t 〈◊〉 ●●f●ct they neither mind God nor the 〈◊〉 ●hey speak to , and ( like an Ape for an Apple ) they 〈◊〉 kiss their paw , inviting a man to their Cabin , but whosoever takes them at their word , they hold him to want manners , and to be a fellow of no breeding . The ignorant Ass that carried the Egyptian Goddess Isis in procession , ●hen the more ignorant people kneeled down to adore the 〈◊〉 , the witless Ass thought it had been in rever●●●●o him : so in like manner these upstart Shipboys . 〈◊〉 once crept into any inferior Office in the Ship , and 〈◊〉 being covered with silk and good borrowed beaten Satin , ●●nde and buttered through with Plush or Velvet , they arrogantly imagine , that all the reverence or respect that men do either for their undeserued place , or gaudy outside , is done to their persons ; but I would have them understand that they are honoured and worshipped , with the same devotion as the barbarous Brasilians , Americans and Virginians do adore the Devil withal , which is not for the hope of any good which they eupect , but for fear of the hurt which they suppose the Devil can do them . The conclusion is , that when a storm or tempeste comes , the Noble , stout , skilful Navigator stands to his Tackling , and courageously applies himself either to Top and yard , Helm and Lead , from Post to stem , and from Prow to Quarter , when all the service Monsier Mushroom and his Mate can do , is either to eat , sleep , spewe , and stink , and at last for some notorious or meritorious work , they are ducked from the yard arm of State , into the deep sea of disgrace , and turned a shore like Cain's Imps , preferred to their due estates of Runagates and Vagabonds . 

The Squadron of Ships that went under the command of the Court - SHIP . 

1 The Renown , a Ship of worthy port , strength and burden , maned with approved and experienced Soldiers and Saylors . 

2 The Courage . 

3 The Resolution . 

4 The Fore-night . 

5 The Expedition . 

6 The Loyalty . 

The Perseverance . Six tall Ships of most excellent service and performance . 

7 The Compliment . 

8 The Brisbe . 

9 The Strange . Three Gallant Pinnaces , but of very small use , profit or service . 

10 The Oblivious . A Ship of great burden and most plentifully maned , with those that had forgotten their Parents , kindred , friends , birth , estate , breeding , and indeed such as were so far out of knowledge to know any man , that they had no acquaintance of themselves , and being mere strangers to their own qualities and conditions ; and thus was the Courtship appointed and attended ; much of her great Ordinance , were Promises , the Powder breath , and airy performance were the Shot , which by reason of the tossing of the billows and unquiet surges of the Sea , did often miss the mark . 

The Friend - SHIP 

Was a Vessel of great account and estimation , David and jonathan , Damon and Pythias , Pylades and Orestes , Alexander and Lodowick , Scipio and Lealius , did most lovingly and unfeignedly sail in her : indeed she was ever free for all comers of what Country , sex , age or estate soever , for the word Friend imports free end , which is as much as the end and intention of Friendship is free : In these latter times , she should have gone to Sea , but there were not men to be gotten to man her , so for a shift they were fain to furnish her with Kindred , Nunkles , and Couzins , with here and there a false Brother : Herod , and Pilate went aboard this Ship ( with a shameful deal of love from the teeth outward ) but their purpose was to destroy innocent blood . It was a merry world when Fidelity was Master of this Ship , Constancy his Mate , and Plain-dealing the Botswaine : but those worthy Mariners are dead , and an old Proverb as sure as Check with them : in a word , the old Ship is decayed and rotten , having only the bare name left , for she is so much past service , that she can hardly steer or bear sail , with an adverse contrary gale , she will fall to Leeward most abominably , yet with a prosperous and fortunate wind , she will spread all her Canvas exceeding fair and hypocritical , and so I 'll describe no further , because she is grown to that cheap rate , that a man may have her a Bellingsgate for a box on the care . 

The Friendship had two very small Pinnaces in her Squadron : named , he is called and esteemed a man of good Footemanship , which word Annagramatized is Foe to Man-ship , importing that running away is an enemy or foe to Manhood , valour and resolution , ( thus much by way of Paradox . ) 

Let the wind blow where it will , yet all weathers this Ship sails a Trot , her lightfooted , nimble-hee●d Mariners ( like so many dancers ) capering in the Pumps and vanities of this sinful world , sometimes a Morrisca or Trenchmore of 40. miles long , to the Tune of Dusty my dear , Dirty come thou to me , Dun out of the mire , or I wail in woe and plunge in pain , all these dances have no other music , except now and then he chance to hear an oath , or a curse or two from the Coachman . 

These Sailors , the most part and best of them are bred in a Kingdom of much fertility and plenty , called Realdine , where after they have all their youth been accustomed to wear Brogues and Trunes , their fare being many times shamrookes , oaten-bread , beans and buttermilk , armed upon stark naked , with a Dart or a Skeene , steeled with the spirit of Vsquabath , than they cross a ditch of eight hour's sail , and land in the most flourishing Kingdom of Triabnie , where by their good Foot-man-ship they are turned out of their old habits , into jackets of good Preterpluperfect Velvet , plated with silver or Argentum vi●um , ( for the quickenesse ) and all to be embroidered back and side , with the best gold twist , and the best of the silkworm , sometimes with a Court ( a Coat of Guard I should say , ) or a Coat of Regard , being well guarded , unreguarded , with such a deal of feather Ribbons , and points , that he seems to be a running Haberdasher's shop of small wares . 

Yet are those men free from Pride , for their greatest Ambition is not to ride but to foot it , or else to sweep Chimneys , or turn Costermongers ; this is the altitude of their aim , and the profundity of their ●elicitie , nevertheless they know themselves to be Great men's Trappingss , courageous Torchbearers , illustrious Firedrakes , glorious & sumptuous Turmoylers , they are far from the gripping sins of Usury and Extortion , and are such Philosophical contemners of the world , that every day they tread it under their ●●ete and trample on it ; and they are such haters of wickedness , that they leave it in all places where they come : they are not covetous of other men's land , for they make all the hast they can every day to leave it behind them ; they are so much to be trusted , that their words are as good as their bonds , yet in this their humility they may compare with Emperors , for they are as brave as Nero , and can drink with Tiberius : To conclude , the Foot-man-ship is maned with well breathed Mariners , who after all their long , painful , and faithful service , are shipped inthe Barke-beggerly , and brought to an Anchor in the Haven of Cripplegate . 

There were in the Regiment with the Footemanship 4. small Pinnaces . 

1 The Sweat , a vessel of warm employment or hot service . 
2 The Moil , a Frigate that will endure much foul weather . 
3 The Toil , a Bark for all weathers , Winter or Summer . 
4 The Cripple , an old Drumler , quite past service . 
The Horseman - SHIP with her Squadron . 

Horsemanship had not so fair a beginning as Footman-ship , for Cayno who was the first vagabond and runagate in the world , was also the first that backed and mannadge a Horse ( as Polador Virgil saith , 〈…〉 doubt after he had murdered his brother , seeing he could not run from the horror of his conscience , therefore he practised Horsemanship , because perhaps he tho●g●t to ride from himself . This Ship hath more paces than 〈◊〉 hath ; and the comparison may hold well for in long vacations , quarter days , against payment of Bon●s' absence of true friends , or protracting of Maids marriages , after the Banes hath been thrice asked , in these cases the Lawyer ▪ the Landlord , the Usurer , the friends , and the Contracted couple , do think time to be soundred , stark lame , or quite tired , & that his best pace is after 14. miles in 15. days ; whilst many a poor ( lyent , an unprovided Tenant , or unfurnished debtor , or a fellow going to be hanged , they think time is all upon the spur , and that he run● at full speed a wild galloppe . And as a Ship at sea sails sometimes by the wind , sometimes before the wind , sometimes with a quarter wind , sometimes with a stone sheate , and sometimes with tack hard a board , and Bolin stretched and sheate close a●te , by all which winds she sails several paces : So Horsemanship hath the Trot , the Amble , the Rack , the pace , the false and wild Gallop , or the full speed , & as several vessels at sea do make up a Navy , as Carracks , Argosies , Hulks , Ships , Barks , Pinnaces , Hoyghs , Drumlers , Frigates , Brigandines , Carnels , Catches , Galleys , Galleons , Gall●● 〈◊〉 foists , Galleyasses , and Asses-galleys : so this Horsemanship , hath to attend her , her 〈…〉 , her Barbary ho●●e , her Naples Courser , her German S●e●de her 〈◊〉 Mare , her Galloway Nag , her 〈◊〉 Hobby , her French C●●uaia , her Welsh Palfrey , her English All , her Smithfield lad , and her Barthlomew Hoby-horse , and 〈◊〉 to all other Ships , which have their Bridle , H●lme or Rudder in their stern or tail , Horseman SHIP is altogether directed and steered by the head , whereby , ●●r want of good managing , many times the Rider makes a headlong voyage ( like a man of good forecast 〈◊〉 the horse head . And as Horseman are none of the best Mariners , so Mariners are commonly the worst Horsemen , as one of them being upon a tired Hacken●y once , ( his companions prayed him to ride faster , he said he was becalmed . 

Another mounted upon a foundered ●ade , that stumbled 3. or 4. times headlong , the Sailor imagined that his horse was too much 〈◊〉 a head , or ●●t●ward on ( as the sea phrase is ) and therefore to b●l●●●e him , that he might go or sail with an even keel , he aligated and soled his ●erkin slee●●● full of stones , and tied them fast to his horse cro●p●r , supposing to make his sleme as deep laden as his head to an ●yd stumbling . 

Indeed this Horsemanship is never unfurnished of a lad●● trick or two at a pinch or time of need , ( and contrary to any other ship in the fairest weather it will heave , set , wi●ce , kick , fling , & curvet , like a Midsummer Morris dancer , or as if the Devil were practising a French 〈◊〉 or ●●rran●o ▪ but I cannot blame them to be lusty , 〈◊〉 they we not put to such hard allowance as many poor who had taught their jades no better manners , then to take the wall of his Majesty's Horse , he dismissed them from their Offices , and made two of his own stable Grooms , Senators in their rooms , and after proceeded to the funeral of his Horse , in manner and form following . 

First , a 100 poor galled Hackneys , and next 300. labouring Asses , all covered with black Cotton , going 2. and 2. every one having 2. bottles of ●●aye on their backs , the only gift of the deceased : then 100 hunting Nags , and 50.  Coache-horses , with 10.  Horses of State , with each two horse-loaves for diet bread . then followed the Pleybeians in mourning habit 200. in number ; next the stable Grooms , Puruayers , Chikes of the stable , Farryers' , Horseleeches , and Gentlemen of the stable , 300.  

then went the Saddlers , Charioteeres , Waggoners , Carters , Sumptermen , Littermen and Coachmen , 300.  

After them Singers , Pagan Priests , Flammines and Archslammines . 70.  

then the H●arse richly behung with Scutcheous devices , Mottoes , and Impresses . 

After them , the Emperor Nero chief mourner , and his Train born up by Otho , and young Sporus . 

Next went two old Asses all in black Velvet , as mourners of State or Chevals the du●il . 

then followed Agrippina ( Nero his mother ) with the fair Popeia and the beautiful Act , ( two of his Concubines ) and after them Galba Nimphid●us' Vittelluss , with others : it i● t●ought that Seneca●at ●at all the while in his study laughing at the Funeral . 

Lastly a great Troop of straggling attendants : The Hearse being set down in Campus Martius , Otho began this speech which followeth , in blank Verse . 

Inintious death to make an Emperor mourn 
Fleabit ten otho 's tymeles Exequys , 
Who might have hued , and born great Conquerors 
And been the father of most valiant Colts ; 
Lament ye Meads , whereon this Palsray grazed 
Ah! strew the streets of Rome with rotten hay . 
Let Pease , Beanes , Oats , and horsebread must with grief 
Rust Currycombs , and Saddles rend in sunder , 
Break stirrop-leathers girths and bridle , break , 
Fall rack and manger , planks split all in twain , 
For you shall never support his weight again , 
You stable Grooms that combed his crisped mane , 
And oft were graced to make up Otho's train , 
Sigh , groan , and weep , lament and howl and cry , 
In litter and horse-dung everlastingly : 
Think how brave Otho did his breath respire , 
Who with his heels hath oft struck sparkling fire . 


Hear Nero speaks . 

The bravest beast that ever Emperor backed 
That thumped the field of Mars with greater grace 
Than P●gasus bearing Tritonia 
About the valleys near the Muse's Hills , 
In battle swifter than the Northern wind 
But in a triumph flout and f●ll of state , 
Listing his hooses , as if he scorned the ground , 
And 〈◊〉 cant to make the air support his weight . 
As mannerly and moderate at his meat 
As is a Bride groom on his wedding day , 
For never would he touch a lock of hay , 
Or smell unto a heap of provender 
Until he heard a noise of Trumpets sound , 
Whereby he knew our meat was served in . 
But after meals , how he would meditate 
Upon his Tutors reverend documents , 
And by himself would practise what was taught him , 
Offering to run the Ring , and fetch Curvets , 
To troth in state as we were on his back , 
And to out do his schoolmaster in Art , 
The thought of these things ( Otho ) kills my heart . 


Otho speaks to the two Asses . 

Then these poor Animals have cause to weep , 
Most reverend Asses you have lost a friend , 
A friend , a father have your worship lost , 
Who would have given you pensions in your age , 
And made you Beadsmen , free from Cariages . 
When he lay speechless , on his death bed , than 
He pointed to the hayloft with his heels , 
As who should say , if I die give it them : 
then to the Wardens of his Company , 
( For he was made free of the Blacke-smiths Craft ) 
He turned about , bade them pull off his shoes , 
And take them as true token of his love . 
And as he dying showed his love to them , 
Because his Master did delight in Plays , 
He wiled that of hi● mane should beards be made , 
And of his tail , a head-tire for a Devil . 
One Ass he made his sole Executor , 
The other Overseer of his will : 
Grant jupiter they may perform the same 
To do and oversee , that men may say 
They were Just Overseers another day . 


Epitaph . 

Here lies the Horse , whose four foot Progeny 
Did troth in blood before the walls of Troy : 
Yea in the bowels of the Greeks perdye , 
And on his breast this Morto , Par ma foy , 
Kin ( by the Sire ) to winged Pegasus , 
And by the Mother to the King of Mules , 
Whose Uncle was the great Bucephalus , 
Whose Arms , four Horse shoes , and the fiel was Gules . 


To conclude , this Horsemanship after many storms , tempests , gusts , and flaws , came at last home to her ancient haven the Bear-garden , richly laden with these commodities following . 

The Chinegall , the Navellgall , Windgall , Spurgall , Lightgall , and Shacklegall , the worms , the Staggers , the Mallenders and Sallenders , Scratches , Pole-evill , the Anticote and the Pompardye , the Dropsy , the Fever , the Palsy , the Glanders , the Frenzy , the Cough and the Colt-evill , the Yellows , the Fashions , the Splinters , the Spa●ineses , the Ringbones , the Quitter-bones , the Curbs , the Rotten-frush , and the Crowne-scabb , the Hidebound , the Haws , the Crestfall , the Vives , the Bloody-riffes , the Cramp , and the Canker , the howkes , the Toothache , the Surfeit , the Tonghurte , the Paps and the Bladders , the Tyrednesse , the Lowsinesse , the Surbate , the Farley , the Pose and the Strangle , the Broaken-winde , the Hoofe-bound , the Botch , the Bots , the Wen in the Groin , the Rot in the Lungs , the Kybes , the Pearl , and the Pin and Webbe , the Cloyed , the Bloodshot , the Wrung in the Withers , the strain , the Prick in the sole , the loose in the Hoof , the Gravelled , the foundering , and the shedding of the hair , the Horse-hipped , the Wrench , the Necke-cricke , and the Shoulder splat . 

These are the commodities wherewith the Horsemanship was sraight , which are so shared and divided , that a man cannot light of any horse , young or old , but he is furnished with one , two or more of these excellent guistes . 

The Ships that attended in the Squadron or Regiment with the Horsemanship , were these , 1 The Rac● , an adventurous vessel of much expectation , and admirable , swiftness . 
2 The Post , a vessel of much use , quick return , and exceeding hazard , toil and travel . 
3 The Hackeney , a most serviceable Pinnace , that endures all weathers , and is so common , that she is to be hired by any or used by all . 


The Surety - SHIP with her Squadron or Regiment . 

This is a Ship of great antiquity , and makes more voyages than all the rest of the Navy , she is the only Merchant adventurer under the Sun , for they that ●ayle in her , do hazard goods , lands , money reputation ▪ friends , kindred , credit , liberty and life ; of all which rich commodities ( always at her returns ) she is so provident ▪ that she makes one jail or other her weatehouse , where it is more safely kept under lock and key , than the golden apples of the Hesperideses were guarded by the Dragon ; she is so easy to be boarded , that a man need not trouble his feet to enter her , or use any boat to come to her , ●or if all her Mariners should go to her by water , than were a Waterman the richest trade below the Moon ; only a dash with a pen , the writing of a man's name , passing his word , or letting his mark ( though it be but the form of a pair of Pothooks , a Cross , a crooked billet , or a W. for John Tompson , any of these facile ways hath shipped a man into the Surety-ship , during his life and his heirs after him , and though the entrance into her be so easy , yet she is so full of impertinent and needy courtesy , that many men will lend a man a hand into her , with more fair entreaties , requests and invitations , then are commonly used to a Mask at the Court , or a groce of Gossips in the Country , and being once entered , a ten penny nail driven to the head may as soon leap out of an Oaken post , as a man may get a shore again : she is painted on the outside with vows and promises , and within her are the stories of the t●ttered Prodigal , eating Husks with the Swine , the picture of Niobe , with Allecto , T●siphone and Megaera , dancing lachtimae : Her Arms are a Goose quill or pen , couchant in a sheepskin field ●able , the Motto above Noverint universi , the supporters a Usurer and a Scrivener , the crest a Woodcock , the Mantles red wax , with this other Motto beneath , Sealed and delivered , this Ship hath the Art to make parchment the dearest stuff in the world ; For I have seen a piece little bigger than my two hands , that hath cost a man a thousand pound , I myself paid a hundred pound once for a small rotten remnant of it . She is rigged most strangely , her ●opess and Cables are Conditions whether or to what Port a man would have her . 

3 The Fool , a Ship of great burden , and for sail and steerage much like the Kind heart . 

4 The Negligence , an Argosy that through want of good foresight , brought the Surety-ship in great danger . 

5 The Decay , a Ship much broken . 

6 The Scapethrift , a small ragged Catch , that hangs or depends upon the whole Regiment . 

The Wor - SHIP with her Squadron or Regiment . 

Though the first syllable of this Ships name be , Worse , whereby she is called Worse-ship , yet she is a better Ship than many are aware of & indeed she is far too good for every ▪ or for any Knave to come aboard of her . In my opinion she doth not belong to any mortal man , for God himself is both Owner and Master of her . 

Yet many there are who claim an interest in her , as first the Devil would have her belong to him , for which cause he makes many barbarous Nations to adore and Worship him , and to sacrifice themselves , their children , and all that they esteem dearest unto them , to his infernal Hell-hood , and for his better holding and keeping of this Worship , he hath his Ministers and Agents , in the most Kingdoms of Christendom , who with their juggling leagerdemaine , hath gulled , blinded & besotted many thousands of all Estates , ages & sexes , that they will fall down & Worship Stocks , Stones , Blocks , Idols , Images , Relics , dead men's bones , or a piece of bread , as the heathen Idolatrous Egyptians did formerly adore and Wor-ship Oynions and Garlic . 

And as there are many that for desert are worthy Pilots , Steeremen and Mariners in the Worship , and are shipped into her only for their merits , so there are a great many , and more than a good many , that by falsehood and indirect courses , have shipped themselves into her : for as Cornelius Agrippa saith in his Vanity of Sciences , some have gotten the Wor-ship by cutting throats in the wars ; some by being Great men's Bawds , or Cuckolds in peace ; some for marrying of cast stale Concubines , or Bastards ; some by bribery , extortion or oppression ; some by false weights and measures ; some by the excessive drunkenness of others ; some by theft , some upon credit , some for ready money , and some for favour ; which is a word crept into the place of merit since the days of Quintilian the Orator : the most corrupted justice will board her ; the slothfullest Divine will have a Cabin in her ; the carpet Knight will be shipped in her ; the most cowardly Captain will enter her ; and many of least faith and conscience will lay claim to her : she having store of such false owners , I say no more of her , but commit her to the mercy of Wind , Tyde , and Time.  

There went with her in her Regiment , these that follow . 

1 The Abuse , an old Ship , too much in use . 
2 The Purchase , a vessel all for Simony or ready money . 
3 The Mittimus , a dangerous Bark , whose word is , At your peril . 
●● after four or five day's preparation , and some ten pound charge among men and horses and dogs , besides an infinite deal of toil and trouble , and an innumerable number of oaths & curses : after all this great deal of do , the main purchase can be no more than a poor silly Hare , which is but a dry meat , and will take more butter in the basting , than her carcase is worth . 

Our ancient Progenitor or first King of this Island ( Brutus ) was so expert in this Woodmanship , that he killed his own father Siluius , shooting him with an arrow , mistaking him for a Hart , a Stag or a Buck : and William the second surnamed Rufus , King of England , was by the like mischance , of a shot made at a Deer , by Sir Walter Tirrell Knight ) slain with the glance of an Arrow against a tree , in the New-forrest in Hampshire . 

I thank Cooper's Dictionary that tells me that Venator is a Hunter , and Venatrix a Huntress or a Woman Hunting , and that Meretrix is a Whore or a Woman Hunted : all these words having derivation from , or Allusion to Venereus Alias Lemot che-reous , for though Diana the hunting Goddess of Chastity be a Constant Venatrix ▪ yet Venus the Queen of Love never fails a right Woodman of a Meretrix . But if Venator and Venatrix should Hunt as much as Meretrix is ( or hath been ) hunted , I think verily that there had not been ( or in time would not be ) one Deer left in many of the greatest Forests , Parks and Chases of Christendom . 

Besides , there is not a perfect Mariner in the Woodmanship but he hath engrafted in him a most Abundant gift of promising , for one of them will swear and vow to give more Dear away to sundry persons ▪ then there are under the keeping and command of six or seven of them : and I have heard that one White Buck in a small Park ( in a place which I could name within the Walls of Christendom ) hath been given away at the least to a 1000 several persons , by one keeper , and the said keeper is so kind that he will never deny a Buck to whosoever will Ask . A Dear friend ( whom I love Dear ) did promise me a Deer , four years since and four dear journeys I made for my Deer , and still with Delaves and Demurs I was put off from my Deer , with promises , that at such and such a time I should have my Deer , but now I am in despair of my Deer , and I mean to take no more care for my Deer ; And so Adieu my Deer ; but indeed he that had the bounty to promise me this Deer , hath the grace to blush whensoever he sees me , and therefore I do love him for his modesty and shamefastness , and had it not been for that , and that I do love him indeed , I would long before this time have Sung him A Kerry-elison that should have made him been glad to have promised me a Brace of Bucks more to have stopped my mouth withal , although in performance my dear had been non est inventus . 

In a word , of all sort of Deer I hold stolen Venison to be the most honestly gotten , because the theives are so quiet , close , private , & silent at their work , that they have no leisure to swear and curse as men do when it is lawfully taken , and my conceit is that where oaths and curses are most restrained , there most honesty and piety remains . But commonly swearing , execrations , and drinking , are the ceremonious Rites of a Bucks or a Hare's death and obsequys . 

With the cry of the Hounds ; And the Echo resownds 
Through the Mead , through the sallow , 
With the Horn , with the hollow , 
With the Horse loud neigh , and the Buck at a Bay . 
And with the Deres fall ; And Hornesounding Knell , 
My Pen bids Hunting Woodmanship farewell . 


The Ships and Pinnaces that served in the Regiment under the Woodmanship , were these . 

1 The Chaunter . 
2 The Boweman . 
3 The Ringwood . 
4 The Slut.  
5 The Bewtye . 
6 The Daysie . 
7 The Kilbuck , with diverse others , all of them being for course or chase . 
FINIS . 

