THE EIGHTH WONDER OF THE WORLD , OR CORIATS' ESCAPE from his supposed drowning . 

WITH HIS SAFE ARRIVAL AND entertainment at the famous City of Constantinople ; And also how he was honourably Knighted with a sword of King PRIAM'S . 

WITH The manner of his proceeding in his peregrination through the Turkish Territories towards the ancient memorable City of JERUSALEM . 

By JOHN TAYLOR . 

Printed at 〈◊〉 near Coleman hedge , and at are to be sold at the sign of the nimble Traveller 1613.  

To the Mighty , Magnificent , Potent , and Powerful Knight , Sir Thomas Parsons , ( alias ) Pheander , ( alias ) Knight of the Sun , Great Champion to Apollo , Palatine of Ph●ebus , Sword-bearer to Sol , Tilter to Titan , Housekeeper to Hyperion , and heir apparent to the invisible kingdom of the Fairies : your devoted Votary , JOHN TAYLOR , wishes your Worshits wisdoms Longitude , Latitude , Altitude , and Craslitude may increase above the Ridiculus multitude of the most en●ment Stal●●●● of this latter age . 

TO thee brave knight , who from the Delphian God ●●●e 
I ●on●●●●ate these famous Acts of Odcomb : 
To thee alone , and unto none but thee , 
For Patronage my toiling Muse doth flee . 
I gave my drowning Coriat unto Archy , 
And with his ●ure escape to thee now march 1 , 
Not doubting but thou wilt in kindness take 
These lines thus written , for his , and thy , dear sake . 
If thou in kindness wilt accept this task , 
Hereafter I will better things uncaske , 
And make the world thy worth to glory at 
In greater measure than at Coriat . 
I 'll mount thee up in ●urse past Charles his Wain , 
I 'll make the Mocue Endymion to disdain , 
I 'll write in ever-deering lines thy fame . 
As far as Phoebus spreads his glorious flame . 
I 'll make thee pluckestorne Saturn by the Chaps , 
And brave great jove amids his thunder-clappes . 
I 'll cause thy praises t'eclipt the God as Arms , 
I 'll wake Donia Venus yield to love's alarms . 
The nimble Mercury shall be thy ●oot-mad , 
Is thou wilt grace my lines : therefore lo i●tooed man 
But if to patronise into thou dost scorn , 
'T were better than thou never hadst been born : 
For against disdain my Muses oneli p●t●ss . 
To write with Gall , com●●●t with Aqua-lottis : 
And Vinegar , and Salt , and Sublimation . 
Which where it falls will'c●rtch & s●all : probatum . 
then at thou lov'st the Fairy Queen thine Aunt , 
Deign to touchsafe this poor and trivial grant : 
then I thy Poet will with how Subjection , 
Proceed to write Tom Coriats' Resurrection . 
Yours ever wh 〈…〉 shall persever in your 〈◊〉 , JOHN TAYLOR . 

To the knowing Reader . 

Now sir , it is a common customary use in these times , to salute you with somewhat ; as Honest , Kind , Courteous , Loving , Friendly , or Gentle : but all these Epithets are overworn , and do , as it were , stink of the fusty garb of Antiquity . Besides , if I should come upon you with any of these claw-backetearmes , I might chance to belie you . But if your kind disposition do merit to be called kind , I pray let me find it in your favourable censure . Some will ( perhaps ) dislike that I do dedicate my books to Archy , and Sir Thomas , and such like : To them I answer , that my subject being altogether foolish , I were very absurd to think that any wise man would be my Patron : And it were mere folly for me to make a hotchpotch , in seeking to compound wisdom and folly together . But howsoever thou esteemest it , it thrusts itself into thy view ; wherein ( if thou be'st not too much drowned in Melancholy ) thou wilt show thy teeth ( if thou hast any ) with laughing . And as my lines are somewhat defective in their shape , so I pray thee , do not hack them , nor hew them with thy stammering , to make them worse , nor Buzzard-blast them with thy calumniating mews , tusks , and scuruyes . Thus leaning thee to thyself , and myself unto thee , I remain thine as thou respects me , 

john Taylor . The cause of the contention betwixt sir Thomas the Scholar , and john the Sculler . 

A Pamphlet printed was the Sculler named , 
Wherein Sir Thomas much my writing blamed ; 
Because an Epigram therein was written , 
In which he said he was ●●pt , galled and bitten . 
He frets , he sums , he rages and exclaims , 
And vows to rovye me from the River Tham●● . 
Well , I to make him some amends for that , 
Did write a Book was called Laugh and be fat : 
In which he said I wronged him ten times more , 
And made him madder than he was before . 
then did he storm , and chase , and swear , and ban , 
And to superior powers a main he ran , 
Where he obtained Laugh and be fat 's confusion , 
Who all were burned , and made a hot conclusion . 
then after that , when rumour had him drowned , 
( The news whereof my vexed Muse did wound ) 
I written a letter to th' elysian coast , 
T' appeal his angry wrong incensed Ghost . 
The which my poor invention than did call , 
Odcomhs' Complaint , or Coriats' Funeral . 
But since true news is come , he scaped that danger , 
And through hot Sunburnt Asia is a ranger . 
Has raising from the dead I thought to write , 
To please myself , and give my friend's delight : 
The World's eighth Wonder , Or Coriats' Reviuing . 

LO I the man whose Muse did lately forage , 
Through wind , and sea with dreadless dauntless courage , 
And to the life , in hodge podge rhyme expressed , 
How Odcomb Coriat was great Neptune's guest . 
How Thetis sweetly lullled him in her lap , 
And ( at her darling ) fed the Barn with pap , 
How big mouthed Aeol stormed , and puffed , and blue , 
And how both wind , and Seas with all their crew 
Were pleased & displeased , tumbled , raged and tossed , 
The Gamers glad , and mad were they that lost . 
These tedious tasks my toiling Muse hath run , 
And what she did , for Coriats' sake was don . 
She hath transported him to Bossoms Inn , 
Where in a Basket he hath hanged been : 
She hath inuouled him in the hungry deep , 
In hope to leave him in eternal sleep : 
Yet having hanged him first , and after drowned him , 
My poor laborious Muse again hath found him . 
For 't is her duty still to wait and serve him 
Although the Fates should hang , or drown , or starve him . 
The fatal sisters serve his turn so pat , 
That sure he hath more lives than hath a Cat. 
Alcide●'s never past so many dangers 
As he hath done , amongst his friends , and strangers , 
Her ●● , through all his actions with such ease , 
As Hogs eat Acorns , or as Pigeon's Pease . 
there 's nothing in the world can him disgrace , 
Not being beaten in a lousy case : 
Nor Trunks , nor Punks , nor stocks , nor mocks , nor moes , 
Not being made an Ass in Rhyme and Prose : 
Nor hanging , drowning , casting , nor the blanket , 
These honour's all are his , the God● be thanked . 
But now methinks some curious itching ear , 
Doth long some sportive news of him to hear . 
For being in the Ocean buried under , 
And now alive again , 't is more than wonder : 
But how these wondrous wonders came to pass , 
I ( as I can ) will tell you how it was . 
When first this mirror amongst a world of Nations , 
( This great ingroser of strange observations ) 
Was bound for Constantones brave noble City , 
then he ( who is Witall , or else all witty ) 
Whose vigilance let's no advantage slip , 
Embarked was in a tall proved Ship 
Of London , the Samaritan she height , 
Now note the forecast of this famous wight 
The Ship he only for her name did choose 
In detestation of the faithless jews : 
For why the jews and the Samaritans , 
Did hate as Christians , Antichristians . 
Yet I suppose his spite to them did spring , 
For I think what , and now I 'll name the thing . 
In his full five month's strange perambulation , 
He was in danger of that perverse Nation . 
For they by wrongful force , would have surprised him , 
TO excoriat Coriat , and t' have Circumcised him . 
This dreadful terror of his Lady ware , 
I guess the cause the jews he hatred bate . 
However was his intricate intent , 
In the Samaritan to sea he went : 
And eare-abusing false intelligence , 
Said he was drowned in Neptune's residence . 
Thus false report did make me much mistake : 
For which a fair recanting mends I 'll make . 
My grieved Mine hath ever since his drowning , 
Been ve●e with sorrow and continual swooning : 
But now she 's all attired with mirth and gladness , 
The Lie was good that made her sick with sadness . 
Know therefore Readers , whatsoever you are : 
That this great Britain brave Oucombyan star : 
Was tossed on Neptune's rough remorseless waves : 
Where each man looked for timeless brinish graves : 
For Aeolus unlocked his vaulted Centre , 
And against the Sea-god did in Arms adventure 
With winds uniayled came at unawares , 
And greene-faced Neptune with defiance dares 
With all his watery Regiments to fight 
Or yield this matchless , worthless , wondrous ●●ight . 
The great humidious Monarch , tells him plain , 
'T were best he jogged from his commanding Main : 
And with his troops of homelesse , roving slaves : 
Go hide him in the earth's imprisoned Caves : 
And not disturb him in his Regal Throne , 
For he would keep Tom Coriat , or else none . 
then Eol 'gan his windy wrath to vent : 
And swore by Styx that Neptune should repent 
This balky high audacious insolence , 
Against his powerful great magnificence . 
then Triton , sounded , the alarm was given , 
That from bells bottom to the skirts of heaven : 
The repercussive echoes of his sounding 
With dreadful relapse back again redounding , 
then , then Robustious swollen cheeked Boreas' blasts , 
Tears , rives , and shivers , Tacklins' , Sailes , and Masts : 
In tottered fragments all in pieces shatred 
Which here and there confusedly lay scattered . 
These hurly burly storms and tempests tumbling 
With dire amazing Thunder-thumping rumbling . 
The mounting billows , like great mountains rise , 
As if they meant to drown the lofty skies . 
then down they fall to the Tartarian deep , 
As if the infernal Fiends they meant to steep : 
That sure ( I guess ) a greater gust was never , 
Since Inna did Aenea's ruin endeavour . 
The Kingly Sea-god ( to avoid more harms ) 
Caught Coriat ( the cause of these Alarms . ) 
And so his boisterous windy foe deprived , 
And home through worlds of floods amain he dived . 
But awful love to his Imperial sphere 
These grievous garboils chanced for to hear : 
And to his brother Neptune down he sends 
The wing heeled Mercury with these commends : 
To thee thou watery great commanding Keasar . 
I come from heaven's Majestic mighty Caesar : 
Commanding thee by thy fraternal love , 
That from thy Coasts thou presently remove 
The man thou lately tookest , the world's sole wonder , 
Or else he 'll rouse thee with distracting Thunder : 
And therefore , as jove's friendship thou dost tender , 
To safe arrival see thou dost him render : 
Whilst May's son his message thus did tell , 
A fury , like a Post-knight , came from hell ; 
And from th' infernal King of black Auer●● , 
These words he uttered ( which doth much concern us ) 
From Acheronticke , Phlegetonticke waves , 
Thy brother Pluto thus much friendships craves : 
thou wilt send Coriat down with him to reign , 
And he 'll send thee as good a thing again , 
For Proserpins' his illustrious Fere , 
Of him , and his adventures chanced to hear : 
Because a Gentleman ushe●d she doth want , 
To have him Pluto begs thy friendly grant . 
The Marine Monarch answers , thus it is : 
You Nuntius from our brethren jove and Dis : 
Know such a mortal is within my power , 
Imprisoned close in ●hetis silver Bower : 
I did surprise him midst a thousand toils 
Of wars ; of jars , of bloody baneful broils : 
My high-born brother jove hath hither sent , 
Commanding sue that I incontia●nt 
Do safely set this newfound man a land . 
And I from Pluto further understand . 
That he would have him ●o Crevan Coast , 
Where he and C●ne● daughter rules the coast . 
First therefore I in wisdom hold it best 
To yield unto the mighty jove's request : 
And on the Graecian coast I 'll safely place him , 
Where he may wander where his fortune trace him . 
These messengers thus answered were dit●●●ist , 
And Neptune did to land his guest persist : 
But now all hell was in an expectation 
For Coriats' coming making preparation . 
The Stygian Ferryman on Sex's shore , 
Did wait with diligence to waste him o'er , 
And hell's threeheaded Porter sweetly sung 
For joy , that all the Coasts of Limbo rung 
With howling Musics , damn despiteful notes , 
From out his triple Chaps , and treble throats . 
Ixion from the torturing wheel was eased , 
And pining Tantal was with junkets pleased , 
And further , 't was commanded , and decreed ; 
The Gripe no more on Titius' gu●● should feed . 
The nine and forty wenches , water filling 
In Tub● unbottomed which was ever spilling : 
They all had leave , to leave their endless toils , 
To dance , sing , sport , and to keep revel coiles . 
Three forked Hecate to mirth was prone , 
And Sisyphus gave o'er the restless stone . 
All , in conclusion had free leave to play , 
And for Tom Coriats' sake make holiday . 
Thus all black Barrathrum is filled with games , 
With lasting bonfires , casting sulphur-flames . 
In Vse'rers skulls the molten gold they quaff , 
And skink , and drink , and wink , and stink , and laugh . 
But when the Post was come and told his Tale , 
then all this sport was turned to baneful bale . 
Grim Pluto stormed , and Proserpina mourned 
And tortured Ghosts , to torments were returned . 
The Sea-god ( careful of great jove's high hest ) 
To great Constantinople brought his guest : 
Where ( nothing that may honour him omitting ) 
His entertainment to his slate was fitting : 
There in all pleasure he himself disports 
Conversing daily with such brave consorts . 
As Turks , and Tartars , Englishmen , and greeks , 
That he thinks ages years , and years but weeks 
that 's wasted in this rare time stealing chat , 
All his delight 's in nothing else but that . 
But his high honour further to relate , 
I 'll sing the new advancement of his state . 
Some English Gentlemen with him consulted , 
And he as nat'rally with them consulted : 
Where they perceiving his deserts were great . 
They strived to mount him into honour's seat : 
And being found of an unmatched spirit , 
He there was double dubbed a doughty Knight . 
Rise up sir Thomas , worshipped mayst thou be 
Of people all ( that are as wise as thee . ) 
Now raped with joy , my Muse must needs record 
How he was knighted with a royal sword : 
But into what a puzzle now got I am ? 
They say it was the Bilbo of King Priam. 
The fatal blade which he in sury drew , 
When in revenge the Myrmidons he slew . 
Impel mell vengeance for great Heclers' bane , 
Who by Achilles fair foule-play was slain . 
That sword that mowed the Grecians like a scythe : 
That sword that made victorious Trojans blithe . 
That sword , that through so many dangers rubbed , 
That famous sword hath Monsieur Coriat dubbed . 
What though 't was rusty ? spite of cankered rust , 
The memory of honour lives in dust . 
'T was no disgrace it was so rusty shipped , 
It had ( like Coriat ) many a scowling scaped . 
But amongst the rest , this must not be forgot , 
How he did from Constantinople troth , 
And how a solemn counsel there decreed , 
That he should travel in a Graecian weed . 
To this ( for his own safety ) they do woe him . 
Because the language is so natural to him . 
And then besp●ke a sober sage wise fellow , 
( When wine had made them all , in general mellow ) 
Take heed quoth he , I counsel you beware 
That of yourself you have a special care 
You be not taken for a Frenchman , for 
The Turks in these parts do the French abhor , 
Since Godfrie● time , that brave bold Bullen Duke , 
Who put them all to shame and rough rebuke . 
And made the Saracens by Million bleed 
And holy Tomb , from faithless fiends he sited . 
wherefore ( quoth he ) in friendship I advice you 
T' avoid suspect 't were best we Circumcise you : 
And then you freely may through perils pass 
Despite the Turks , so like a Graecian Ass 
no man with Lonxes' eyes will deem you other , 
And thus you safely may suspicion smother . 
Sir Thomas gave this fellow's speech the hearing , 
But told him 't was too heavy for his hearing : 
For why , fall back , fall edge , come good , come all . 
He vowed to keep his foreman's foreskin still . 
This resolution was no sooner spoken , 
The friendly counsel was dismissed and broken . 
Where after leave was ta'en 'twixt him and them , 
He took his journey toward jerusalem : 
And what he can observe 'twixt morn and night , 
With due observance he doth daily write , 
That , if my judgement be not much mistook , 
An Elephant will scarce support his book . 
For he in five months built a paper hulk , 
And this must be ten times of greater bulk , 
●● Paule-church-yard , lonely pity thee , 
thou only thou , shalt most encumbered bee : 
thou from the Press art pressed to be oppressed : 
With many a fat-fetched horne-brought Odcomb jest . 
But yet I know the Stationeri are wise , 
And well do know wherein the dangers lies : 
For to such inconvenience they 'll not enter : 
But suffers Coriat to abide th'aduenter : 
Because his Giant volume is so large , 
they 'll give sir Thomas leave to bear the charge . 
That man is mad who changes gold for dross , 
And so were they to buy a certain loss : 
Let him that got and bore the Barn still breed it , 
And nurse , does burse , and soster , cloth , and seed it . 
Thus hath my Muse ( as fortune her allotted ) 
Both run and tid , and gallops , ●●ble● , trotted 
To skies , and seas , and to black hell below 
In servile duty that my love doth owe. 
My captive thoughts like true servants to him , 
Strive how they any way may service do him . 
To serve his turn like Prentices they 'gree , 
love send Sir Thomas home to make them free . 
Epilogue to Sir Thomas Coriat upon his name . 

Why have I spent my time thus Coriat ? 
wherefore on thy lewd lines thus poor I at ? 
Why like an Idiot fool adore — I at 
Thy works ? which wisdom will not glory at 
At no place ever was before — I at 
Where wonders upon wonder more — I at 
With pen , instead of Lance , now gore — I at 
Thy Odcomb foppery now door — I at 
At thy pride's altitude , now sore — I at 
thou art the Theme I write my — story at 
If ought besell me to be — sorry at 
Hardhearted fate against thee then roar — I at 
Upon his books name , called his Crudities . 

Tom Coriat , I have seen thy Crudities , 
And , methinks , very strangely brewed it is , 
With piece and patch together glude it is , 
And how ( like thee ) ill-favoured hu'de it is , 
In many a line I see that lewd — it is , 
And therefore fit to be subdued — it is , 
Within thy broiling brainpan stude — it is , 
And 'twixt thy grinding jaws well chewed it is , 
Within thy stomach closely mude — it is , 
And last in Court and Country spude — it is , 
But now by wisdom's eye that viewed it is , 
They all agree that very rude — it is , 
With soolery so full endu'de — it is , 
That wondrously by sooles pursued it is , 
As sweet as galls amaritude it is , 
And seeming full of Pulchtitude — it is , 
But more to write but to intrude — it is , 
And therefore wisdom to conclude — It is , 
A Simile for his Learning . 

The luscious Grape of Bacchus' heating Vine , 
When it to ripe maturity is sprung , 
Is pressed , and so converted into wine , 
then closed in Cask most tied at head and bung : 
For if by chance , it chanceth to take vent : 
It spills the wine in colour , strength , and sent . 
e'en so thy Latin , and thy Greek was good 
Till in thy musty Hogshead it was put : 
And Oddly there Commixed with thy blood , 
Not wisely kept , not well nor tightly shut : 
That of the Cask it tastes so , I assure thee , 
That sew ( or none ) can ( but in sport ) endure thee . 
My Farewell to him . 

Now Curiat , I with thee have ever done , 
My Muse unto her journeys and hath won : 
My first Inventions highly did displease thee , 
And these my last are written to appeal thee : 
I wrought these great Herculean works to win thee , 
then if they please thee not the sooles within thee : 
What next I write , shall better be or none , 
Do thou let me , and I 'll let thee alone . 
But if thou seem'st to rub a galled sore , 
Vindict●● vengeance makes all Hell to roar . 
FINIS . 

