Bull , Bear , and Horse , Cut , Curtail , and Long-tail . 

With Tales , and Tales of Bulls , Clenches , and Flashes . 

Is also here and there a touch of our Beare-garden-sport ; with the second part of the Merry conceits of Wit and Mirth . 

Together with the Names of all the Bulls and Bears . 

LONDON , Printed by M. Parsons , for Henry Gosson , and are to be sold at his shop on London Bridge . 1638.  

This Dedication is directed , to his well-affected and much Respected , his often Approved , and truly beloved , Mr. Thomas Godfrey , Keeper of the Game for Bears , Bulls , and Dogs . 

Kind friend , I am sure you can defend me from being bitten with your Bears , though not from being backbitten by Envy ; you can stave me , and save me , from the Goring of your Bulls , but there are too many herds of other Horned Beasts to But at my Inventions , and toss my harmless meaning , as their empty judgements , and Witless fancies are inclined ; howsoever I am resolved to love you , and not to Respect them I am glad that you can say that an excessive time of charge is passed with you , and I hope for better days and times . I have touched here and there merrily upon the Game , but so far from offence , that I do expect that it will be pleasing both to the Wise , and to the Indifferent Readers . And me thinks very fools should not be angry with it , for I have thrust in a great many Babbles to please them to If any thing do seem distasteful in it , my Comfort is , that a Wise man will not set his Wit to mine , and be offended but if a Fool be angry , than I will not set my Wit to his , and take exceptions . And thus with my best wishes to you and yours , I remain a poor friend to you and yours , 

john Taylor . 

Bull , Bear , and Horse , Cuts , Curtols , and Longtailes . 

Concerning Bulls , sure no man is so Dull , 
Orignorant but that he knows a Bull : 
There are more sorts of Bulls then Bears by odds , 
For lupiter , ( the chief of Heathen gods ) 
Into a Bull , was pleased himself to Shape , 
When on Europa he committed Rape : 
And to a Bull , he turned his form divine 
When he ( on Ceres ) got fair Proserpina . 
Taurus ( the Bull ) is if you wisely Note 
A Sign Celestial for the Neck and Throat , 
If any doubt of it , let them but go 
And buy an Almanac , he 'll find it so . 
Pasipha Queen of Crect , ( a Royal Trull ) 
Was monstrously enamoured of a Bull : 
Betwixt whom the Monster Minotaur was got , 
As in th' eighth Book of Ovid it was wrote . 
But sure the stories truth is better framed , 
That says there was a man there ( Taurus named ) 
Who was beloved of the lustful Queen , 
And had with her too oft familiar been . 
't is said Semir amiss ( King Ninus Mother ) 
Did love a Bull , which is as true as tother , 
When as Just Minos , ( Creets victorious King ) 
The Megarans did to 's subjection bring , 
For which to jove a feast he solemnised , 
Wherein a hundred Bulls were sacrificed . 
The Brazen Bull of Ph●…llaris the Tyrant , 
Was such a Beast , as made the World admire on 't , 
In which men Roasted , were to death Tormented , 
And he first suffered in 't that it Invented . 
There dwells a man at Rome , that Bulls can make , 
To make seduced Kings , and Kingdom's Quake , 
Which Bulls ( though Led ) ( OH wondrous to behold 
Are quickly Metamorphosed into Gold. 
there 's the Philosopher's Admired Gem , 
( That long sought Jewel , worth a Diadem ) 
That hard , hard stone , which many men have sought 
And all they found , they found themselves worth naught ; 
The Castle Angelo , doth it Immure 
And there turns drossy Lead , to Gold most pure . 
There are Bulbeggers , which fright Children much , 
There are Bull Taverns , that men's Wits will touch ; 
And further ( for the Bull's Renown and fame ) 
We had an excellent Hangman of that name . 
Suppose a man 's matched with a beauteous Wife , 
Who with an ugly Dwarf defiles her life , 
To please her husband , she can fiddle , faddle , 
Whilst oftentimes a Monkey fits his Saddle , 
A man may say , that he most basely is 
Bulled with an Urchin , through his Wives Amiss . 
And now of late a bull 's a Common Creature , 
For men ( with nonsense ) do speak bull 's by Nature , 
From East to West , from North unto the South , 
bull 's air produced each hour , by Word of Mouth . 
Which every day are brought unto the Printer , 
Faster than Mother Puddings made her Winter . 
To the decay of many a Tallow Taper , 
And the consuming many a Ream of Paper , 
Soft Malt doth make sweet Fire , the Proverb says , 
Or else the Bull says so , you see which ways . 
If men would use to Leap before they Look , 
Bulls should not thus be thrust in many a Book , 
For though Care may be Killed with any Cat , 
You are not sure the Fire is in the Fat , 
Fools feign ( say they ) do often make fair Words , 
Yet some may Catch the Bush some beaten the Birds . 
But Better comes the seldom , I desire 
For My Kill set the Peck of Malt on fire . 
This any man may to himself apply 
That When the Larks fall , we may catch the sky . 
But if my Judgement do me not deceive 
I do esteem it better lack than leave . 
Though Brawn and Bacon breeds from Boars and Hogs , 
Yet hungry Puddings Will eat dirty Dogs . 
And sure a man had better bide away , 
then come to late , A Fair after the Day . 
If such a one speed well , it is as rare , 
As 't is To catch a Taber with a Hare . 
Which is as certain as blind Fortune's Wheel , 
Or hold fast Like a wet Tail by the Eel . 
Let every man a true decorum keep , 
Because 't is ill , A waking Dog to sleep . 
And 't is a Proverb throughout Christendom , 
That never One day was not built in Rome . 
If great men give me nothing , I say plain , 
I 'll hurl as much as that at them again . 
He that sticks down a Goose , and steals a Feather , 
Doth ( by that match ) not save , or profit neither . 
Along Corn for short harvest men may see , 
Like tedious woeing for a scornful she . 
't is folly for a man to fall at strife 
With Women , who hath nine Cats like a life ; 
For when the Gray-horse is the better Mare , 
A Blind man may be taken with a Hare . 
Spit in your hold , take better hands I say , 
We may be here to Morrow , and gone to day . 
The man that angry is without amends , 
't is fit ( without a cause he be made friends : ) 
For though men know their Cattles by their marks 
The greatest men are not the wisest Clerks . 
I purpose no man's credit to defame , 
But He that is balfe hanged , bathe no good name . 
Though all these Rhymes are scarcely worth a Token 
The Water to the Pot goes till 't is broken . 
Who cuts their fingers must abide them bleed . 
And when Geese preach , then let thr Fox take heed . 
't is hard to make me think , or late , or soon , 
That ever Green Cheese was made of the Moon . 
Nor is it fit ( as I do understand ) 
To put a mad Sword in a naked man's hand . 
A man may be a Drunkard or a Lecher , 
And yet mend as the Bolt doth mend the Fletcher . 
Or as the sour Ale mends the Summer , so 
A man ( mistook ) may make his friend , his foe . 
For all this , 't is not fitting to be booked , 
How once old Lincoln o'er the Devil looked . 
The Ancient Proverb still doth stand in force , 
Some better may look one then steal a Horse . 
It may be some will not these lines allow , 
But then they take a wrong Ear by the Sow . 
T was never yet a question in the Law , 
To stumble at a Block , leap o'er a straw . 
But any man of simple wit may find , 
That all this Corn hath shaken down no Wind . 
He that will wrangle for an Egg that 's Addle , 
Although he loose the Horse , may win the Saddle . 
And thus my Muse , most lowly elevated , 
These English Proverbs hath to Bulls tranflated . 
more worthy , and Remarkable observations of the Bull.  

AS is before Repeated in my lines , 
Taurus ( the Bull ) ' amongst the Celestial Signs ; 
So Taurus is a Mountain , whose high Top 
Doth seem to scale the Skies , and underprop 
The Bull that 's stellified ; That Hill doth bound 
All Asia on the North , about it round 
Is many a Kingdom and large Continent , 
Which shows the Bull is mighty in extent . 
A bull 's a Beast of State and Reputation , 
For he that eats Bull Beef , ( by approbation ) 
With eating such strong meat , I do assure ye 
't will puff him up , and make him swell with fury . 
If any man will but himself examine , 
he 'll find a Bull , a Buckler against famine , 
A bull 's a happy Creature , whence proceeds 
Most of the food , whereon most people feeds : 
He , and his sweet hearts ( most beloved kine ) 
Yields thousands where with all to sup and dine . 
The Calves , ( his sons and daughters ) plenteously 
With young and tender Veal , our wants supply . 
And from the Bulled Cow , ( in perpetual motion ) 
Milk flows amongst us daily like a Ocean , 
Sweet Cream , and Cockney Curds they yield each day , 
And ( for the poor ) Whig , Buttermilk and Whey , 
Cheese Raw , or Toasted , or to Bait Mousetraps , 
And Butter , to anoint the Flemings Chaps , 
The Milk-pans' do allow , like bounteous Pools , 
Means to make Cheesecakes , Custards , Flawns , and Fools , 
And at the Milk-pale , I have seen and heard 
Good Sullabubs , have been both made and marred . 
It is the bull 's Conjunction with the Cow 
( With blessed increase ) that doth these things allow . 
Without the Bull we should be so unstored , 
The Kingdom could not yield a Posset Curd . 
Know then by this ( good Reader ) what a Bull is , 
And he that will not know it , but a Gull is . 
The One ( the Bull's strong Eunuch son ) is Chief 
Of Mortal meats , ( man-feeding vigorous Beef ) 
And who so will amongst the Butchers seek 
In London , and in Westminster each week , 
With those two Cities Bounds , and Liberties , 
With Country Butchers , and the great supplies 
That Market folks do to those parts Impart 
( The Load of many a Horse , and many a Cart ) 
The Beefs thus slain , and eaten would appear 
Above 3000 , each week through the year . 
Chines , Sirloins , Flanks , Clods , Legs , doth fill us full , 
Brisket and Marrowbones comes from the Bull ; 
A Neats-tongue dried is dear , a Dish of State , 
At Stillyard any man may know the Rate . 
With many more things which I 'll not Recite , 
't would trouble men to Read , and I to write . 
Thus do the Butchers Thrive , the Graziers Gain , 
The Cooks and Victuallers , do their states maintain , 
Souse-wives grow plump and fat , and 't is because 
Their sale is quick for Muggets Paunches , Maws , 
Tripes , Reads , Neatsfeets , Cowheels , & Chitterlings , 
Whilst many thousands feed on Bag-puddings . 
Note but how well the Cheese-mongers do live , 
And what a useful gainful Trade they drive : 
Yet in their shops there is true Justice found 
The poor man's peney , and the rich man's pound 
Shall have true , weightaccordiag to proportion , 
Without conivence , falsehood , or extortion . 
Were there no Bulls , Chandler's were beggared quite 
Nor could they sell our darkness any light 
At any price of Reason , than our Guise 
Were soon to go to Bed , and late to Rise . 
Thus is the Bull , and the Bulls Breed descected 
In Flesh and Entrales ; now my Quil's erected 
( In what is written before I have not Lyde ) 
And now I 'll siourish o'er the Horns and Hide . 
The Tanner's wealth increaseth day and Night , 
Till at the last his Son is dubbed a Knight : 
And Daughters should be ( could they purchase pride ) 
With Portions , and proportions Ladyfi'de . 
The Currier also needs not Curry favour , 
For though his Trade smell , somethidg hath some savour . 
Nor would men be so mad as to prefer 
Their sons bound prentice to a Shoemaker ; 
But that their future hopes do them persuade , 
It is no Barefooted and Bootless Trade . 
Nor will it ever lack , or live in scorn , 
Till all our children without feet are born ; 
For ( more than any Trade ) he 'll sing and play , 
Whilst every Monday is his Holiday . 
And when a Shoemaker falls to decay , 
he 'll be a Cobbler new , and mend that way : 
But there 's a monstrous Trade , of late sprung forth , 
Doth spoil more Leather than their skins are worth , 
The best Hides they devour , and Gurmundize , 
Which makes the worst in price too high to Rise ; 
With them the World doth bravely run on Wheels , 
Whilst poor men pinch and pay , quite out at heels . 
But hold , what vessel have I set a Broach , 
What is muse got jolting in a Coach ? 
Out with a vengeance , walk on foot I p●… 
And to the Bull again direct your way . 
Now for the excellent Admired Horn 
more profitable than the Unicorn . 
For Hoops , for Spectacles , for Combs to dress yo●… 
( Which when they come so near your heads , pray 
And 't is a Bull I have heard often said ( bless you ) 
Reach me the Iron Shooing Horn good Maid . 
And when the Hunted Stag bids life farewell , 
The Huntsman's Horn doth bravely Ring his Knell , 
Which was the Bull-calves , or the Buls-horns once 
Before the Gelder reft him of his stones . 
Thus from the Bull , and the Bulls Breed you see , 
A world of people still maintained be ; 
He finds flesh , Boötes , Shoes , Lights , and stands in stead 
And great importance to afford us Bread. 
The Bulls dear son ( the Ox ) with daily toil , 
Wears out himself with ploughing and turmoil , 
And all to find us bread , and when he dies , 
His Flesh , Hyde , Horns and all , our wants supplies . 
So much for Bulls now in particular , 
For our Bear-garden Bull , a Bull of war , 
A stout , a valiant , and a Head-strong-beast , 
Which did not fight this 18 Months at least ; 
A Beast of mighty policy and power , 
That at his Dog foes will look Grim , and Lower , 
he 'll knit the Brow with terror , in such sort , 
That when he chafes most , than he makes most sport ; 
At push of Pike , he with his head will play , 
And with his feet spurn injuries away ; 
he 'll turn and wind as nimble as an Eel , 
And kick , and scorns abuses with his Heel ; 
he 'll fling and throw , he 'll bravely toss & turn , 
he 'll hurl and heave , and dangerously spurn , 
Note but his valour , when he 's at the stake , 
How he prepares himself the Dog to take : 
His f●…eet fixed fast , disdaining once to stir , 
His wary eye upon the angry Cur. 
Whilst politicly with his Head he weaves , 
And with advantage up his foe he heaves , 
With such a force , that often with the fall 
he 's dead , or lamed , or hath no power to sprawl . 
Thus hath our Bull fought in his own defence , 
And purchased ( for his Master ( Crowns and pence . 
And for that purpose may do so again , 
( I wish I had the knowledge to know when ) 
For since the time a Bull a Dog could toss , 
Our Bear-garden had never such a loss : 
But le 's not lay the fault upon the Times , 
But let us blame ourselves , and cease our Crimes . 
Bulls , Mistakes , Clenches , Long and short Tales . 

A Tale of a Bull that was bought instead of a Cow . 

IT was well known to many ancient people to this day , that in the City of Gloucester , without the South Gate , in the Parish of Saint Ewins , ( where myself was born ) there dwelled a Schoolmaster , who was called Master Greene , to whom I with many more went to School , for some small learning beyond the Hornbook ; This Master Greene did love new milk so well , that because he would be sure to have it new , he would buy a Cow of his own , and to that purpose went to the Beast Market , but by the way having met with some friends , and a Cup or two of Sack , it had so wrought in the old man's pate , that when he came to the Beast-market , his eyes so dazzled and doted on a fair Bull , that he supposed his Cod to be a goodly Cows Udder ; so he ( neither naming Cow or Bull ) demanded the price of the Beast , till at the last the Bull was bought and sold , and driven home to a stable of Master Green's , who being glad of his good bargain , told his wife of it ; and when the Evening milking time was come , Master Greene , with his Wife and Maid , went to the Stable , where the Wench kneeling down to milk , and taking the Bull by the Cod , she said she could find never a Teat , whereat the man and woman were amazed ; and the Bull ( for his own ease ) instead of milk , pissed in the Pail , for the which Master Greene was ever mocked and flouted , and myself ( with my Fellow Scholars ) to show our acute forwardness in Rhyme , and out of the thallownesse of our deep judgements , composed this poetical Enco nium . 

Our Master Greene , was overseen , 
In buying of a Bull ; 
For when the Maid , did mean to milk , 
He pissed the Pail half full - probatum . 
Our Schoolmaster did take these Verses so kindly , that having found out the grave Authors of them ; he ( to express , or declare his love to Poetry ) gave us such speedy , present , and yet backward sure payment , that we danced at it , and were so merry , that our cheeks ran down with water . 

Another Tale of a Town Bull.  

A Parson of a Country Village ( for the increase of Town Calves ) kept a lusty Bull , which served for the use of the whole Parish ; which Bull , was fallen so poor and lean , that his bones might have been almost told as they were ready to start out of his skin , and the cold Winter being come , the miserable Parson put the Bull to graze on the bare ground in in the Churchyard , ( for there was little or no Grass ) and there was also a Horse of the Parsons as lean as the Bull , which fed ( or fasted ) in the said Churchyard . These poor Beasts being almost starved with hunger and cold , and the hardness of their Master's heart , it fortuned that in a very darkenight , there arose a very violent Tempest of wind and rain , so that the Bull for succour and shelter from the weather , went into the Church porch , and there lay down and died with cold and famine . The Horse likewise ( having the like purpose to get out of the storm ) went to the Church-porch , and by reason it was so dark , he stumbled over the dead Bull , and ran his head against the Church door , which was so old and broken that with the force of the Horses fall , it flew open and let the Horse into the Church , who recovering his legs , and walking up and down , musing where he was , at the last he came to the Bell Ropes , which the Country people that used to Ring , had ( for the ease of their hands ) made wispes , or wads of Hay fast round about the hand-fasts or handles of the Ropes ; the which Hay , the Horse smelling out , he being hungry , laid lips to , and pulled so hard at the Hay , that the Rope gave warning to the Bell , and the Bell to the Clapper , that it Rang now and then a stroke or twain , which the Parson hearing , he marvelled much what the matter should be , or who should jangle the Bells so confusedly at that time of the night , in the mean space the Horse goes from Rope to Rope , ( as he could find them in the dark ) which caused every Bell to toll in an untuned Diapason : At last the Parson arose , and called up the Clerk , and some neighbours , and lighted their Lanterns ( which were the lighter and the heavier for their Candles ) so they came amazedly and fearfully to the Churchyard , and there they found the Bull dead in the Church-porch , and the Horse in the Belfry ringing his Knell . Although there be no impossibility in this Tale , yet I am not guilty of the belief of it , nor am I bound to prove it . 

Bulls with short Tales . 

A Taxation , or levy , or payment was laid upon a Country Village , for the repairing or mending of a bad highway , against the which collection the people grumbled and murmured very much ; So that one of the most grave and wise of he Parish , said to the Officers that gathered the money , I tell you friends , if these kind of Bursements and elections be laid thus tolerably upon us ; ' it 's enough to make folks mad , and rise in devotion . 

A Bull.  

A Fellow going from London towards Rumford in Essex , before he came at Ilford , ( some what near the highway ) he saw the carcases of three murderers hanged in Chains , and at his return home being demanded what news he had brought out of the country ; Truly ( quoth he ) I have no great news to tell you , but I saw a rare sight , which was , I saw three men hanged in giblets . 

A clear sighted Bull.  

One met a man in the street , taking acquaintance of him thus , Sir , I am a stranger , and am mistaken in you , for you are not the Gentleman that I took you for , but I pray you pardon me , for I am sure I have seen you by sight . 

Mistakes . 

Some neighbours being at hot contention , for a matter of little or nothing : the business was brought before a justice , who said unto them , My good neighbours , I do wish you to agree , for the proverb says truly , The Law is costly ; therefore I would have you to put the Controversy to me , and I will set all differences even betwixt you ; Truly Sir , said one , I do humbly thank your worship , the matter concerns my wife , and I put her Case to your Worship withal my heart ; in truth quoth another , I am contented , I am willing to defer the matter to your Worship's discredit . 

A Bull of authority . 

A Major of a Country Town , being sat with the rest of his brethren , in the Town-house began to make a grave Oration , beginning as followeth . brethren , friends , and neighbours , I am in good hope that our proceedings will be to a good purpose , because we are so happily and lovingly separated together amongst ourselves . 

A she Bull.  

A Young She Citizen born , was newly married , having never in her life been a Traveller further than she could hear the sound of Bow-bell . Her Husband ( on a time ) went with her into the Country a Airing , whereas they were going thorough a meadow , there was a Tree , upon one of the Boughs whereof a Mole-catcher had hanged up many Moles or Wants which he had taken , which the young woman espying , she called to her husband , saying , OH what a solitary life it is to live in the City , where no such fine things do grow as are here in the Country , for look you Husb and here is a Black-pudding Tree . 

A Roguish Flash . 

A Poor man was going to the Market ( on a Saturday ) to buy Beef , he having a Roguish boy to his son , the boy asked him whether he was going ; he answered , I am going to the Butchers . OH father ( said the boy ) the Butchers are crafty fellows , and if you take not heed , they will cousin you , therefore I advice you to take the Dog with you , for two heads are better than one . 

A Flash . 

A Neat Gentleman , with an Ash colour , or Silver coloured pair of silk Stockings , going hastily through the gate that leads into the Palace at Westminster , suddenly , a woman ( or maid ) did chance to cast out a dish or pot of newmade warm water , some tale whereof lighted in the Gentleman's shoes , and withal besparkled his silk Stockings ; at which , very angrily he said , thou filthy base sluttish Quean , Canst thou not see , but throw thy stinking piss into my shoes and hose ? To whom she answered , Sir , I am sorry that I have done you any wrong , but yet you have done me a great deal more injury than I have done to you , for I would have you know , that I am no such Slut as you called me , neither do I keep piss till it stinks , but I always throw it away fresh and fresh as I make it . 

A Bull.  

Two Gentlemen passing up the River of Thames , with a pair of Oars from London-bridge towards Westminster , one of the Gentlemen did take somewhat in distaste , that one of the Watermen had either said or done to him ; the Waterman did entreat him not to be angry , and said , he did mean no harm , and was sorry that a Gentleman should be angry for nothing ; but the more the one did entreat , the more furious the other was , insomuch that he said to the Waterman , Sirrah , hold your prating , for I vow as I am a Gentleman , if I do rise and come to thee , I will knock thy head and the wall together . 

A Clench . 

AN old man had sat tippling so long at the Alehouse , that he had almost gotten a Loaf out of the Brewer's Basket , and having an unhappy Boy to his son , who came for him to get him home , to whom the old man said , Sirrah Boy have a care of me , and lead me well , for my head is very light ; to whom the Boy answered , Father , it is long of your eyes that your head is light , for if they were out , your head would be in the dark . 

A Bull.  

A Gentleman riding in the Country , attended with one Servingman , they met a fellow that was a stride upon a Cow , the Servingman said , Master behold , yonder is a strange sight . What is it said the Gentleman ? why sir ( said his man ) look you sir , there is one Rides on Horseback upon a Cow ; that 's a great Bull , said the Gentleman ; nay sir , said his man , it is no Bull , I know it is a Cow by his Teats . 

A Mistake . 

One that was a Goodfellow upon the Score so far , that many black posts did proclaim his credit in sundry Taverns , Ale houses , and Tobacco shops , Chalk was the Ink , to remember what Ch●…n●…e he owed for his Drink . It happened , that his brain being intoxicated with late tippling in a frosty Winter's night , and his way being over a little Close from the Alehouse to his own house , he perceiving the Grass all milk-white with the hoary frost ; at which sight he merrily said to one that went with him , Now I see that all the world is Chalked , and my Scores will never be seen for me to pay them . 

A Bull.  

Two men in a hot Summer Evening , stripped themselves out of their clothes , to swim or wash themselves in the Thames , or some other Brook or River ; and having ( as they thought ) stayed overlong in the water , one of them said , Let us now go a Shore , and put on our clothes , for it is time to go home . The other answered , do you go on shore first , I will but unlose a point , and come to you presently . 

A short Bull.  

One said , that the best Bull-dog that ever he saw play at the Bear , was a Brinded Bitch . 

A City Bull.  

Two Citizens , having been making merry in Middlesex , came riding homewards through a Village called Acton ( which is six miles from London ) and perceiving a fair house , with the doors and windows shut , one of them said , it was great pity that such a handsome building should want an inhabitant ; to whom the other answered , you say true brother , it is pity , but if I had this house in London , it should not stand empty here . 

A Curtoll Bull.  

One said that he was so soused and dashed with a shower of Rain , that he had never a dry thread wet about him . 

A pretty Bull.  

One was persuaded to go into the water and wash himself , he answered that it was dangerous , and that he did never mean to go into any River , or other water , before he had first learned to swim perfectly . 

A Mistake . 

A Man departed from his house , and dwelling privately , without taking leave of any body , and travelled , so that it was not known to any what was become of him , at last there was a supposition that he was killed in a quarrel by a mad fellow that behaved himself so well , that few honest folks loved him . This fellow was apprehended , and arraigned at the Assizes for suspicion of the fact , and by some strong presumptions appeared so guilty , that he was thought fit to be hanged , and after a years imprisonment , he went abroad now and then ( with the leave of the jailor ) where by chance he met the man that was supposed to be slain by him ; whereupon the prisoner got his liberty : who coming among his old Consorts , he said , My Masters , I have endured a great deal of trouble about kill of a Rascal , and nothing grieves me so much , as that I met the Rogue sixteen months after in Aylsbury Market . 

A Bull.  

One said that the High Sheriff of Yorkshire did entertain the judges in a brave and commendable fashion , with one hundred and twenty men , all in one saire Livery of Grey Marble . 

Of a Friar . 

A Preaching Friar once reprooved his Auditors for sleeping at his Sermons , but yet ( said he ) I pray you do not refrain coming to Church though you do sleep , for God Almighty may chance to take some of you napping . 

Of a Sailor and his Wife . 

A Sailor was absent on a Voyage three years , in the mean space his Wife had a Boy , twenty months old , to entertain him withal at his return : the Sailor said , Wife , whose child is this : marry husband ( quoth she ) it is mine , and God sent it me in your absence . To which the man replied , I will keep this child , because God sent him , but if God send me any more on that fashion , he shall keep them himself . 

A witty Tale of a new married man  

A Young fellow being newly married , having been from home , came suddenly into his house , and found his Wife at foul play with another man : the poor young Cuckold ran presently and told his wife's father all the business , who replied thus ; Son , I married her mother , and I tell thee plain that thy wife seems to be her daughter in conditions as well as feature , for I have taken her mother many times in that manner , and no warning would serve her , till in the end age made her leave it , and so will thy wife do when she is old and past it . 

A Tale of three Gossips , that would know , Whereabouts a Cuckold's horns do grow . 

Three Gossips in a Tavern , chatting over a Pint of Sherry , said one of them , I muse whereabouts a Cuckold's horns grow ; quoth the second , I think they do grow in the pole , or nape of the neck ; verily , quoth the third , I do think it to be true , for my Husband's bands are always worn out behind . 

Of a Whore.  

One called a Whore lazy jade , content yourself , quoth another , as lazy as she seems , she is able to carry a man quick to the Devil . 

Of Cuckolds . 

A Company of neighbours that dwelled all in a row , in one side of a street ; one of them said , Let us be merry , for it is reported that we are all Cuckolds that dwell on our side of the street ( except one ) one of the women sat musing , to whom her husband said ; ( wife ) what all a mort , why art thou so sad ? no , quoth she , I am not sad , but I am studying which of our neighbours it is that is not a Cuckold . 

A Clench . 

A Gentleman being in a house of iniquity , or Cousin-german to a Bawdy house , the room being very dark , he called aloud for a light Huswife ; to whom a Wench made answer , I come Incontinent . 

He calls for light , she under stood him right , 
For she was vanity which made her light : 
She said she would incontinent attend , 
To make her Continent , she needs to mend . 
A Mistake . 

Two Maids ( or servants ) dwelling in a house together , the one of them having occasion to use a Steel , smoothing Iron , or some such kind of Laundry Instrument , and having sought it , and not finding it , said to her fellow , thou dost mislay every thing in the house , and art so busy a baggage that thou canst let nothing stand ; to which the other answered , and you are so way ward and tasty , that a little thing trouble's you , and puts you in a great anger . 

A Gentlewoman's answer to a Captain . 

IN a time of Peace , a Captain being in company , where after dinner there was dancing , with whom a Gentlewoman was desirous to dance , the Captain said , he was made to fight , and not to dance : to whom she answered , that it were good that he were oiled and hanged up in an Armoury , till there were occasion to use him . 

Of a Huffing Gallant 

One asked a Huffing Gallant , why he had not a Lookingglass in his Chamber , he answered , he durst not , because he was often angry , and then he looked so terribly , that he was fearful to look upon himself . 

Of a fellow that was whipped . 

There was a fellow that ( not for his goodness ) was whipped at a Carts-tayle ; and in his execution he drew backward , to whom a Gentleman ( in pity ) said , Fellow , do not draw back , but press forward , and thy execution and pains will be the sooner passed and done ; to whom the Rogue answered , It is my turn now , when thou art whipped , do thou go as thou wilt , and now I will go as I please . 

Believe it if you list . 

One said , that he had travailed so far that he had laid his hand upon the hole where the wind came forth : a second said , that he had been at the farthest edge of the world , and driven a nail quite thorough it : the third replied , that he had been further , for he was then on the other side of the world , and clenched that nail . 

Of a Pope . 

There was a Pope , who being dead , it is said that he came to heaven gate and knocked ; Saint Peter ( being within the Gate ) asked who was there : The Pope answered , Brother , it is I , I am the last Pope deceased ; Saint Peter said , if thou be the Pope , why dost thou knock , thou having the Keys , mayest unlock the gate and enter ? The Pope replied , saying , that his predecessors had the Keys , but since their time the Wards were altered . 

A Tale betwixt a Miser and a poor Man  

A Rich Miser , being reviled by a poor man , whom he had oppressed ; the rich man said , thou Dog , leave thy barking : the poor man answered , that he had one quality of a good dog , which was , to bark when he saw a Thief . 

An unhappy answer of a Boy to his father playing at Dice . 

A Man being deeply in play at Dice , having lost much money , his son ( a little lad ) being by him , wept ; quoth the father , Boy , why dost thou weep ? the Boy answered , that he had read that Alexander the Great , wept when he heard that his ●…her ( King Philip ) had conquered many Cities , Towns , and Territories , fearing that he would leave him nothing ro win ; and I weep the contrary way ( quoth the boy ) for I fear that my Father will leave me nothing to lose . 

Of one that oppressed the Poor . 

AN Oppressor having felled all the trees in a Forest , which for a long time had been the relief of many poor people , said , that it was as good as a Comedy to him to see the trees fall ; to whom a poor man said , I hope , as thou makest a Comedy of our miseries , that three of those trees may be reserved to finish a Tragedy for thee and thy children . 

Of one that forgot his old acquaintance . 

One lamented his friends hard fortune , that being raised to a place of honour , was grown senseless , forgetting all his old familiar acquaintance , and so far from knowing any man , that he knew not himself . 

Of Instruments and Engines . 

The Plough surpasseth the Pike , the Harrow excelleth the Halberd , the Coulter exceeds the Cuttleax , the Goad 〈◊〉 better than the Gun ; for the one 〈◊〉 are the Instruments of life and profit , and the other are the Engines of death , and all kinds of calamities . 

Either shame , or hunger . 

A Poor man is in two extremes : first , if he ask , he dies with shame ; secondly , if he ask not , he dies with hunger . 

An Officers excuse . 

One being in Office , was reproved for negligence ; his excuse was , that it was his best policy to be idle : for if he should do ill , he should displease God , and if he should do well , he should offend men : 〈◊〉 whom one answered , you ought to do ●…our duty , for in well doing you shall ●●ease God , and in ill doing you shall ●…lease men . 

How women take pleasure to be sued unto . 

Women take great pleasure to be to be sued to , though they never mean to grant . 

Of Suits in Law.  

One said that Suitors in Law were mortal , and their sure immortal and that there is more profit in a quick denial , then in a long dispatch . 

Of Rome . 

A Traveller was talking what a good City Rome was , to whom one of the company said , that all Rome was not Italy for we had too much Rome in England . 

Irish wood an enemy to Caterpillars . 

A Country Fellow came into Westminster Hall , where one told him that the roof of it was made of Irish wood , and that the nature of it was such , that no Spider would come near it , and he said ( further ) that in Ireland , no Toad , Snake , or Caterpillar can live , but that the Earth , or the Trees will destroy them : Ah ( quoth the Country man ) I wish with all my heart that the Benches , Bars and Flooring were all made of such earth and wood , and that all Coaches , Barges , and Wherries , were made of Irish Oak , that all our English Caterpillars might be destroyed . 

Thomas Coriat's complaint of john Taylor . 

Master Thomas Coriat ( on a time ) complained against me to King james , desiring His Majesty that he would cause some heavy punishment to be inflicted upon me , for abusing him in writing ( as he said I had ) to whom the King replied , that when the Lords of His Honourable Privy Council had leisure , and nothing else to do , than they should hear and determine the differences betwixt Master Coriat the Scholar , and john Taylor the Sculler : which answer of the King was very acceptable to Master Coriat . Whereupon I made this following Petition to the King.  

TO THE KING'S MOST Excellent Majesty . 

The humble Petition of john Taylor , your Majesty's poor Water-poet . 

Shows , 

Most mighty Monarch of this famous I 'll , 
( Upon the knees of my submissive mind ) 
I beg thou wilt be graciously inclined , 
To read these lines my rustic Pen compile : 
Know ( Royal Sir ( Tom Coriat works the wile , 
Your high displeasure on my head to bring ; 
And well I wot , the sot , his words can file , 
In hope my fortunes headlong down to fling . 
The King , whose Wisdom through the world did ring , 
Did hear the cause of two offending Harlots ; 
So , I beseech thee ( Great ) great Britain's King , 
To do the like for two contending Varlets . 
A brace of Knaves your Majesty implores , 
To hear their suits as Solomon heard Whores , 
A Ribble-rabble of Gossips . 

The space of a fortnight from the Bear-baiting , two hours and a half from the Windmill , about four of the Clock in the forenoon , a little after supper in the morning , between old mother Maudlin , of the Parish of Idiots , Plaintiff , of the one party , and Gossip Gitlian , of Gossip's Hall , in the Parish of Twattlebourgh , of the other party , Defendant . A maver in Controversy depending of issues , whereupon it was consulted by the right reverend Matron , Madam Isabel , that Katherine should go no more a Maying with Susan in the cool of the Evening before sunrising , whereupon Lister took the matter snuff , and swore by the cross of Audr●… Bugle-bow that jone should jog to 〈…〉 house to borrow her poking stick : upon this Philiday starts up very jeparately , and commands Margot to make haste to Rache 〈…〉 house , and borrow a dozen of left handed spoons : now old Sibyl all this while sat mumping like a Gib-cat , and on the sudden she starts up , and thrusts Charity out of doors , to take up her lodging where she could get it ; Doll being much offended to see Margot invited to Prec●●●aes' wedding , by no means could suffer Abigail to break her fa●…t before she got Victuals ; presently Beatrice whispers Sicily in the care foftly , that all the company heard it , and bade her tell Alice , that unless she took heed , the pot would run over , and the fat lie in the fire ; at this Mary clapped her hands together , and entreats Blanch to tell her Cousin Edith , how she should say that Luce should say , that Elizabeth should do the thihg she wots of . Amy hearing all this with a judicial understanding capacity , at last tells Parnell , that her daughter Rebecka was gone to lie at her Aunt Christians house in Shooing-horn Alley . Now in the heat of all this business , Barbara tells Frances how there is good Ale at the Labour-in-vaine : the matter being brought to this pass , Winifrid says that her god-daughter Grace , is newly brought , ( God bless the child ) and that Constance the Comfit-maker's wife , at the sign of the Spider's leg , must be Gossip ; out alas says Temperance , what have I forgot , I should have been an hour agone at Prudences the Laundress , to have taken measure of a pair of Cuffs for her Maid Dorcas : Now to conclude the business , Martha protests that she will never trust Thomasin again while she life's , because she promised to meet her at Pimlico , and bring her neighbour Bethya with her , and came not . Nevertheless Faith went to mother Redcaps , & by the way metwith joyce , who very kindly batled her penny w th' her at a fat Pig. Well quoth Sara , all this wind shakes no corn , and I should have been a starching Mistress Mercies Lawn Apron , and like a good Huswife I am prating here . Neighbours and friends , quoth Arbella , seeing the matter draws toward so good a conclusion , let 's e'en have the t'other Pint before we go ; truly says jane , the motion is not to be misliked , what say you Gossip Ursula truly says Ellen , I would go with you with all my heart , but I promised to meet Lydya at a Lector that we might take a neighbourly nap together . Upon this rose a hurly burly , that the whole assembly dispersed themselves diverse ways , some one way , some another , and in conclusion , the business was all wisely ended as it was begun . 

A Bear . 

Bear and forbear , I now speak of the Bear , 
And therefore ( Reader ) give , or lend an Eare.  
First therefore , in much briefenesse I am rendering 
Where , and how Bears have breeding and engendering , 
Some are Ossean , some are Callidonian , 
Some Aeremanthian Bears , and some Aemonian , 
Some rugged Russians , some Sunburnt Numidians , Amphibians ) 
And last , the white swimming Bears , 
Some do affirm a Bear to be a creature , 
Whelped like a lump , with neither shape or feature , 
Until the Dam doth lick it into fashion , 
And makes the lamp a Bear in transformation . 
As Tailors with their precious wisdom's Talons , 
Do lick , and Metamorphose Gulls to Gallantt . 
Whereby a fashion oft is shaped ( by chance ) 
Out of an ill-bread lump of ignorance . 
But for the Bear he keeps his shape most constant , 
The Tailor ( and his creatures ) change each instant , 
The Bear keeps still , the fashion he brought hither , 
The gallant gull 's inconstant , like Wether . 
A bear 's a temperate Beast , most free from riot , 
A prudent Schoolmaster , of sparing diet , 
he 'll live four months from every kind of meat , 
By sucking of his left foot , like a Teat . 
Which is an abstinence that doth require , 
more than the fast of a Carthusisian Friar , 
no Capuchin , or immured Anchorite , 
Did never ( so much ) curb his Appetite . 
And as Bears suffer hunger , I am sure , 
no beast created , doth more cold endure : 
When fridged Boreas' blustering blasts do blow , 
Midst Rocks , of hoary Ice , and hills of Snow , 
The worst of Winter's sharp extremity , 
The hardy Bear , abides most constantly . 
And in hot Africa , and the Libyan Coast , 
Where Phoebus' flames doth seem the world to Roast : 
Where Negro Moores , are dried and blackly died , 
That heat ( excessive ) there the Bear doth bide . 
So that with hunger , heat , and pinching cold , 
The Bear's extremities are manifold . 
Being grown unto Maturity and strength , 
And having hither past the seas , at length , 
At Bear-garden , ( a sweet Ro●…untious Golledge ) 
he 's taught the Rudiments of Art and knowledge . 
There doth he learn to dance , and ( gravely grumbling ) 
To fight & to be Active ( bravely tumbling ) 
To practise wards , and postures , to and from , 
To guard himself , and to offend his foe ; 
Upon his hind feet , Tipto stiff to stand , 
And cuff a Dog off with his foot-like hand ; 
And afterwards ( for recreations sake ) 
Practise to run the Ring about the stake . 
Whilst shouts , and Mastiffs mouths do fill the sky 
That sure Actaeon never had such a cry . 
Thus Bears do please the hearing and the sight , 
And sure their scent will any man invite : 
For whosoer'e spends most , shall find this favour , 
That by the Bears and Dogs , he 's made a savour . 
And as a Commonwealth , ( oft by Ill-willers ; ) 
Is vexed by prowling knaves , and Caterpillars , 
So is a Bear ( which is a quiet Beast ) 
By Curs and Mongrels , oftentimes oppressed . 
And tied to what he doth he 's bound to see , 
The best and worst of all their cruelty . 
And for men's monies , what shift ere they make for 't , 
What ere is laid or paid , the bear 's at stake for 't . 
Though he be hardly drawn to 't , against his will , 
he 's bound to see and bear , and bide much ill ; 
Besides the baiting of a Bear is rare , 
Unlike the baiting of a Horse or Mare : 
The Horse hath Provender , and Hey for Bait , 
And doth in peace and quiet eat his meat ; 
When as the Bear , is Tugged , Lugged , Bitten & Beaten 
And eats no Bait , but likely to be Eaten . 
A Bear is like a Watchman by his coat , 
He wears a Rugge-gowne always ( if you note , ) 
And ( like a Watchman ) oft a Bear will be 
As mannerly , and watch as well as he . 
And as a grumbling Officer may wear 
A Collor and a Chain , so doth a Bear . 
't is written by Authors ( Philosophical ) 
How that a Bear is useful , Physical , 
For Agues , and hot Fevers , take his hair , 
His Grease ( or Lard ) will aching Limbs repair : 
His Marrow strengthens , ( if you do anoint ) 
Shrunk Sinews , Nerves , or an enfeebled joint , 
The oil boiled from his feet will operate 
The Gowtes tormenting much to mitigate , 
And when man 's in consumption , like to pine , 
The bears pith's good , that grows amid his Chine . 
A Bear's skin Tanned i t'h hair , is for a bed 
Better than Blanket , Rugg , or Coverled . 
A Bear's Teeth , Painters in high price do hold , 
To make them Instruments to gilled with gold , 
And for his Fur it is such excellent stuff , 
That Many a Lady wears it in a Muff ; 
Dry a Bear's Liver , and to Powder beaten it , 
And let a Maid of forty five years eat it ; 
Although a thousand false Knaves would deceive her 
Yet she shall keep her Maidenhead for ever . 
Thus having showed of Bears their sundry breeding 
Their forms , their admirable sparing feeding : 
Their patience , courage , temperance , sortitude , 
And many virtues that have them endued , 
For fear I should men's patience much offend , 
I 'll give one short touch more and make an end . 
then for the further honour of the Bears , 
They ( with the stars ) are mounted in their Spheres : 
There Vrsa Major in the firmament , 
Is stellifide , a glorious ornament , 
And there , the little Bear , ( a star more finer ) 
Is called Artophilax , or Vrsa Minor , 
And who so reads the second part of Ovid , 
There shall they find ( what here is written ) approved . 
Now once again , pray lend your eyes and ears , 
I 'll write of baiting of the Bulls and Bears . 
It is a Game so ancient , that I wot 
Records can scarce show when we usde it not . 
Except now , in these sad infectious times , 
That heaven's just hand doth plague us for our crimes , 
The Game is by authority suppressed : 
And Bears , and Bulls , and Dogs , have too much rest , 
Through want of baiting grown to such a strain , 
( Hard to be tamed , or brought in frame again ) 
Almost all mad for want of exercise , 
Filling the Air with roaring and with cries , 
That those who near the Bear-garden are dwelling 
Do hear such bellowing bawling , yawling , yelling , 
As if Hell were broke loose , or ( truth to speak ) 
The Devils at football were or Barleybreak . 
there 's three courageous Bulls , as ever played , 
Twenty good Bears , as ere to stake was taid , 
And seventy Mastiffs of such Breed and Races , 
That from fierce Lions will not turn their faces ; 
A male and female Ape ( kind Jack and Jugge ) 
Who with sweet compliment do kiss and hug , 
And lastly there is Jack an Apes his Horse , 
A Beast of fiery fortitude and force . 
As for the Game I boldly dare relate , 
't is not for Boys , or fools effeminate , 
For whosoe'er comes thither , most and least , 
May see and learn some courage from a Beast : 
And 't is not only a base Rabble Crew , 
That thither comes , It may be proved true , 
That to the Bear-garden comes now and than , 
Some Gamesters worth ten thousand pounds a man 
For rough behaviour that 's no great disgrace , 
there 's more hors-play used at each dear hors-race , 
more heads , or legs , or necks , are broke each day , 
At Cards , dice , Tables , Bowls , or foot-ball-play . 
The Game hath been maintained , and will , we hope 
Be so again ( now favour gives it scope ) 
For Kings , for Princes , for Ambassadors , 
Both for our Countreym●…n , and foreigners . 
Which hath been held , a Royalty and Game , 
And ( though eclipsed ) will be again the same . 
But now ( to make an end ) must be explained , 
How it the name of Paris-garden ganed : 
The name of it was from a Royal Boy , 
( Brave Illion's firebrand , wrack and sack of Troy ) 
Paris ( King Priam's son ) a sucking child , 
Was thrown away into the woods so wild , 
There that young Prince was cast to live or perish , 
And there a Bear with suck , the babe did cherish ; 
And as a rare memorial of the same , 
From Paris , Paris-garden hath the name . 
Those that will not believe it , let them go 
To France , in Paris , they may find it so , 
Or if not there , let them look narrowly , 
In Matthew Paris famous History . 
And that we have obtained again the Game , 
Our Paris-garden Flag proclaims the same . 
Our Bears , and Bulls , and Dogs , in former state , 
The streets of London do perambulate , 
And honest sport , and lawful merriment , 
Shall thrice a week be showed , to give content . 
here follows the Names of the Bulls and Bears at the Bear-garden now . 

The Bulls are , 

1 Goldilocks . 
2 Emperor . 
3 Dash.  
4 juggler . 
The Bears are , 

1 Ned of Canterbury . 
2 George of Cambridge . 
3 Don john . 
4 Ben Hunt.  
5 Nan Stiles . 
6 Beef of Ipswich . 
7 Robin Hood . 
8 Blind Robin . 
9 judith of Cambridge . 
10 Bess Hill.  
11 Kate of Kent . 
12 Rose of Bedlam . 
13 Nan Talbot . 
14 Mall Cutpurse . 
15 Nell of Holland . 
two white Bears . 

16 Mad Bess 
17 Will Tookey 

18 Bess Runner . 
19 Tom Dogged . 
If any will have one of these , or some , Or all , let them to our Bear-garden come : These beasts are for their service bound , & 〈◊〉 And there their pleasures may be satisfied . 

Upon the goodness of a worthiness of Horses , with a merry touch of the Bear-garden Palfrey , or Jacke-an-apes his Horse . 

MY Muse is Mounted betwixt the soaring wings 
Of Pegasus , who bravely fly's and flings 
Through air , through clouds , through sunshine , & descries 
Each earthly Regions Rare Varieties . 
The numbers infinite , of sundry creatures , 
Their strange diversity in forms and Natures , 
And as in gliding flight , I swiftly soar 
O'er Sunburnt Africa , and the Libyan shore , 
There ( with much pleasure ) I did cast mine eye 
Upon the wellmade Horse of Barbary , 
And crossing o'er the Mediterran Maine , 
I saw the prancing Jennet of proud Spain , 
strait the Iberian fume of Aristippus , 
●…urled us to Greece , and there I viewed their Hippos . 
then back o'er Italy amain we flew , 
Whereas their fierce Cavallo I did view , 
In Naples I the Courser brave espied , 
Thence , we o'er Almain , and low Belgia glide , 
There my Muse saw the bounding Palfrey Prancen , 
From thence my winged horse bore me over France 
There foaming fiery hot the gallant Gaul , 
Did dance Corantoes with his Frenth Chevall . 
then o'er Hibernia , we took speedy flight , 
And there the Irish Hobby pleased my sight , 
then my Pegasian wings began to flag , 
I viewed the English Steed , and Scottish Nag . 
And as the heat of blood my Bcast inflames 
He kicked and threw me headlong into Thames , 
And as I fell , his hoof bestowed a wince , 
Upon my pate , and there 's the mark ere since . 
The gentle River at my fall did grieve , 
Set me on land safe , gave me means to live : 
And Pegasus inspired me with his heel , 
That ever since an itching vain I feel , 
Of sprightful Poesy , though not so well , 
As men may say I therein do excel . 
But I can do ( as many more have done ) 
Bring Reams of Paper to confusion . 
Nor doth my Muse rejoice in merriments , 
Drawn from wits sordid obscene excrements ; 
I 'll curb her in , from meddling with the State , 
Or libelling against men infortunate , 
I mean to keep my ears upon my head , 
And on men's miseries I scorn to tread . 
I have observed no proud man ever yet , 
Did any thing but ruin , and hatred get ; 
I know obedience , and humility , 
Is best with all beloved tranquillity , 
I know the laws guard me from mischief's Jaws , 
Which laws I love , & those that made those laws 
Nor shall my lines ( for things indifferent ) 
In Church or Commonwealth ere make a rent . 
Thus Pegasus did to Parnassus' sore , 
And on the Thames I got a healthful Oar , 
Which oft-times I have used , and will again , 
Mean time I 'll use the vigour of my brain , 
As Homer written the wars of Mice and Frogs , 
So I ( his Ape ) do write of Bears and Dogs : 
Of Bulls , and Bulls begot by word of mouth 
Of Horses , and some Tales of age and youth , 
And now my Muse again begins to mount , 
The Horse's excellency to recount , 
You famous Palfreyes' of the flaming Sun , 
( That scorned the management of Phaeton ) 
Who with the heat of Sol's bright Axletree 
Caused all this under world on fire to be ; 
( I know the moral meaning of the same , 
Is , man should not beyond true reason aim . ) 
Let Ecus , Phlegon , Aethon , and Piruis , 
Apollo's golden Team Assist my Muse , 
But 't is no matter , keep your daily course , 
Without your aid my wit is ne'er the worse ; 
Whilst you are reeking with celestial sweat 
I , of Terrestrial Horses mean to treat . 
A Horse ( of all the Beasts beneath the sky ) 
Is best , and most for man's commodity : 
His exact making gives the eye delight , 
A body brave , lined with a noble spirit , 
And though he knew no reason , or a mind , 
Yet unto man he 's tractably inclined , 
In dangerous war , the Horse the brunt doth carry , 
Where every Rider seems a Sagitary , 
In peace , a Horse for state , for Tilt or Tourney , 
For quick dispatch , or ease in any journey , 
For pleasure , carriage , and for husbandry , 
The Horse doth furnish our necessity . 
The poorest Horse that is , or ever was , 
Doth much more service than the golden Ass , 
that 's decked with borrowed trappingss , yet such beasts , 
Advance audaciously their brainless Crests , 
Near where the Princely Lion doth resort , 
And there in pride and sensual lust do snort , 
Yet can they not out strip all beasts so far , 
But Wisdoms eye perceives them what they are . 
The hunting Horse is of good use for pleasure . 
The Sumpter Horse doth understand the treasure . 
The Mill-horse hath an endless journey ( round ) 
The Packhorse overladen measures ground , 
The Mare and Gelding servesour business well , 
Whilst ( for poor Hackneys ) England is a Hell. 
And what 's a Horse's gain for all his pain , 
But bread , grass , hay , oats , or such kind of Grain , tires . 
That is the summum bonum , he desire's , 
Through want of which there 's many a good Horse 
I have seen Gallants ( three parts drunk almost ) 
Ride , as they meant to see the Devil in post , 
And when they to their journey's end have come , 
Their horses mucky wet , with sweat and foam , 
The Rider's fall unto their drinking vain , 
The Ostler walks the Horse a turn or twain , 
Their jaws tied up unto the empty Rack , 
The whilst their Rider's smoke , and swallow sack , 
Quaffes , capers , sings a Catch , a round , or Ditty , 
And leaves the Horse unto the Ostlers pity , 
And so the jades of meat do get such store , 
As Lazarus once had at the Gluttons door . 
Thus many a good Horse proves a jade indeed 
Being over rid , and want whereon to feed , 
All those that to a beast bears such a mind , 
I wish them all so served in their kind . 
there 's many ways , men's barbarous cruelty , 
Doth cause diseases multiplicity 
To be in Horses , and the damned Trade 
To sell a Botched sophisticated jade , 
In Smithfield is in practice twice a week , 
He that believes me not , let him go seek . 
There shall he see the ambler made to troth , 
The lame and foundered , lusty , ( being hot ) 
The trotter shall be forced with ease to amble , 
And through the horsemarket shall be such scamble 
With galloping , and trotting , ambling , pacing , 
Most odious swearing , lying , and outfacing , 
Such daubing horses griefs with counterfeiting , 
That he 's a cunning buyer escapes their cheating . 
In ancient times , horses much fame did gain , 
Which Poets and Historians do maintain : 
Besides the swift skie-scalding Pegasus , 
Great Alexander had Bucephalus , 
Reinoldo had his Bayard , and there are , 
Names given to horses , both in peace and war. 
But leaving stately horses , it is found 
The Bear-garden is circular , or round , 
Where jack-an-apes his horse doth swiftly run 
His circuit , like the horses of the Snn. 
And quick as lightning , his will trace and tract , 
Making that endless round his Zodiac , 
Which jack ( his Rider ) bravely rides a straddle , 
And in his hot Career perfumes the saddle ; 
he 's active , and he 's passive in his pace , 
And sprung from ancient and approved race , 
His grandsires grandsire , was begot perforce , 
Between the Nightmare , and the Trojan Horse , 
That female Horse of Sinon , in whose womb 
A hundred well-armed mad Colts had their room , 
Which being foald , spoilt Troy , with sword & flame , 
and from that Jade , our jade descent doth claim , 
For ( as his parents oft have done before ) 
He always keeps a jadish trick in store . 
FINIS . 





  I unumerable are the people and families that live by the Bull , and the Bull's offspring . 

  Pegasus cast me off his back , and I sell into the Thames , which was the cause I served an apprenticeship to be a Waterman .   The had usage of unconscionable riders to horses    Much cheeting in Smithfield , in buying and selling Horses .   Upon the Bearegarden Horse . 