The Libertine Overthrown : Or , a MIRROR for Atheists ; Wherein they may clearly see their Prodigious Follies , Vast Extravagancies , Notorious Impieties and Absurdities : Containing a Compendious Account of the Egregious Vicious Life , and Eminently and Sincerely Penitent Death , Of that Great Statesman , Eminent Poet , and Learned Scholar , JOHN Earl of ROCHESTER , Who deparrted this Life the 26th of July , MDCLXXX . Wherein is briefly recited not only his Disputes and Arguments against God and Religion , as the same were used in Conferences with Divines , and at several Atheistical Meetings ; but also the chief of his notorious Pranks , such as his turning Mountebank , his Disguising himself in the Shape's of Beggars , his Amours , Revels , etc.  To all which is added , The plain manner of his wonderful Conversion , which was by hearing read the 53d . Chapter of Isaiah , his Christian deportment and Godly Expressions during his last Sickness ; as also his Dying Remonstrance left in Writing , and signed and attested by Eminent Witnesses . 

The whole , for the use of the meanest Capacities , abstracted from the Remarks of the Right Reverend D. Gilbert Burnet , now Bishop of Sarum , and the Reverend Mr. Parsons , Chaplain to Ann Countess of Rochester . 

Licenced according to Order . 

London , Printed and Sold by J. Bradford , without Bishopsgate . 

A Mirror for Atheists . 

THE daily growth of Impiety and Athe●●● amongst the meaner sort , obliges me to publishing the ensuing compendious Abstr●●● wherein will appear the emptiness , shallowness and significany of the greatest and wisest Arguments , aga●●● the Being of an Omnipotent Jehovah ; in hand● of which , I shall transcribe the Remarkable Pass●●● of the Life of John Earl of Rochester , a Great M●●● a greater Sinner , but at the last by divine Mercy , a 〈◊〉 Eminent and Zealous Penitent . One who had for ●●veral Years , made it his Business to argue against 〈◊〉 and Religion , and placed his Bliss and Happiness , 〈◊〉 summum bonum , in carnal Pleasures and sensual 〈◊〉 lights ; but to be methodical , I shall give a short deser●●tion of his Birth , Parentage and Education . 

As for his Family , on both sides , from wh● he was descended , they were some of the 〈◊〉 famous in their Generations . His Grandfather was that Excellent and truly great Man , 〈◊〉 Lord Wilmot , Viscount Athlone in Ireland . 〈◊〉 his Father , who inherited the same Title , 〈◊〉 Greatness , was by his late Majesty King 〈◊〉 the I created Baron of Adderburg in Oxfords●●●● and by King Charles the II the Earl of Roches●●● His Mother , of whom many worthy things 〈◊〉 be spoken , was the Relict of Sir Francis - 〈◊〉 Lee of Ditchly , in the County of Oxford , Baron 〈◊〉 Daughter of that Generous and Honourable ●entleman Sir John , St. Johns of Lyddiard , in the ●ounty of Wilts , Baronet . 

He was Born in April 1648.  And as for his Education , it was in Wadham-college in Oxford , un●er the care of that Wise and Excellent Governor Dr. Blanford , the late Right Reverend Bishop 〈◊〉 Worcester ; there it was he laid a good Foundation of Learning and Study , though he afterwards ●uilt upon that foundation Hay and Stubble ●●ere he first sucked from the Breasts of his Mother ●●e University those perfections of Wit , Eloquence and Poetry , which afterwards by his own corrupt Stomach , or some ill juices after were 〈◊〉 into Poison to himself and others . 

Leaving the University , he betook himself to ●ravel , from which he returned in the 18th Year 〈◊〉 his Age , and appeared at Court with as great advantages as most ever had , greatly signalizing 〈◊〉 Valour at Sea in the Year 65. when he went ●ith the Earl of Sandwich , etc.  He had so entirely 〈◊〉 down the Intemperance that was growing on 〈◊〉 before his Travels , that at his Return he ha●●d nothing more . But falling into Company that 〈◊〉 these Excesses , he was , though not without difficulty ; and by many Steps , brought back to it ●●ain . And the Natural Heat of his Fancy being ●●flamed by Wine , made him so extravagantly ●●easant , that many , to be diverted more by that ●umour , studied to engage him deeper and deeper 〈◊〉 Intemperance ; which at length did so entirely subdue him , that ( as he told the Reverend Dr. ●●rnet now Bishop of Sarum ) for five Years together he was continually Drunk ; not all the while under the visible Effects of it , but his Bloo● was so inflamed , that he was not in all that time cool enough to be perfect Master of himself . Thi● led him to say and do many wild and unaccountable things . There were two Principles in hi● Natural temper , that being heightened by tha● Heat , carried him to great Excesses ; a violent love of Pleasure , and a disposition to extravagant Mirth . The one involved him in great sensuality ; the other led him to many odd Adventures and Frolicks , in which he was oft in hazard of his Life . The one being the same Irregular Appetite in his Mind , that the other was in hi● Body , which made him think nothing diverting that was not extravagant . And though in col● Blood he was a generous and good Natured Man yet he would go far in his Heats , after any thin● that might turn to a Jest , or matter of Diversion And so he came to bend his Wit and divert hi● Studies and Endeavours to support and strengthen these ill Principles both in himself and others . 

An accident fell out after this , which confirmed him more in these Courses : ( I shall relate it in th● very Words of the Reverend D. Burnet ) Whe● he went to Sea in the Year 1665. there happened to be in the same Ship with him Mr. Mou●tague , and another Gentleman of Quality ; these two , the former especially seemed perswade● that they should never return into England Mr. Montague said he was sure of it , the other was not so positive : The Earl of Rochester , an● the last of these , entered into a formal Engagement , not without Ceremonies of Religion , tha● if either of them died , he should appear , an● give the other Notice of a future state , if there was any . But Mr. Montague would not enter into the Bond. When the day came that they thought to have taken the Dutch Fleet in the Port of Bergen , Mr. Montague , though he had such strong Presage in his Mind of his approaching Death , yet he generously stayed all while in the the greatest Danger : The other Gentleman signalised his Courage in a most undaunted manner , till near the end of the Action ; when he fell on a sudden into such a trembling , that he could scarce stand ; and Mr. Montague going to him to hold him up , as they were in each others Arms , a Cannon Ball killed him outright , and carried away Mr. Mountague's Belly , so that he Died within an Hour after . The Earl of Rochester ( says the Doctor ) told me , that these presages had in their Minds made some Impression on him , that there were separated Being's ; and that the Soul either by a Sagacity or some secret Notice communicated to it , had a sort of Divination : But that Gentleman never appearing was a great Snare to him during the rest of his Life . 



As to the Supreme Being , he had always some ●mpressionss of one , and professed often that he never knew an entire Atheist who fully believed there was no God : yet when he explained this notion of his Being , it amounted to no more than a vast power , that had none of the Attributes of Goodness or Justice , we ascribe to the Deity : These were his Thoughts about Religion . For Morality , he freely owned to me ( saith the Reverend Dr. Burnet ) that though he talked of it , as a finething , yet this was only because he thought it a decent way of speaking , and that as they went always in clotheses , though in their Frolicks they would have chosen sometimes to have gone Naked , if they had not feared the people : So though some of them found it necessary for human Life to talk of Morality , yet he confessed they cared not for it , further than the Reputation of it was necessary for their credit , and Affairs ; of which he gave many . Instances , as their professing and swearing friendship , where they hated Mortality ; their Oaths and Imprecations in their Addresses to Women , which the intended never to make Good : The delight they had in making people quarrel ; their unjust usage of their Creditors , and putting them off by any deceitful promise they could invent , that might deliver them from present Importunity ; of all which he afterwards sincerely Repent . 

He would often go into the Country , and be for some Months wholly employed in study , or the Sallies of his Wit ; which he came to direct chiefly to Satire . For his other Studies they were divided between the comical and witty writings of the Ancients and Moderns , the Roman Authors , and Books of Physic , which the ill state of Health he was fallen into , made more necessary to himself : and which qualified him for an odd Adventure which I shall but briefly mention . Being under an unlucky Accident which obliged him to keep out of the way , he disguised himself , so that his nearest Friends could not have known him , and set up in Tower-street for an Italian Mountebank , where he had a stage , and practised Physic some weeks not without success . In his latter Years , ●e read Books of History more . He took pleasure ●o disguise himself as a Porter , or as a Beggar , sometimes to follow some mean Amours , which ●or the vaniety of them , he affected . At other ●imess merely for Diversion , he would go about in ●dd shapes , in which he acted his part so naturally , that even those who were on the Secret , and ●aw him in these shapes , could perceive nothing ●y which he might be discovered . 

Besides the Derision calumnies and Jeers he put ●pon Religion in his Lampoons Satyrs , etc. it was too frequent a Custom with him to meet with several dissolute persons , purposely to ridicule and dispute against Religion , etc. of which I ●hall give one memorable Instance related by Mr. Parsons , as the Earls own Words , One day at an Atheistical Meeting , at a Person of Qualities , I undertaken to manage the Cause , and was the principal Disputant against God and Piety , and for my performances received the applause of the whole company ; up●n which my mind was terribly struck , and I immediately replied thus to myself ; Good God That a man , ●hat walks upright , that sees the wonderful works of God , and has the use of his senses and reason , should ●se them to the defying of his Creator ! But though this ●as a good Beginning towards my Conversion , to find my Conscience touched for my Sins , yet it went off again ; ●ay all my Life long I had a secret value and reverence ●or an honest man , and loved Morality in others : But I ●ad formed an odd Scheme of Religion to myself , which ●ould solve all that God or Conscience might force upon ●e ; yet I was not ever well reconciled to the Business of christianity , n●r had that Reverence for the Gospel of ●hrist as I ought to have , p. 23. of E. of Rochester's funeral Sermon . 

In this Antheistical state of Mind , denying 〈◊〉 Power of the Almighty : and despising his M●●●sterss , he continued till by a most wonderful Providence , the Lord was pleased to open his 〈◊〉 Blinded Eyes : And it was thus , as he gave the 〈◊〉 count to the Reverend Dr. Burnet . 

Mr. Parsons in order to his Conviction , read him the 53.  Chapter of our Saviour's Passion , t●● he might there see a Prophecy concerning it , writ● many Ages before it was done ; which the Je●●●● that Blasphemed Christ , still kept in their Han● as a Book divinely Inspired : He said it to me , 〈◊〉 Mr. Parsons , That as he heard it read , he felt an ●●●ward force upon him , which did so enlighten his 〈◊〉 and convince him , that he could resist it no longer : 〈◊〉 the Words had an Authority which did shoot like 〈◊〉 or Beams in his Mind ; so that he was not only convince by the Reasoning he had about it , which satisfied 〈◊〉 understanding , but by a Power which did so effectu●●● constrain him , that he did ever after as firmly believe his Saviour , as if he had seen him in the Clouds . 〈◊〉 had ( said my Author ) made it be read so often 〈◊〉 him , that he had got it by Heart : and 〈◊〉 through a great part of it in discourse with 〈◊〉 with a sort of Heavenly Pleasure , giving me 〈◊〉 Reflections on it ; some few I rememb●● Who hath believed our Report ? H● he said , was foretold the Opposition the Gospel was meet with from such Wretches as he was . 〈◊〉 hath no Form nor Comeliness , 〈◊〉 when we shall see Him , there is no Bea● that we should desire Him. On this he said , 〈◊〉 meanness of his Appearance has made vain and fo● People desparage Him , because he came not in suc● 〈◊〉 Coat as they delight in , thus for his own ●ordss . 

Having thus far traced his Life , in several considerable and valuable Passages . I shall now Com●ndiously incert some of his chief Atheistical Arguments , used in defence of his immoralities , and ●●●tious Practices , as the same were urged to , and answered by the Right Reverend Dr. Burnet , as ●ake it ; upon their first Acquaintance . 

The Three chief things they talked about were Morality , Natural Religion , and Revealed Religion , ●hristianiy in particular : For Morality ( saith my author ) the Earl confessed , he saw the necessity 〈◊〉 it , both for the Government of the World , 〈◊〉 for the Preservation of Heath , Life , and ●●iendship , and was much a shamed of his former practices , rather because he had made himself a ●east , and had brought pain and sickness on his ●ody , and had suffered much in his Reputation , ●an from any deep sense of a Supreme Being or ●●other State : But so far this went with him , ●●at he resolved firmly to change the course of his ●●fe , which he thought he should effect by the 〈◊〉 of Philosophy , and had not a few no lesle 〈◊〉 than pleasant Notions concerning the folly 〈◊〉 madness of Vice : but he confessed he had no remorse for his past actions , as offences against 〈◊〉 , but only as Injuries to himself and mankind . 

Upon this Subject ; saith the Reverend Doctor ●hewed him the Defects of Philosophy for reforming the World : That it was a matter of Speculation , which but few either had the leisure or ●●pacity to inquire into . But the Principle that must reform mankind , must be obvious to 〈◊〉 man's Understanding . That Philosophy in mat●●● of Morality , beyon the great lines of our D●●● had no very certaind fixed Rule ; but in the 〈◊〉 Offices and Instances went much by the fanciest Men , and Customs of Nations and conseque●●● could not have Authority enough to bear do the propensities of Nature , Appetite or Passi●● For which ( saith the Doctor ) I instanced in 〈◊〉 Points , The one was about that Maxim of 〈◊〉 Stoic , to extirpate all sort of Passion and con●●● for any thing , etc.  The other was upon the straint of pleasure how far that was to go . U●●● this saith my Author , he told me the two Ma●●● of his Morality then were , that he should do 〈◊〉 thing to the hurt of any other , or that might prejudice his own Health : And he thought that 〈◊〉 pleasure when it did not interfere with these 〈◊〉 to be indulged as the Gratification of our Nature Appetites . It seemed , continued he , unreasona●●● to imagine these were put into man only to be 〈◊〉 strained , or Kerbed to such a narrowness : 〈◊〉 he applied to the free use of Wine and Women . 

To this , saith my Author , I answered , Tha● Appetites being natural , was an Argument for Indulging them , than the Revengful might as 〈◊〉 allege it for Murder , and the Covetous for St●●●ing ; whose Appetites are no lesle keen on those ●●jectss ; and yet it is acknowledged that these Appetites ought to be curbed . If the difference is 〈◊〉 from the Injury that another Person recei●●● the Injury is as great , if a Man's Wife is 〈◊〉 or his Daughter corrupted ? And it is impossible a Man to let his Appetites lose to vagrant 〈◊〉 not to transgress in these particulars . I ●●ther urged , saith the Doctor , that Morality●●●ld ●●●ld not be a strong thing , unless a Man were ●●termined by a Law within himself ; for if he 〈◊〉 measured himself by decency , or the Laws of 〈◊〉 Land , this would teach him only to use such 〈◊〉 in his ill practices , that they should not ●eak out too visibly ; but would never carry him 〈◊〉 an inward and universal probity : That Virtue ●s of so complicated a Nature , that unless a ●●●an came entirely within its discipline , he could 〈◊〉 adhere steadfastly to any one Precept ; for ●●●cess are often made necessary supports to one ●●other . That this cannot be done , either steadily 〈◊〉 with any Satisfaction , unless the Mind does inwardly comply with , and delight in the Dictates 〈◊〉 Virtue . And t●at could not be effected , ex●●●t a man's nature were internally regenerated and ●●anged by a higher Principle : Till that came ●●out , corrupt Nature would be strong , and Philosophy but feeble : especially when it struggled ●●th such appetites or Passions as were much kin●ed , or deeply rooted in the constitution of ones ●●dy . This , said the Earl , sounded to him like ●●thufiasme , or Canting : He had no Notion of it , ●●d so could not understand it . 

He comprehended the Dictates of Reason and philosophy , in which as the Mind became much conversant , there would soon follow , as he believed , greater easiness in obeying its precepts : I told 〈◊〉 on the other hand , that all his Speculations Philosophy would not serve him in any stead , to 〈◊〉 reforming of his Nature and Life , till he ap●●●ed himself to God for inward assistances . It was certain , that the Impressions made in his Reason governed him , as they were lively presented to him : But these are so apt to slip out of our Memory , and we so apt to turn our thoughts from them , and at some times the contrary Impressions are so strong , that let a man set up a reasoning in his Mind against them , he finds that Celebrated saying of the Poet.  

Video meliora proboque deteriora sequor . 
I see what is better and approve it : but follow what i● worse . 


to be all that Philosophy will amount to . Where as those who upon such Occasions apply themselves to God , by earnest Prayer , feel a disengagement from such Impressions , and themselves en●●ed with a power to resist them . So that thos● bonds which formerly held them , fall off . 

This he said must be the effect of a heat in Nature : it was only the strong diversion of th● thoughts , that gave the s●eming Victory , and h● did not doubt but if one could turn to a Problem i● Euclid , or to write a Copy of Verses , it would have the same effect . To this I answer , That 〈◊〉 such Methods did only divert the thoughts , there might be some force in what he said : but if they not only driven out such Inclinations , but bega● Impressions contrary to them , and brought 〈◊〉 into a new disposition and habit of mind ; the●● he must confess there was somewhat more than 〈◊〉 diversion , in these changes , which were brought on our minds by true Devotion . 

He further said sometime after that he did no● understand the Business of Inspiration ; he believe● the penmen of the Scriptures had heats and honestly , and so written : but could not comprehend how ●●d should reveal his Secrets to mankind . He could ●●t apprehend how there should be any corruption 〈◊〉 the nature of Man , or a lapse derived from ●●am — The Incoherences of stile in Scriptures ●●e odd transitions , the seeming contradictions , chiefly about the order of time , the Cruelties envyned the Israelites in destroying the Canaanites , Circumcision , and many other Rites of the Jewish ●orship seemed to him infutable to the Divine Na●●re : And the first three Chapters of Genesis , he ●●ought could not be true unless they were Parables ●hiss was the substance of what he excepted to Re●●●led Religion in general , and to the Old Testament 〈◊〉 particular . 

●ut in all these things ( said the Reverend B. Burnet ) ●old him he was in he wrong way , where he examined the Business of Religion , by some da●●●rtss of Scripture : Therefore I desired him to con●●der the whole contexture of the Christian Religi●● , the Rules it gives , and the methods it pr●scibes , ●●othing can conduce more to the peace , order and ●appiness of the World than to be governed by 〈◊〉 Rules , nothing is more for the interest of every ●an in particular : the Rules of Sobriety , Temperance and Moderation were the best preservers of ●ife , and which was perhaps more , of Health , humility , Contempt of the vanities of the World , ●●d the being well employed , raised a man's mind 〈◊〉 a freedom from the follies and temptations that ●aunted the greatest part . Nothing was so generous and great as to supply the necessities of the ●oor , and to forgive Injuries : nothing raised and maintained a Man's Reputation so much , as to be exactly just and merciful , Kind , Charitable an● Compassionate : Nothing opened the powers of 〈◊〉 Man's Soul so much as a calm Temper , a seren● Mind ; free of passion and disorder : Nothing made Societies , Families , and Neighbourhoods 〈◊〉 happy as when these Rules which the Gospel prescribes , take place , of doing as we would have other● to do to us , and loving our Neighbours as our lseve● ▪ The Christian Worship is also plain and simple , suitable to so pure a Doctrine ; the ceremonies of 〈◊〉 few and significant . 

The Issue of all this Discourse was , He told th● Reverend D. Burnet , that he saw Vice and Impiety were as contrary to Human Society , as wild Beasts let loose would be ; and therefore he firmly resolved to change the whole method of his Life to ▪ become stricty just and true , to be chaste and Temperate , to forbear swearing and Irreligious Discourse , to Worship and Pray to his Maker . And that though he was not arrived at a full persuasion of Christianity , he would never employ his Wit to run it down or corrupt others ; This Hopeful Bud of Grace , by the Blessing of God so fructified , that in a short time he became not an almost , but a● altogether Christian. Some Instances I shall compendiously give . And 

I His hearty concern for the pious Education of his Children , wishing that his Son might never be a Wit , that is , ( as himself explained it ) one of those wretched Creatures , who pride themselves in abusing God and Religion denying his Being , or his Providence , but that he might become an Honest and a Religious Man , which could only be the support and Blessing of his Family ; Complaining , what a vicious and naughty World they were brought into , and that no Fortune's or Honours were comparable to the Love and Favour ●f God to them , in whose name he Blessed them , Prayed for 'em , and committed them to his Protection . 

And here I must not pass by his pious and most passionate Exclamation to a Gentleman of some Character , who came to visit him in his last Sickness : OH Remember that you contemn God no more , he is an avenging God , and will visit you for your sins ; will in mercy I hope , touch your Conscience sooner or later as he has done mine ; you and I have been Friends and Sinners together a great while , therefore I am the more free with you ; we have been all mistaken in our conceits and Opinions ; our persuasions have been false and groundless , therefore God grant you Repentance . And seeing him the next day again , he said to him , Perhaps you were disobliged by my plainness yesterday ; I spoke the words of Truth , and soberness to you , and ( striking his hand upon his Breast ) said , I hope God will touch your Heart . To this may be added , his Comfortable Persuasions of Gods accepting him to his Mercy , saying three or four days before his Death , I shall die , but o ! What unspeakable Glories do I see ! What Joys beyond thought or Expression ; am I sensible of ! I am assured of God's Mercy to me through Jesus Christ. O how I long to die and to be with my Saviour . 

The time of his Sickness and Repentance was just nine Weeks ; in all which time , he was so much Master of his Reason , and had so clear and understanding , ( saving 30. hours , about the middle of it , in which he was deli●ious ) that he never dictated or spoken more composed in his Life : and therefore if any shall continue to say , his Piety was the effect of Madness or Vapours ; let me tell them it is h●●●ly disingenuous , and that the Assertion is as sill● it is wicked . nor was this thing done in a corn● nmbers visited and attended him ; and surely , 〈◊〉 any , the learned Physicians , that were convers●● with him in the whole course of his tedious sickness are competent Judges of a Frenzy or Delirium . 

To conclude these Remarks , I shall incert his dying Rem●strance , sufficiently attested and signed by his own Hand , as truest sense , ( which I hope may be useful for that Good end designed it , ) in manner and form following 

For the benefit of all those whom I may have drawn sin by My example and encouragemnet , I leave to world this my last Declaration , which I deliver in presence of the great God , who knows the secrets of hearts , and before whom I am now appearing to be judged ▪ 

That from the bottom of my soul I detest and ab●●● the whole course of my former wicked life ; that I thi● can never suffiently admire the goodness of God , who haven me a true sense of my pernicious Opinions and vile P●●●ticeses , by which I have hitherto lived without Hope , 〈◊〉 without God in the world ; have been an Open Enem● Jesus Christ , doing the utmost despite to the holy Spir●● Grace . And that the greatest testimony of my Chari●● such is , to warn 'em in the Name of God , and as they re●●●● the welfare of their Immortal Souls , no more to deny his ●●ing , or his Providence , or despise his Goodness ▪ no mo●●● make a mock of Sin , or contemn the pure and excellent religion of my ever Blessed Redeemer , through whose Merits a●●● I one of the Greatest of Sinners , do yet hope for Mercy 〈◊〉 Forgiveness Amen . 

Declared and Signed in the presence of ANNE ROCHESTER . 
ROBERT PARSONS . 
F. ROCHEST●● Jun. 16 , 1680.  

FINIS . 





Vers. 1  Vers. 2.  