THE BROKEN HEART . 

A Tragedy . 

ACTED By the KING'S Majesty's Servants at the private House in the BLACKFRIARS . 

Fide Honor.  

LONDON : Printed by I B. for HUGH BEESTON , and are to be sold at his Shop , near the Castle in Cornhill . 1633.  

TO THE MOST WORTHY DESERVER OF THE noblest Titles in Honour , WILLIAM , Lord CRAVEN , Baron of Hamsteed-marshall . 

MY LORD : 

THE glory of a great name , acquired by a greater glory of Action , hath in all ages lived the truest chronicle to his own Memory . In the practice of which Argument , your growth to perfection ( even in youth ) hath appeared so sincere , so un-flattering a Penman ; that Posterity cannot with more delight read the merit of Noble endeavours , then noble endeavours merit thanks from Posterity to be read with delight . Many Nations , many eyes , have been witnesses of your Deserts , and loved Them : Be pleased then , with the freedom of your own Nature , to admit ONE amongst All , particularly into the list of such as honour a fair Example of Nobility . There is a kind of humble Ambition , not un-commendable , when the silence of study breaks forth into Discourse , coveting rather encouragement than Applause ; yet herein Censo●re commonly is too severe an Auditor , without the moderation of an able Patronage . I have ever been slow in courtship of greatness , not ignorant of such defects as are frequent to Opinion : but the justice of your Inclination to Industry , emboldens my weakness , of confidence , to relish an experience of your Mercy , as many brave Dangers have tasted of your Courage . Your Lordship strove to be known to the world ( when the world knew you least ) by voluntary but excellent Attempts : Like Allowance I pled of being known to your Lordship ( in this low presumption ) by tendering to a favourable entertainment , a Devotion offered from a heart , that can be as truly sensible of any least respect , as ever profess the owner in my best , my readiest services , A Lover of your natural Love to Virtue , 

john Ford.  

The Prologue . 

Our Scene is Sparta . HE whose best of Art 
Hath drawn this Piece , calls it the Broken Heart . 
The Title lends no expectation here 
Of apish laughter , or of some lame jeer 
At place or persons ; no pretended clause 
Of jests fit for a brothel Court's ' applause 
From vulgar admiration : such low songs , 
Tuned to unchaste e●reses , suit not modest tongues . 
The Virgin● Sister then deserved fresh bays 
When Innocence and Sweetness crowned their layest 
then vices gasped for breath , whose whole Commerce 
Was whipped to Exile by unblushing verse . 
This law we keeps in our Presentment now , 
Not to take freedom more than we allow ; 
What may be here thought a fiction , when Times youth 
Wanted som● riper years , was known A Truth : 
In which , if words have clothed the subject right , 
You may partake , a Pity , with Delight . 
The Scene , SPARTA . The Speakers names , fitted to their Qualities . 

AMYCLAS , Common to the Kings of Laconia . 
ITHOCLES , Honour of loveliness , A favourite . 
ORGILUS , Angry , Son to Crotolon . 
BASSANES , Vexation , A jealous Nobleman . 
ARMOSTES , An appeasor , A Counsellor of State.  
CROTOLON , Noise , Another Counsellor . 
PROPHILUS , Dear , Friend to Ithocles . 
NEARCHUS , Young Prince , Prince of Argos . 
TECNICUS , Artist , A Philosopher . 
LEMOPHIL , Glutton , Two Courtiers . 
GRONEAS , Tavernhaunter , Two Courtiers . 
AMELUS , Trusty , Friend to Nearchus . 
PHULAS , Watchful , Servant to Bassanes . 
CALANTHA , Flower of beauty , The King's daughter 
PENTHEA , Complaint , Sister to Ithocles . 
EUPHRANEA , joy , A Maid of Honor.  
CHRISTALLA , Crystal , Maids of Honour . 
PHILEMA , A kiss , Maids of Honour . 
GRANSIS Old Beldame . Overseer of Pe●thea . 
person 's included . 

THRASUS , Fierceness , Father of Ithocles . 
APLOTES , Simplicity , Orgilus so disguised . 
THE BROKEN HEART . 

Actus primus , 

Scaena prima . 

Enter Crotolon and Orgilus . Crot.   Dally not further , I will know the reason 
That speeds thee to this journey . 


Org.   Reason ? good Sir● 
I can yield many . 


Crot.   Give me one , a good one ; 
Such I expect , and ever we part must have● 
Ath●●s ? pray why to Athens ? you intent not 
To kick against the world , turn Cynic , Stoic , 
Or read the Logic Lecture , or become 
An Ar●●pagite ; and judge in causes 
Touching the Common wealth ? for as I take it , 
The budding of your chin cannot prognosticate 
So grave an honour , 


Org.   All this I acknowledge , 


Crot.   You do : then ( 〈◊〉 ) if books and love of knowledge 
Inflame you to this travel , here in Sparta 
You may as freely study . 


Org.   't is not that Sir.  


Crot.   Not , that Sir ? As a father I command thee 
To acquaint me with the truth● 


Org.   Thus I obey ●● : 
After so many quarrels , as 〈◊〉 
Fury , and R●ge had 〈◊〉 in blood , and 〈◊〉 
Wit● 〈…〉 
With now 〈…〉 
Our present King 〈…〉 
Your eager swords , and Sealed a 〈◊〉 peace : 
Friends you prosest yourselves , which to conform , 
A resolution for a lasting league 
Betwixt your Families was entertained , 
By joining in a 〈◊〉 bond , 
Me , and the fair Penthea , only daughter 
To Thrasus . 


Crot.   What of this ? 


Org.   Much , much ( dear sir ) 
A freedom of converse , an interchange 
Of holy , and chaste love , so sixth our souls 
In a firm growth of union , that no Time 
Can eat 〈…〉 pledge : we had enjoyed 
The sweets our vows expected , had not cruelty 
Prevented all those triumphs we prepared for , 
By Thrasus his untimely death . 


Crot.   Most certain . 


Org.   From this time splouted up that poisonous stalk 
Of Aconite , whose ripened fruit hath ravished 
All health , all comfort of a happy life : 
For Ithocles her brother , proud of youth , 
And prouder in his power , nourished closely 
The memory of former discontents . 
To glory in revenge , by 〈◊〉 partly , 
Partly by threat● , a woo●ss at once , and forces 
His virtuous sister to admit a marriage 
With Bassanes , a Nobleman , in honour 
And riches , I confess beyond my fortunes . 


Crot.   All this is no sound reason to import me 
My leave for thy departure . 


Org.   Now it follows , 
〈◊〉 P●uthe● wedded to this torture 
By an insulting brother , being secretly 
Compelled to yield her virgin freedom up 
To him , who ●●uer can usurps her hear● 
Before contracted mine , is now so 〈◊〉 
To a most barbarous thraldoms misery , 
Affliction , that he savo●● not humanity 
Whos● sorrow melts not into more than pity , 
In hearing but her name . 


Crot.   As how pray ? 


Org.   Bassanes 
The man that call● her wife ; considers truly 
What Heaven of perfections he is Lord o● , 
By thinking fair Penth●● his : This thought 
Begets a kind of Monster-love , which Love 
Is nurse unto a fear so strong , and servile , 
As brands all dotage with a jealousy . 
All eyes who gaze upon that shrine of beauty , 
He doth resolve , do homage to the miracle ; 
Some one , he is assured , may now or then 
( If opportunity but sort ) prevail : 
So much out of a selfe-unworthinesse 
His fears transport him , not that he finds cause 
In her obedience , but his own distrust . 


Crot.   You spin out your discourse . 


Org.   My griefs are violent● 
For knowing how the Maid was heretofore 
Courted by me , his jealousies grow wild 
That I should steal again into her favours , 
And undermine her virtues : which the gods 
Know I nor dare , nor dream of : hence , from hencel 
I undertake a voluntary exile . 
First , by my absence to take off the ears 
Of jealous Bassanes , but chiefly ( Sir ) 
To free Penthea from a hell on earth : 
Lastly , to lose the memory of something , 
Her presence makes to live in me afresh . 


Crot.   Enough ( my Orgilus ) enough● To Athens 
I give a full consent : — Alas good Lady — 
We shall hear from thee often ? 


Org.   Often . 


Crot.   See 
Thy Sister comes to give a farewell . 


Enter Euphrania . Fuphr.   Brother . 


Org.   
A brother's kiss 〈…〉 
Thy health , and thy well-doing , than my life . 
Before we part , in presence of our father , 
I must prefer a lu●t to ' 〈◊〉 . 


Euphr.   You may style it , 
My brother , a command . 


Org.   That you will promise 
To pass never to any man , how ever worthy , 
Your faith , till with our Father's leave 
I give a free consent . 


Crot.   An easy motion , 
I 'll promise for her , Orgilus . 


Org.   Your pardon ; 
Euphranea's oath must yield me satisfaction . 


Euphr.   By Vesta's sacred fires I swear . 


Crot.   And I 
By great Apollo's beams join in the vow ; 
Not without thy allowance , to bestow her 
On any living . 


Org.   Dear Euphrania 
Mistake me not ; far , far 't is from my thought , 
As far from any wish of mine , to hinder 
Preferment to an honourable bed , 
Or fitting Fortune : thou art young , and handsome ; 
And 't were injustice ; more , a tyranny 
Not to advance thy merit . Trust me Sister , 
It shall be my first care to see thee matched 
As may become thy choice , and our contents : 
I have your oath . 


Euphr.   You have : but mean you brother 
To lea●e us as you say ? 


Crot.   ay , I , Euphrania●'s ● 
He has just grounds direct him : I will prove 
A father and a brother to thee . 


Euphr.   Heaven 
Does look into the secrets of all hearts : 
Gods you have mercy with thou , else — 


Crot.   Doubt nothing 
Thy brother will return in safety to us.  


Org.   Souls sunk in sorrows , never are without 'em ; 
They change fresh airs , but bear their griefs about ' 'em . 


Exeunt omnes . Flourish . Scene 2.  

Enter Amyclas the King , Ar●●stes , Prophilus , and attendants . Amy.   The Spartan gods are gracious , our humility 
Shall bend before their Altars , and per●●●●● 
Their Temples with abundant sacrifice . 
●ee Lords , Amyclas your old King is entering 
Into his youth again . I shall shake on 
This silver badge of age , and change this snow 
For hairs as gay as are Apollo's locks ; 
Our heart leaps in new vigour . 


Armo.   May old time 
Run back to double your long life ( great Sir ) 


Amy.   It will , it must Armostes , thy bold Nephew , 
Death-braving Ithocles , brings to our gates 
Triumphs and peace upon his conquering sword . 
Laconia is a monarchy at length ; 
Hath in this latter war trod underfoot 
Messene's pride ; Messene bows her neck 
To Lacedaemon's royalty : o 't was 
A glorious victory , and doth deserve 
more than a Chronicle ; a Temple Lords , 
A Temple , to the name of Ithocles . 
Where didst thou leave him Prophilus ? 


Proph.   At Pephon 
Most gracious Sovereign ; twenty of the noblest 
Of the Messenians , there attend your pleasure 
For such conditions as you shall propose . 
In settling peace , and liberty of life . 


Amy.   When comes your friend and General ? 


Pro.   He promised 
To follow with all speed convenient . 


Enter Cretol●n , Calantha , Christalla , Philema and Euphrania . Amy.   Our daughter — Dear Calantha , the happy news , 
The conquest of Messene , hath already 
Enriched thy knowledge . 


Calan.   With the circumstance 
And manner of the fight , related faithfully 
By Prophilus himself ; but pray Sir , tell me , 
How doth the youthful General demean 
His actions in these fortunes ? 


Proph.   Excellent Princess , 
Your own fair eyes may soon report a truth 
Unto your judgement , with what moderation , 
Calmness of nature , measure , bounds and limits 
●f thankfulness and joy , he doth digest 
Such amplitude of his success , as would 
In others , moulded of a spirit less clear , 
Advance 'em to comparison with heaven . 
But Ithocles . — 


Cal.   Your friend . — 


Proph.   He is so Madam , 
In which the period of my Fate consists : 
He in this Firmament of honour , stands 
Like a Star fixed , not moved with any thunder 
Of popular applause , or sudden lightning 
Of self-opinion : He hath served his Country , 
And thinks 't was but his duty . 


Crotolon :  You describe 
A miracle of man  


Amy.   Such Crotolon , 
On forfeit of a King's word thou wilt find him : 
Hark , warning of his coming , all attend him . 


Flourish . Enter Ithocles , Hemophil , and Groneas : the rest of the Lords ushering him in . Amy.   Return into these arms , thy home , thy sanctuary . 
Delight of Sparta , treasure of my bosom , 
Mine own , own Ithocles . 


Itho.   Your humblest subject . 


Armo.   Proud of the blood I claim an Interest in ; 
As brother to thy mother , I embrace thee 
Right noble Nephew . 


Itho.   Sir , your love 's too partial . 


Crot.   Our Country speaks by me , who by thy valour , 
Wisdom and service , shares in this great action ; 
Returning thee , in part of thy due merits , 
A general welcome . 


Itho.   You exceed in bounty . 


Calan.   Christalla , Philena , the Chaplet . — Ithocles 
Upon the wings of Fame , the singular 
And chosen fortune of an high attempt , 
Is born so past the view of common sight , 
That I myself , with mine own hands , have wrought 
To crown thy Temples , this provincial garland ; 
Accept , wear , and enjoy it , as our gift 
Deserved , not purchased . 


Itho.   y' are a royal maid . 


Amy.   She is in all our daughter . 


Itho●  Let me blush , 
Acknowledging how poorly I have served , 
What nothings I have done , compared with th' honours 
Heaped on the issue of a willing mind ; 
In that lay mine ability , that only 
For who is he so sluggish from his birth ? 
So little worthy of a name , or country , 
That owes not out of gratitude for life , 
A debt of Service , in what kind soever 
Safety or Counsel of the Commonwealth 
Requires for payment ? 


Ca● .  A speaks truth . 


Itho.   Whom hea●en 
Is pleased to style victorious , there , to such , 
Applause runs madding , like the drunken priests 
In Bacchus' sacrifices without Reason ; 
Voicing the Leader on a Demi god : 
When as indeed , each common soldier's blood 
Drops down ●s' current coin in that hard purchase , 
As his , whose much more delicate condition 
Hath sucked the milk of ease . judgement commands , 
But Resolution executes : I use not 
Before this royal presence , these fit sleights , 
As in contempt of such as can direct : 
My speech hath other end ; not to attribute 
All praise to one man's fortune , which is strengthened 
By many hands . — For instance , here is Prophilus 
A Gentleman ( I cannot flatter truth ) 
Of much desert ; and , though in other rank , 
Both Hemophil and Groneas were not missing 
To wish their Country's peace ; for in a word , 
All there did strive their best , and 't was our duty . 


Amy.   Courtiers turn soldiers ? — we vouchsafe our hand . 
Observe your great example . 


Hemo.   With all diligence . 


Gron.   Obsequiously and hourly . 


Amy.   Some repose 
After these toils are needfully we must think on 
Conditions for the Conquered ; they expect ' 'em . 
On , — come my Ithocles . 


Euphr.   Sir with your favour , 
I need not a supporte● . 


Proph.   Fate instructs me . 


Exeunt . Ma●●n● Hemophil , Gro●●a● , Chris●alla et Philema . Hemophil stays , Christalla , Gro●●as , Philema . Chry.   With me ? 


Phil.   Indeed I dare not stay . 


Hem.   Sweet Lady 
Soldiers are blunt , — your lip . 


C●ris● .  Fie , this is rudeness ; 
You went not hence such creatures . 


Gron.   Spirit of valour 
Is of a mounting nature . 


Phil.   It appears so : 
Pray in earnest , how many men apiece 
Have you two been the death of ? 


Gron.   Faith not many ; 
We were composed of mercy . 


Hemo.   For our daring 
You heard the General's approbation 
Before the King.  


Christ.   You wished your Country's peace : 
That showed your charity ; where are your spoils , 
Such as the Soldier fights for ? 


Phil.   They are coming . 


Chri.   By the next Carrier , are they not ? 


Gr●●  Sweet Philena , 
When I was in the thickest of mine enemies , 
Slashing off one man's head , another's nose , 
Another's arms and legs . 


Phil.   And altogether . 


Gron.   then would I with a sigh remember thee ; 
And cry dear Philena , 't is for thy sake 
I do these deeds of wonder : — dost not lo●e me 
With all thy heart now ? 


Phillip   Now as heretofore . 
I have not put my love to use , the principal 
Will hardly yield an Interest . 


Gron.   By Mar● 
I 'll marry thee . 


Phil.   By Vulcan y' are forsworn , 
Except my mind do alter strangely . 


Gron.   One word . 


Chri.   You lie beyond all modesty , — forbear me . 


Hem.   I 'll make thee mistress of a City , 't is 
Mine own by conquest . 


Chri.   By petition ; sue for 't 
In Forma pauperis : — City ? Kennel . Gallants 
off with your Fathers , put on aprons , Gallants ; 
Learn to reel , throm , or trim a Lady's dog , 
And be good quiet souls of peace Hobgoblins . 


Hem.   Christalla ? 


Chri.   Practise to drill hogs , in hope 
To share in the Acorns . Soldiers ? Corn●cutterss ; 
But not so valiant : they oft times draw blood , 
Which you durst never do . When you have practised 
more wit , or more civility , we 'll rank 〈◊〉 
I th' list of men : till then , brave things at arms 
Dare not to speak to us , — most potent Groneas . 


Phil.   And Hemophil the hardy , — at your services . 


Gron.   They scorn us as they did before we went.  


Hem.   hang 'em , let us scorn them , and be revenged . 


Eexunt Chri. at Philema . Gron.   Shall we ? 


Hem.   We will ; and when we slight them thus , 
Instead of following them , they 'll follow us. 
It is a woman's nature . 


Gron.   't is a scurvy one . exeunt orgies . 


Scene 3.  

Enter T●cnicus a Philosopher , and Orgilus disguised like a Scholar of his . Tecn.   Tempt not the Stars ( young man ) thou canst not play 
With the severity of Fate : this change 
Of habit , and disguise in outward view , 
Hides not the secrets of thy soul within thee , 
From their quick-piercing eyes , which dive at all times 
Down to thy thoughts : in thy aspect I note 
A consequence of danger . 


Org.   Give me leave 
( Grave Tecnicus ) without foredooming destiny , 
Under thy roof to ease my silent griefs , 
By applying to my hidden wounds , the balm 
Of thy Oraculous Lectures : if my fortune 
Run such a crooked by-way , as to wrist 
My steps to ruin , yet thy learned precepts 
Shall call me back , and set my footings straight : 
I will not court the world . 


Tecn.   Ah Orgilus , 
Neglects in young men of delights , and life , 
Run often to extremities● they care not 
For harms to others , who contemn their own . 


Org.   But I ( most learned Artist ) am not so much 
At odds with Nature , that I grutch the thrift 
Of any true deserver : nor doth malice 
Of present hopes , so check them with despair , 
As that I yield to thought of more affliction 
Than what is incident to frailty : wherefore 
Impute not this retired course of living 
Some little time , to any other cause 
then what I justly render : the information 
Of an unsettled mind , as the effect 
Must clearly witness . 


Tecn.   Spirit of truth inspire thee . 
On these conditions I conceal thy change , 
And willingly admit thee for an Auditor . 
●lete my study . 


Org.   I to contemplations : 
In these delightful walks — thus metamorphized , 
I may without suspicion harken after 
Penthe●s' usage , and Euphranea's faith : 
Love ! thou art full of mystery : the Deities 
Themselves are not secure , in searching out 
The secrets of those flames , which hidden waist 
A breast , made tributary to the Laws 
Of beauty ; Physic yet hath never found 
A remedy , to cure a Lover's wound . 
ha ? who are those that cross yo● private walk 
Into the shadowing grove , in amorous foldings ? 
Prophilus passeth over , supporting Euphrania , and whispering . My Sister ; o my Sister ? 't is Euphrania 
With Prophilus , supported too ; I would 
It were an Apparition ; Prophilus 
Is Ithocles his friend : It strangely puzzles me : 
Again ? help me my book ; this Scholar's habit 
Must stand my privilege● my mind is busy , 
Mine eyes , and ears are open . walk by reading . 


Enter again Prophilus and Euphrania . Proph.   Do not waste 
The span of this stolen time ( sent by the gods 
For precious use ) in niceness ! Bright Euphrania , 
Should I repeat old vows , or study new , 
For purchase of belief to my desires — 


Org.   D●sires ? 


Proph.   My service , my integrity — 


Org.   that 's better . 


Proph.   I should but repeat a lesson 
oft conned without a prompter ; but thine eyes , 
My Love is honourable — 


Org.   So was mine 
To my Penthea : chastely honourable . 


Proph.   Nor wants there more addition to my wish 
Of happiness , then having thee a wife , 
Already sure of Ithocles a friend , 
Firm , and un-alterable . 


Org.   But a brother 
more cruel than the grave . 


Euphr.   What can you look for 
In answer to your noble protestations , 
From an unskilful maid , but language suited 
To a divided mind ? 


Org.   Hold out Euphranc● . 


Euphr.   Know Prophilus , I never undervalved 
( From the first time you mentioned worthy love ) 
Your merit , means , or person : It had been 
A fault of judgement in me , and a dulness 
In my affections , not to weigh and thank 
My better Stars , that offered me the grace 
Of so much blissfulness . For to speak truth , 
The law of my desires kept equal pace 
With yours , nor have I left that resolution ; 
But only in a word , whatever choice 
lives nearest in my heart , must first procure 
Consent , both from my father , and my brother , 
Ever he can own me his . 


Org.   She is forsworn else . 


Proph.   Leave me that task . 


Euphr.   My brother ever he par●ed 
To Athens , had my oath . 


Org.   Yes , yes , ●a had sure . 


Proph.   I doubt not with the means the Court supplies , 
But to prevail at pleasure . 


Org.   Very likely . 


Proph.   Mean time● best , dearest , I may build my hopes 
On the foundation of thy constant sufferance 
In any opposition . 


Euphr.   Death shall sooner 
Divorce life , and the joys I have in living , 
then my chaste vows from truth . 


Proph.   On thy fair hand 
I seal the like . 


Org.   There is no faith in woman — 
Passion ? o be contained : my very heart strings 
Are on the Tenters . 


Euphr.   Sir , we are overheard ; 
Cupid protect us : 't was a stirring ( Sir ) 
Of some one near . 


Proph.   Your fears are needless , Lady ; 
None have access into these private pleasures , 
Except some near in Court , or bosom Student 
From Tecnicus his Oratory ; granted 
By special favour lately from the King 
Unto the grave Philosopher . 


Euphr.   Me thinks 
I hear one talking to himself : I see him . 


Proph.   't is a poor Scholar , as I told you Lady . 


Org.   I am discovered — Say it : is it possible 
With a smooth tongue , a leering countenance , 
Flattery , or force of reason ( — I come t' ee Sir ) 
To turn , or to appease the raging Sea ? 
Answer to that , — your Art ? what Art to catch 
And hold fast in a net the Sun's small Atoms ? 
no , no ; they 'll out , they 'll out ; ye may as easily 
Outrun a Cloud , driven by a Northern blast , 
As fiddle faddle so . Peace , or speak sense . 


Euphr.   Call you this thing a Scholar ? alas he 's lunatic . 


Proph.   Observe him ( sweet ) 't is but his recreation . 


Org.   But will you hear a little Lion are so tetchy , 
You keep no rule in argument ; Philosophy 
Works not upon impossibilities , 
But natural conclusions . — Mew ? — absurd ; 
The metaphysicss are but speculations 
Of the celestial bodies , or such accidents 
As not mixed perfectly , in the Air engendered , 
Appear to us unnatural ; that 's all . 
Prove it ; — yet with a reverence to your gravity , 
I 'll balk illiterate saw●inesse , submitting 
My sole opinion to the touch of writers . 


Proph.   Now let us fall in with him . 


Org.   ha ha ha . 
These Apish boys , when they but taste the Grammars , 
And principals of Theory , imagine 
They can oppose their teacher's Confidence 
Leads many into errors . 


Proph.   By your leave Sir.  


Euphr.   Are you a Scholar ( friend ? ) 


Org.   I am ( gay creature ) 
With pardon of your Deities , a mushrooms 
On whom the dew of heaven drops now and then : 
The Sun shines on me too , I thanne his beams , 
Sometime I feel their warmth ; and eat , and sleep . 


Proph.   Does Tecnicus read to thee ? 


Org.   Yes forsooth , 
He is my master surely , yonder door 
Opens upon his Study . 


Proph.   Happy creatures ; 
Such people toil not ( sweet ) in heats of State , 
Nor sink in thaws of greatness : Their affections 
Keep order with the limits of their modesty : 
Their love is love of virtue . — what 's thy name ? 


Org.   Aplotes ( sumptuous master ) a poor wretch . 


Euphr.   Dost thou want any thing ? 


Org.   Books ( Venus ) books . 


Proph.   Lady , a new conceit comes in my thought , 
And most available for both our comforts . 


Euphr.   My Lord — 


Proph.   whiles I endeavour to deserve 
Your father's blessing to our loves , this Scholar 
May daily at some certain hours attend , 
What notice I can write of my success , 
Here in this grove , and give it to your hands : 
The like from you to me ; so can we never , 
Barred of our mutual speech , want sure intelligence ; 
And thus our hearts may talk when our tongues cannot . 


Euphr.   Occasion is most favourable , use it . 


Proph.   Aplotes , wilt thou wait us twice a day ; 
At nine i' th' morning , and at four at night , 
Here in this Bower , to convey such letters 
As each shall send to other ? Do it willingly , 
Safely , and secretly , and I will furnish 
Thy Study , or what else thou canst desire . 


Org.   jove make me thankful , thankful , I beseech thee 
Propitious jove , I will prove sure and trusty 
You will not fail me books . 


Proph.   Nor ought besides 
Thy heart can wish . This Lady's name 's Euphra●ea , 
Mine Prophilus . 


Org.   I have a pretty memory , 
It must prove my best friend . — I will not miss 
One minute of the hours appointed . 


Proph.   write 
The books thou wouldst have bought thee in a note , 
Or take thyself some money . 


Org.   no , no money : 
Money to Scholars is a spirit invisible , 
We dare not finger it ; or books , or nothing . 


Proph.   Books of what sort thou wilt : do not forget 
Our names . 


Org.   I warrant thou , I warrant ' ee . 


Proph.   Smile Hymen on the growth of our desires , 
we 'll feed thy torches with eternal fires . Exeunt . manet Org.  


Org.   Put out thy Torches Hymen , or their light 
Shall meet a darkness of eternal night . 
Inspire me Mercury with swift deceits ; 
Ingenious Fate has leapt into mine arms , 
Beyond the compass of my brain . — Mortality 
Creeps on the dung of earth , and cannot reach 
The riddles , which are purposed by the gods . 
Great Arts best write themselves in their own stories , 
They die too basely , who outlive their glories . Exit . 


Actus Secundus : 

Scaena prima . 

Enter Bassanes and Phulas . Bass.   I 'll have that window next the street damned up ; 
It gives too full a prospect to temptation , 
And court's a Gazer's glances : there 's a lust 
Committed by the eye , that sweats , and travels , 
Plots , wakes , contrives , till the deformed bear-whelp 
Adultery be licked into the act , 
The very act ; that light shall be damned up ; 
d' ye hear Sir ? 


Phul.   I do hear my Lord ; a Mason 
Shall be provided suddenly . 


Bass.   Some Rogue , 
Some Rogue of your confederacy , ( factor 
For slaves and strumpets ) to convey close packets 
From this spruce springal , and the t'other youngster ; 
That gaudy Earwig , or my Lord , your Patron , 
Whose p●usioner you are . — I 'll tear thy throat out 
Son of a Cat , ill-looking Hounds-head ; tip up 
Thy ulterous maw , if I but scant a paper , 
A scroll , but half as big as what can cover 
A wart upon thy nose , a spot , a pimple , 
Directed to my Lady : it may prove 
A mystical preparative to lewdness . 


Phul.   Care shall be had . — I will turn every thread 
About me to an eye . — here 's a sweet life . 


Bass.   The City housewives , cunning in the traffic 
Of Chamber-merchandise , set all at price 
By wholesale , yet they wipe their mouths , and simper , 
Cull , kiss , and cry Sweetheart , and stro●ke the head 
Which they have branched , and all is well again : 
Dull clods of dirt , who dare not feel the rubs 
Stuck on the foreheads ? 


Phul.   't is a villainous world , 
One cannot hold his own in 't . 


Bass.   Dames at Court 
Who flaunt in riots , run another by as● 
Their pleasure heaves the patient Ass that suffers 
Up on the stil●d of Office , titles , Incomes ; 
Promotion justifies the shame , and ●ues for 't : 
Poor Honour ! thou art stabbed , and bleedest to death 
By such unlawful hire . The Country mistress 
Is yet more wary , and in blushes hides 
What ever trespass draws her tro●h to guilt ; 
But all are false . On this truth I am bold , 
no woman but can fall , and doth , or would — 
Now for the newest news about the City ; 
What blab the voices sirrah ? 


Phul.   OH my Lord , 
The rarest , quaintest , strangest , tickling news 
That ever — 


Bass.   Hey damn , up and ride me Rascal , 
What is 't ? 


Phul.   Forsooth ( they say ) the King has mewed 
All his grey beard , in stead of which is budded 
Another of a pure Carnation colour , 
Speckled with Green and Russet . 


Bass.   Ignorant block . 


Phul.   Yes truly , and 't is talked about the streets , 
That since Lord Ithocles c●me home , the Lions 
Never left roaring , at which noise the ●earess 
Have danced their very hearts out . 


Bass.   Dance out thine too . 


Phul.   Besides , Lord Orgilus is fled to Athens 
Upon a fiery Dragon , and 't is thought 
OF never can return . 


Bass.   Grant it Apollo . 


Phul.   Moreover , please your Lordship , 't is reported 
For certain , that who ever is found jealous 
Without apparent proof that 's wife is wanton , 
Shall be divorced : but this is but she-news , 
I had it from a midwife . I have more yet . 


Bass.   Antic , no more ; Idiots and stupid fool's 
Grate my calamities . Why to be fair 
Should yield presumption of a faulty soul ? 
Look to the doors . 


Phul.   The horn of plenty crest him . 


Exit Phul.  Bass.   Swarms of confusion huddle in my thoughts 
In rare distemper . Beauty ? o it is 
An unmatched blessing , or a horrid curse . 
Enter Penthea , and Gransis an old Lady . She comes , she comes , so shoots the morning forth , 
Spangled with pearls of transparent dew , 
The way to poverty is to be rich ; 
As I in her am wealth , but for her 
In all contents a Bankrupt . — Loved Penthea , 
How fares my hearts best joy ? 


Gran.   In sooth not well , 
She is so over-sad . 


Bass.   Leave chattering Magpie . — 
Thy brother is returned ( sweet ) safe , and honoured 
With a Triumphant victory : thou shalt visit him : 
We will to Court , where , if it be thy pleasure , 
thou shalt appear in such a ravishing lustre 
Of jewels above value , that the Dames 
Who brave it there , in rage to be outshined , 
Shall hide them in their Closets , and unseen 
Fret in their tears ; whiles every wondering eye 
Shall crave none other brightness but thy presence . 
Choose thine own recreations , be a Queen 
Of what delights thou fanciest best , what company , 
What place , what times , do any thing , do all things 
Youth can command ; so thou wilt 〈…〉 
From the pure firmament of thy fai●e lookest 


Gran.   Now 't is well said my Lord , what Lady ? laugh , 
Be merry , time is precious . 


Bass.   Furies whip thee . 


Pen.   Alas my Lord , this language to your Handmaid 
Sounds as would music to the deaf : I need 
no braveries nor cost of Art , to draw 
The whiteness of my name into offence ; 
Let such ( if any such there are ) who covet 
A curiosity of admiration , 
By laying out their plenty to full view , 
Appear in gaudy outsides ; my attires 
Shall suit the inward fashion of my mind ; 
From which , if your opinion nobly placed , 
Change not the Livery your words bestow , 
My Fortunes with my hopes are at the highest . 


Bass.   This house me thinks stands somewhat too much innardss 
It is too melancholy , we 'll remove 
Nearer the Court ; or what thinks my Penthea 
Of the delightful Island we command ? 
Rule me as thou canst wish . 


Pen.   I am no Mistress ; 
whither you please , I must attend ; all ways 
Are alike pleasant to me . 


Gran.   Island ? prison : 
A prison is as gaysome : we 'll no Islands : 
Mary out upon 'em , whom shall we see there ? 
Seagulls , and Porpoises , and water-rats , 
And Crabs , and Mews , and Dogfish ? goodly geere 
For a young Ladies dealing , or an old ones . 
On no terms Islands , I 'll be stewed first . 


Bass.   Gransis , 
You are a juggling Bawd. — This sadness ( sweetest ) 
Becomes not youthful blood , — ( I 'll have you pounded ) 
For my sake put on a more cheerful mirth , 
Thou'lt mar thy cheeks , and make me old in griefs . 
— ( Damnable Bitch-fox . ) 


Gran.   I am thick of hearing 
Still when the wind blows Southerly . What think ' e● , 
If your fresh Lady bre●d young bones ( my Lord ? ) 
wood not a chopping boy d' ye good at heart ? 
But as you said , 


Bass.   
Or chop thee into collo●● 


Gran.   Pray speak louder● 
Sure , 〈◊〉 , the wind blows South still , 


Pen.   thou prayest madly . 


Bass.   't is very hot , I sweated extreamely● — Now.  


Enter Phula● . Phul.   A heard of Lords , Sir.  


Bass.   ha ? 


Phul.   A 〈◊〉 of indies . 


Bass.   Where ? 


Phul.   Shoalds of horses . 


Bass.   Peasant , how ? 


Phul.   Caroches 
In drifts — th' one enter , th' other stand without , sir. 
And now I vanish . Exit Phulas . 


Enter Prophilus , Hemophil , Groneas , Christalla and Philena . Proph.   Noble Bassanes . 


Bass.   Most welcome Prophilus , Ladies , Gentlem●n , 
To all , my heart is open , you all honour me . 
( A tympany swe●s in my head already ) 
Honour me bountifully . — ( How they flutter , 
Wagtails and ●ayes together ? ) 


Proph.   From your brother , 
By virtue of your love to him , I require 
Your instant presence fareth 


Pen.   He is wool Sir.  


Proph.   The gods preserve him ever : yet ( dear beauty ) 
I find some alteration in him lately , 
Since his return to Sparta . My good Lord , 
I pray use no delay . 


Bass.   We had not needed 
An invitation , if his sister's health 
Had not fallen into question . — Hast Penthea , 
Slack not a minute : lead the way good Prophilus , 
I 'll follow step by step● 


Proph.   Your arm fair Madam . 


Exeunt omnes sed Bass. & Gran.  Bass.   One word with your old Bawdship : th' hadst been better 
Railed at the sins thou worship'st , thou have thwarted 
My william I 'll use thee cursedly . 


Gran.   You dote . 
You are beside yourself . A Politician 
In jealousy ? no , y' are too gross , too vulgar . 
Pish , teach not me my trade , I know my ●ue : 
My crossing you , sinks me into her trust , 
By which I shall know all : my ●rade's a sure one . 


B●ss .  Forgive me , Gransis , ' was consideration 
I relished not , but have a care now . 


Gran.   Fear not , 
I am no new-come-to't . 


Bass.   Thy life 's upon it , 
And so is mine . My Agonies are infinite . Exeunt omnes : 


Scene 2.  

Enter Ithocles alone . Itho.   Ambition ? 't is of viper's breed , it knows 
A passage through the womb that gave it motion . 
Ambition ? like a seeled Dove , mounts upward , 
Higher and higher still to perch on clouds , 
But tumbles headlong down with heavier ruin . 
So squibs and crackers fly into the air , 
then only breaking with a noise , they vanish 
In stench and smoke : Morality applied 
To timely practice , keeps the soul in tune , 
At whose sweet music all our actions dance ; 
But this is form of books , and school-tradition , 
I● physics not the sickness of a mind 
Broken with grief●● : strong Fe●●erss are not eased 
With counsel , but with be●● receipts , and meane● : 
Means , speedy means , and certain ; that 's the cure . 


Enter Armostes and Crotolon . Armo.   You stick ( Lord Crotolon ) upon a point 
Too nice , and too unnecessary . Prophi●us' 
Is every way desertful . I am confident 
Your wisdom is too 〈◊〉 to need instruction 
From your 〈…〉 


Crot●  ●et not so ripe 
( My Lord Armostes ) th●t ●t dares to do●e 
Upon the painte● 〈…〉 smooth persuasion , 
Which tempts me to breach of faith . 


Itho.   Not yet 
Resolved ( my Lo●●● ) 〈…〉 consent 
Be so available , we 'll wri●● to 〈◊〉 
For his 〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉 . The King's 〈◊〉 
Will join with our d●●●reses , he ●as been ●●●ed too● . 


Armo.   Yes , and the King himself importuned Crotol●● 
For a dispatch . 


C●o●●  〈…〉 command , their wil● 
Are Laws not to be questioned . 


Itho.   By this marriage 
You k●it an union so denout , so hearty , 
Between your loves to me , and mine to yours , 
As if mine own blood had an interest in it ; 
For Prop●ilus' is mine , and I am his . 


Crot.   My Lord , my Lord  


Ith.   What , good Sir ? speak your think . 


Crot.   Had this sincerity been real once , 
My Orgilus had not been now vn-wi●ed , 
Nor ● our lost Sister buried in a Bride bed . 
Your Uncle here , Armostes knows this truth , 
For had your father Thrasus lived , but peace 
dwell in his grave : I have done . 


Armo.   y' are bold and bitter . 


Itho.   HE presses home the injury , it smarts ; 
no reprehensions Uncle , I deserve ' 'em . 
Yet gentle Sir , consider what the heat 
Of an unsteady youth a giddy bra●●e , 
Green indiscretion , flattery of greatness , 
Rawness of judgement , wilfulness in folly , 
Thoughts vagrant as the wind , and as uncertain 
Might lead a boy in years too ; 't was a fault , 
A Capital fault , for than I could not dive 
Into the secrets of commanding Love : 
Since when , experience by the extremities ( in others ) 
Hath forced me to collect . And trust me Crotolon , 
I will redeem those wrongs with any service 
Your satisfaction can require for currant . 


Armo.   Thy acknowledgement is satisfaction . 
What would you more ? 


Crot.   I 'm conquered : if E●phra●●● 
Herself admit the motion , let it be so . 
I doubt not my son's liking . 


Itho.   Use my fortunes , 
Life , power , sword , and heart , all are your own . 


Enter Bassa●es , Prophilus , Cala●● , Pe●th●a , E●phrane● , Christalla , Ph●l●ma , and Gra●si● . Armo.   The Princess with your sister . 


Calan.   I present ' e● 
A stranger here in Court ( my Lord , ) for did not 
Desire of seeing you , draw her abroad , 
We had not been made happy in her company . 


Ith.   You are a gracious Princess . — Sister , wedlock 
Holds too severe a passion in your nature , 
Which can engross all duty to your husband , 
Without attendance on so dea● a mistress . 
't is not my brother's pleasure , I presume , 
TO immure her in a chamber . 


Bass.   't is her will , 
She governs her own hours ; ( noble Ithocles ) 
We thank the gods for your success , and welfare . 
Our Lady has of ●ate been indisposed , 
Else we had waited on you with the first . 


Itho.   How does Penthea now ? 


Pen.   You best know brother , 
From whom my health and comforts are derived . 


Bass.   I like the answer well ; 't is sad , and modest ; 
There may be tricks , yet , tricks . — Have an eye Gransis . 


Calan.   Now Crotolon , the suit we joined in must not 
Fall by too long demur . 


Crot.   't is granted , Princess , 
For my part . 


Armo.   With condition , that his son 
Favour the Contract . 


Calan.   Such delay is easy . 
The joys of marriage make thee , Prophilus , 
A proud deserver of Euphrama's love , 
And her of thy desert . 


Proph.   Most sweetly gracious . 


Bass.   The joys of marriage are the heaven on earth , 
Life's paradise ( great Princess ) the soul's quiet , 
Sinews of concord , earthly immortality , 
Eternity of pleasures ; no restoratives 
Like to a constant woman . — ( but where i● she ? 
'T would puzzle all the gods , but to create 
Such a new monster . ) — I can speak by proof , 
For I rest in Elysium , 't is my happiness . 


Crot.   Euphrania how are you resolved , ( speak freely ) 
In your affections to this Gentlem●n ? 


Euphr :  Nor more , nor less th●n a● his love assures me , 
Which ( if your li●ing with my ●●●●hers' warrants ) 
I cannot but approve in all point● worthy . 


Crot.   So , so , I know your answer . 


Ith.   't had been pity 
To sunder hearts so equally consented . 


Enter He●●phill . Hem.   The King ( Lord Ithocles ) commands your presence ; 
And ( fairest Princess ) yours . 


Calan.   We will attend him . 


Enter Groneas . Gron.   Where are the Lords ? all must unto the King 
Without delay : the Prince of Argos — 


Calan.   Well Sir.  


Gron.   Is coming to the Court , sweet Lady . 


C●lan .  How ! 
The Prince of Argos ? 


Gron.   'T was my fortune , Madam , 
TO enjoy the honour of these happy tidings . 


Ith.   Penthe● ! 


Pen.   Brother ! 


Ith.   Let me an hour hence 
Meet you alone , within the Palace grove , 
I have some secret with you — Prithee friend 
Conduct her thither , and have special care 
The walks be cleared of any to disturb us.  


Proph.   I shall . 


Bass.   how 's that ? 


Ith.   Alone , pray be alone . 
I am your creature , princess . — on my Lords . Exeunt . 


Bassanes . Bass.   Alone , alone ? what means that word alone ? 
Why might not I be there ? — hum ! — he 's her brother ; 
Brothers and sisters are but flesh and blood , 
And this same whoreson Court ease is temptation 
To a rebellion in the veins ● — Besides , 
His fine friend Prophilu●'s mus● be her guardian . 
Why may not he dispatch a business nimbly 
Before the other come ? — or — papering , pandering , 
For one another ? be 't to sister , mother , 
Wife , Couzen , any thing , amongst youths of mettle , 
Is in request : It is so — stubborn Fate : 
But if I be a Cuckold , and can know it , 
I will be fell , and fell . 


Enter Gro●e●s . Gron.   My Lord , y' are called for . 


Bass.   Most heartily I thank y● , 〈◊〉 my wi●e pray ? 


Gron.   Retired amongst the 〈◊〉 


Bass.   〈◊〉 thank ●ee● 
there 's an old waiter with 〈◊〉 ●●w you 〈◊〉 ? 


Gron.   She 〈…〉 presence Lobby fast a●●e●pe ●ir . 


Bass.   Asleep ? sleep Sir● 


Gron ,  Is your Lordship troubled● 
You will not to the King ? 


Bass.   Your humblest Vassal . 


Gron.   Your servant my good Lord  


Bass●  I wait your foot st●ps . 


Exeunt . Scene the third . 

P●ophilus' , Penthea . Proph.   In this walk ( Lady ) will your brother find you : 
And with your favour , give me le●●e a little 
To work a preparation , in his fashion 
I have observed of late , some kind of slackness 
To such alacrity as Nature 
And custom took delight in : Sadness grows 
Upon his recreations , which he he hoards 
In such a willing silence , that to question 
The grounds will argue skill in friendship , 
And less good manners . 


Pen.   Sir , I 'm not inquisitive 
Of secrecies without an invitation . 


Phoph.   With pardon , Lady , not a syllable 
Of mine implies so rude a sense ; the drift . — 


Enter Orgilus . Proph.   Do thy best 
To make this Lady me●ry for an hour● . Exit . 


Org.   Your will shall be a law , Sir.  


P●n .  Prithee leave me , 
I have some private thoughts I would accounted with : 
Use thou thine own . 


Org.   Speak on , fair nymph , our souls 
Can dance as well to musick● of the Spheres 
As any's who have feasted with the gods . 


Pen.   Your School terms are too troublesome . 


Org.   What heaven 
Refines mortality from dross of earth , 
But such as uncompounded beauty hallows 
With glorified perfection . 


Pen.   Set thy wits 
In a less wild proportion . 


Org.   Time can never 
On the white table of unguilty faith 
write sergeant dishonour ; turn those eyes 
( The arrows of pure love ) upon that fire 
Which once rose to a flame , perfumed with vows 
As sweetly scented as the Licence smoking like 
The holiest Altar's , Virgin tears 
On Vesta's odours ) sprinkled dews to feed 'em , 
And to increase their fervour . 


Pen.   Be not frantic . 


Org.   All pleasures are but mere imagination , 
Feeding the hungry appetite with steam , 
And sight of banquet , whilst the body pines , 
Not relishing the real taste of food , 
Such is the leanness of a heart divided 
From intercourse of troth-contracted lones ; 
no horror should deface that precious figure 
Sealed with the lively stamp of equal souls . 


Pen.   Away , some fury hath bewitched thy tongue : 
The breath of ignorance that flies from thence , 
Ripens a knowledge in me of afflictions , 
Above all sufferance . — Thing of talk be gone , 
Be gone without reply . 


Org.   Be just , Penthea , 
In thy commands : when thou send'st forth a doom 
Of banishment , know first on whom it lights ; 
Thus I take off the shroud , in which my cares 
Are folded up from view of common eyes ; 
What is thy sentence next ? 


Pen.   Rash man , thou layest 
A blemish on mine honour with the hazard 
Of thy too desperate life : yet I profess , 
By all the Laws of ceremonious wedlock , 
I have not given admittance to one thought 
Of female change , since cruelty enforced 
Divorce betwixt my body and my heart : 
Why would you fall from goodness thus ? 


Org.   OH rather 
Examine me how I could live to say 
I have been much , much wronged ; 't is for thy sake 
I put on this Imposture ; dear Penthea , 
If thy soft bosom be not turned to marble , 
Thou'lt pity our calamities ; my Interest 
Confirms me thou art mine still . 


Pe● .  Lend your hand : 
With both of mine I clasp it thus , thus kiss it , 
Thus kneel before ye . 


Org.   You instruct my duty . 


Pen.   We may stand up : Have you ought else to urge 
Of new demand ? as for the old forget it , 
't is buried in an everlasting silence , 
And shall be , shall be ever ; what more would ye ? 


Org.   I would possess my wife , the equity 
Of very reason bids me . 


Pen.   Is that all ? 


Org.   Why 't is the all of me myself . 


Pen.   Remo●e 
Your steps some distance from me ; at this space 
A few words I dare change ; but first put on 
Your borrowed shape . 


Org.   You are obeyed , 't is done● 


Pen.   How ( Orgilus ) by promise I was thine , 
The heavens do witness ; they can witness too 
A rape done on my truth : how I do love the● 
Yet Orgilus , and yet , must best appear 
In tendering thy freedom ; for I find 
The constant preservation of thy merit , 
By thy not daring to attempt my fame 
With injury of any loose conceit , 
Which might give deeper wounds to discontents : 
continue this fair race , then though I cannot 
Add to thy comfort , yet I shall more often 
Remember from what fortune I am fallen , 
And pity mine own ruin . — Live , li●e happy . 
Happy in thy next choice , that thou mayst people 
This barren age with virtues in thy issue : 
And o , when thou art married , think on me 
With mercy , not contempt : I hope thy wife , 
Hearing my story , will not scorn my fall : 
Now let us part . 


Org.   Part ! yet advice thee better : 
Penthea is the wife to Orgilus , 
And ever shall be . 


Pen.   Never shall nor william  


Org.   How ! 


Pen.   Hear me , in a word I 'll tell thee why● 
The Virgin dowry which my birth bestowed , 
Is ravished by another : my true love 
Abhors to think , that Orgilus deserved 
no better favours then a second bed . 


Org.   I must not take this reason . 


Pen.   To confirm it , 
Should I outlive my bondage , let me meet 
Another worse than this , and less desired , 
If of all the men alive thou shouldst but touch 
My lip , or hand again . 


Org.   Penthea , now 
I tell thou you grow wanton in my sufferance ; 
Come sweet , thou art mine . 


Pen.   Uncivil Sir , forbear , 
Or I can turn affection into vengeance ; 
Your reputation ( if you value any ) 
Lies bleeding at my feet . Unworthy man , 
If ever henceforth thou appear in language , 
Message , or letter to betray my frailty , 
I 'll call thy former protestations lust , 
And curse my Stars for forfeit of my judgement . 
Go thou , sit only for disguise and walks , 
To hide thy shame : this once I spare thy life ; 
I laugh at mine own confidence ; my sorrows 
By thee are made inferior to my fortunes . 
If ever thou didst harbour worthy love , 
Dare not to answer . My good Genius guide me , 
That I may never see thee more . — Go from me . 


Org.   I 'll tear my veil of politic French off , 
And stand up like a man resolved to do 
Action , not words shall show me . OH Penthea . Exit Orgilus . 


Pen.   HE sighed my name sure as he parted from me , 
I fear I was too rough : Alas poor Gentleman , 
HE looked not like the ruins of his youth , 
But like the ruins of those ruins : Honour , 
How much we fight with weakness to preserve thee . 


Enter Bassanes and Gransis . Bass.   Fie on thee , damn thee , rotten maggot , damn thee , 
Sleep ? sleep at Court ? and now ? Aches , convulsions , 
Impostumes , themes , gouts , palsies clog thy bones 
A dozen years more yet . 


Gran.   Now y' are in humours . 


Bass.   she 's by herself , there 's hope of that ; she 's sad too , 
she 's in strong contemplation : yes , and ●ixt . 
The signs are wholesome . 


Gran.   Very wholesome truly . 


Bass.   Hold your chaps night mare . — Lady , come your brother 
Is carried to his closet ; you must thither . 


Pen.   Not well , my Lord ? 


Bass.   A sudden ●it , 't will off ; 
Some surfeit or disorder . — How dost dearest ? 


Pen.   Your news is none o' th' best . 


Enter Prophilus . Proph.   The chief of men , 
The excellentest Ithocles , desire's 
Your presence Madam . 


Bass.   We are hasting to him . 


Pen.   In vain we labour in this course of life 
To piece our journey out at length , or crave 
Respite of breath , our home is in the grave . 


Bass.   Perfect Philosophy : then let us care 
To live so that our reckonings may fall even 
When w' are to make account . 


Proph.   He cannot fear 
Who builds on noble grounds : sickness or pain 
Is the deservers exercise , and such 
Your virtuous brother to the world is known . 
Speak comfort to him Lady , be all gentle ; 
Stars fall but in the grossness of our sight , 
A good man dying , th' Earth doth lose a light . Exeunt omnes . 


Actus Tertius : 

Scaena prim● . 

Enter Tecnicus , and Orgilus in his own shape . Tecn.   BE well advised , let not a resolution 
Of giddy rashness choke the breath of reason . 


Org.   It shall not , most sage Master . 


Tecn.   I am jealous : 
For if the borrowed shape so late put on , 
Inferred a consequence , we must conclude 
Some violent design of sudden nature 
Hath shaken that shadow off , to fly upon 
A new-hatched execution : Orgilus , 
Take heed thou hast not ( under our integrity ) 
Shrouded unlawful plots : our mortal eyes 
Pierce not the secrets of your hearts , the god● 
Are only privy to them . 


Org.   Learned Tecnicus , 
Such doubts are causeless , and to clear the truth 
From misconceit , the present State commands me . 
The Prince of Argos comes himself in person 
In quest of great Calantha for his Bride , 
Our kingdom's heir ; besides , mine only sister 
Euphrania is disposed to Prophilus . 
Lastly , the King is sending letters for me 
To Athens , for my quick repair to Court. 
Please to accept these Reasons . 


Tecn.   Just ones , Orgilus , 
Not to be contradicted : yet beware 
Of an unsure foundation ; no fair colours 
Can fortify a building faintly jointed . 
I have observed a growth in thy aspect 
Of dangerous extent , sudden , and ( ●ooke to 't ) 
I might add certain — 


Org.   My aspect ? could Art 
Run through mine inmost thoughts , it should not sift 
An inclination there , more than what suited 
With justice of mine honour . 


Tecn.   I believe it . 
But know then Orgilus what honour is : 
Honour consists not in a bare opinion 
By doing any act that feeds content ; 
Brave in appearance , 'cause we think it brave : 
Such honour comes by accident , not nature 
Proceeding from the vices of our passion 
Which makes our reason drunk . But real Honour 
Is the reward of virtue , and acquired 
By justice or by ●●lour , which for Bases 
Hath justice to uphold it . He than fails 
In honour , who for lucre of Revenge 
Commits thefts , murders , Treasons and Adulteries , 
With such like , by entrenching on just Laws , 
Whose sovereignty is best preserved by justice. 
Thus as you see how honour must be grounded 
On knowledge , not opinion : For opinion 
Relies on probability and Accident , 
But knowledge on Necessity and Truth : 
I leave thee to the fit consideration 
Of what becomes the grace of real Honour . 
Wishing success to all thy virtuous meanings . 


Org.   The gods increase thy wisdom ( reverend Oracle ) 
And in thy precepts make me ever thrifty . Exit Org.  


Tecn.   I thank thy wish . — Much mystery of Fate 
Lies hid in that man's fortunes , Curiosity 
May lead his actions into rare attempts ; 
But let the gods be moderators still , 
no human power can prevent their william  
Enter Armostes . From whence come ' ee ? 


Arm● .  From King Amycl●● ; ( pardon 
My interruption of your Studies ) — Here 
In this sealed box he sends a treasure dear 
To him as his Crown , he prays your gravity 
You would examine , ponder , si●t and bolt 
The pith and circumstance of every tittle 
The scroll within contains . 


Tecn.   What is 't Armostes ? 


Armo.   It is the health of Sparta , the King's life , 
Sinews and safety of the Commonwealth , 
The sum of what the Oracle delivered , 
When last he visited the prophetic Temple 
At Delph●ss ; what his reasons are for which 
After so long a silence he requires 
You counsel now ( grave man ) his majesty 
Will soon himself acquaint you with . 


Tecn.   Apollo 
Inspire my Intellect . — The Prince of Argos 
Is entertained . 


Armo.   He is , and has demanded 
Our Princess for his wife ; which I conceive 
One special cause the King importunes you 
For resolution of the Oracle . 


Tecn.   My duty to the King , good peace to Sparta , 
And fair day to Armostes . 


Armo.   Like to Tecnicus . 


Exeunt . Soft Music . A Song . 

Can you paint a thought ? or number 
Every fancy in a slumber ? 
Can you count soft minutes roving 
From a dial's point by moving ? 
Can you grasp a sigh ? or lastly , 
Rob a Virgin's honour chastely ? 
no , o no ; yet you may 
Sooner do both that and this , 
This and that , and never miss , 
then by any praise display 
Beauty's beauty , such a glory 
As beyond all Fate , all Story , 
All arms , all arts , 
All loves , all hearts , 
Greater than tho●e , or they , 
Do , shall , and must obey . 


During which time , Enters Prophilus , Bassanes , Penthea , Gransis , passing over the Stage ; Bassanes and Gransis enter again softly , stealing to several stands , and listen . Bass.   All silent , calm , secure . — Gransis , no creaking ? 
no noise ; dost hear nothing ? 


Grans.   Not a mouse , 
Or whisper of the wind . 


Bass.   The floor is matted , 
The bedposts sure are steel or marble . — Soldiers 
Should not affect ( me thinks ) strains so effeminate ; 
Sounds of such delicacy are but fawn 
Upon the sloth of Luxury : they heighten 
Cinders of covert lust up to a flame . 


Grans.   What do you mean ( my Lord ) speak low ; that gambling 
Of yours will but undo us.  


Bass.   Chamber-combats 
Are felt , not hard . 


Pro.   A wakes . 


Bas.   what 's that ? 


Ith.   who 's there 
Sister ? all quit the room else . 


Bass.   't is consented . 


Enter Prophilus . Proph.   Lord Bassanes , your brother would be private , 
We must forbear ; his sleep hath newly left him . 
Please thou withdraw ? 


Bass.   By any means , 't is fit . 


Proph.   Pray Gentlewoman walk too . 


Gran.   Yes , I will Sir.  


Exeunt omnes . Ithocles discovered in a Chair , and Penthea . Itho.   Sat nearer sister to me , nearer yet ; 
We had one Father , in one womb took life , 
Were brought up twins together , yet have lived 
At distance like two strangers . I could wish 
That the first pillow whereon I was cradled , 
Had proved to me a grave . 


Pen.   You had been happy : 
then had you never known that sin of life 
Which blots all following glories with a vengeance , 
For forfeiting the last will of the dead , 
From whom you had your being . 


Itho.   Sad Penthea , 
thou canst not be too cruel ; my rash spleen 
Hath with a violent hand plucked from thy bosom 
A lover-blest heart , to grinned it into dust , 
For which mine 's now a breaking . 


Pen.   Not yet , heaven 
I do beseech thee : first let some wild fires 
Scorch , not consume it ; may the heat be cherished 
With desires infinite , but hopes impossible . 


Itho.   Wronged soul , thy prayers are heard . 


Pen.   Here lo I breathe 
A miserable creature led to ruin 
By an unnatural brother . 


Itho.   I consume 
In languishing affections for that trespass , 
Yet cannot die . 


Pen.   The handmaid to the wages , 
The untroubled of Country toil , drinks streams 
With leaping kids , and with the bleating lambs ; 
And so alleys her thirst secure , whiles I 
Quench my hot sighs with fleer of my tears . 


Itho.   The labourer doth eat his coursest bread , 
Earned with his sweat , and lies him down to sleep ; 
Which every bit I touch turns in digestion 
To gall , as bitter as Penthea's curse . 
Put me to any penance for my tyranny , 
And I will call thee merciful . 


Pen.   Pray kill me , 
Rid me from living with a jealous husband , 
then we will join in friendship , be again 
Brother and sister . — Kill me pray : nay , will ' ee ? 


Itho.   How does thy Lord esteem thee ? 


Pen.   Such an one 
As only you have made me ; a faith-breaker , 
A spotted whore , forgive me ; I am one 
In art , not in desires , the gods must witness . 


Itho.   thou dost be lie thy friend . 


Pen.   I do not Ithocles● ● 
For she that 's wife to Orgilus , and lives 
In known Adultery with Bassanes , 
Is at the best a whore . wilt kill me now ? 
The ashes of our parents will assume 
Some dreadful figure , and appear to charge 
Thy bloody gilt , that hast betrayed their name 
To infamy , in this reproachful match . 


Itho.   After my victories abroad , at home 
I meet despair ; ingratitude of nature 
Hath made my actions monstrous : thou shalt stand 
A Deity ( my sister ) and be worshipped , 
For thy resolved martyrdom : wronged maids , 
And married wives shall to thy hallowed shrine 
Offer their orisons , and sacrifice 
Pure Turtles crowned with myrtle , if thy pity 
Unto a yielding brother's pressure , lend 
One finger but to ease it . 


Pen.   OH no more . 


Itho.   Death waits to waft me to the Stygian banks , 
And free me from this Chaos of my bondage , 
And till thou wilt forgive , I must endure . 


Pen.   Who is the Saint you ser●e ? 


Itho.   Friendship , or 
Of birth to any but my sister , durst not 
Have moved that question as a secret , Sister : 
I dare not murmur to myself . 


Pen.   Let me , 
By your new protestations I conjure thou , 
Partake her name . 


Itho.   Her name , — 't is , — 't is , I dare not . 


Pen.   All your respects are forged . 


Itho.   They are not . — Peace 
Calantha is the Princess , the King's daughter , 
Sol● heir of Sparta — Me most miserable , 
Do I now love thee ? for my injuries 
Revenge thyself with bravery , and gossip 
My treasons to the King's ears . Do ; Calant●● 
Knows it not yet , nor Prophilus my nearest . 


Penth.   Suppose you were contracted to her , would it not 
Split even your very soul to see her father 
Snatch her out of your arms against her will , 
And force her on the Prince of Argos ? 


Itho.   Trouble not 
The fountains of mine eyes with thine own story , 
I sweated in blood for 't . 


Pen.   We are reconciled : 
Alas , Sir , being children , but two branches 
Of one stock , 't is not fit we should divide : 
Have comfort , you may find it . 


Itho.   Yes in thee : 
Only in thee Penthea mine . 


Pen.   If sorrows 
Have not too much dulled my infected brain , 
I 'll cheer invention for an active strain . 


Itho.   Mad man ! why have I wronged a maid so excellent ? 


Enter Bassanes with a poniard , Prophilus , Groneas , Hemophil and Gransis . Bass.   I can forbear no longer : more , I will not ; 
Keep off your hands , or fall upon my point : 
Patience is tired , for like a slow-paced Ass 
ye ride my easy nature , and proclaim 
My sloth to vengeance , a reproach and property . 


Itho.   The meaning of this rudeness . 


Proph.   he 's distracted . 


Pen.   OH my grieved Lord  


Grans.   Sweet Lady come not near him● 
He holds his perilous weapon in his hand 
To prick he cares not whom , nor where , — see , see , see . 


Bass.   My birth is noble , though the popular blast 
Of vanity , as giddy as thy youth , 
Hath reared thy name up to bestride a cloud , 
Or progress in the Chariot of the Sun ; 
I am no clod of trade , to lackey pride , 
Nor like your slave of expectation wait 
The bawdy hinges of your doors , or whist●● 
For mystical conveyance to your bed-sports . 


Gron.   Fine humor● , they become him . 


Hem.   How he stairs , 
Struts , puffs , and sweats : most admirable lunacy ? 


Itho.   But that I may conceive the spirit of wine 
Has taken possession of your soberer custom , 
I 'd say you were unmannerly . 


Pen.   Dear brother . 


Bass.   Unmannerly — Mew Kitling — smooth formality 
Is usher to the rankness of the blood , 
But Impudence bears up the train : Indeed , sir , 
Your fiery mettle , or your springal blaze 
Of huge renown , is no sufficient Royalty 
To print upon my forehead the scorn Cuckold . 


Itho.   His jealousy has robbed him of his wits , 
HE talks he knows not what . 


B●ss .  Yes , and he knows 
To whom he talks ; to one that franks his lust 
In Swine-security of bestial incest . 


Ith.   Ha devil . 


Bass.   I will hallo 't , though I blush more 
To name the filthiness , than thou to act it . 


Ith.   Monster ! 


Proph.   Sir by our friendship . 


Pen.   By our bloods , 
Will you quite both undo us , Brother ? 


Grans.   Out on him , 
These are his migraines , firks and melancholies . 


Hem.   Well said , old Touchhole . 


Gron.   Kick him out at doors . 


Pen.   With favour let me speak . — My Lord ? what slackness 
In my obedience hath deserved this rage ? 
Except humility and sin lent duty 
Have drawn on your unquiet , my simplicity 
Never studied your vexation . 


Bass.   Light of beauty , 
Deal not ungently with a desperate wound ! 
no breach of reason dares make war with her 
Whose looks are sovereignty , whose breath is balm 
OH that I could preserve thee in fruition 
As in devotion ! 


Pen.   Sir , may every evil 
Locked in Pandora's box ; shower ( in your presence ) 
On my unhappy head , if since you made me 
A partner in your bed , I have been faulty 
In one unseemly thought against your honour . 


Itho●  Purge not his g●●e●e● , Penthea . 


Bass.   Yea , 〈◊〉 on , 
Excellent creature — Good be not a hindrance 
To peace , and praise of virtue . — OH my senses 
Are charmed with sounds celestial . — On , dear , on● 
I never gave you one ill word ; say , did I ? 
Indeed I did not . 


Pen.   Nor , by Juno's forehead , 
Was I ever guilty of a wanton error . 


Bass.   A goddess , let me kneel . 


Grans.   Alas kind Animal . 


Itho.   no , but for penance . 


Bass.   Noble sir , what is it ? 
With gladness I embrace it ; yet pray let not 
My rashness teach you to be too unmerciful . 


Itho.   When you shall show good proof that manly wisdoms 
Not overswayed by passion , or opinion , 
Knows how to lead judgement ; then this Lady 
Your wife , my sister , shall return in safety 
Home to be guided by you , but till first 
I can , out of clear evidence approve it , 
She shall be my care . 


Bass.   Rip my bosom up● 
I 'll stand the execution with a constancy : 
This torture is unsufferable . 


Itho.   Well Sir , 
I dare not trust her to your fury . 


Bass.   But 
Penthea says not so . 


Pen.   She needs no tongue 
To pled excuse , who never purposed wrong . 


Hemo.   Virgin of reverence and antiquity 
Stay you behind . 


Gr●n .  The Court wants not your diligence . 


Exeunt omnes , sed Bass. & Grans.  Grans.   What will you do my Lord ? my lady 's gone , 
I am denied to follow . 


Bass.   I may see her . 
Or speak to her once more . 


Grans.   And feel her too , man , 
Be of good cheer , she 's your own flesh and bone . 


Bass.   Diseases desperate must find cures alike : 
She swore she has been true . 


Grans.   True on my modesty . 


Bass.   Let him want truth who credits not her vowes● 
Much wrong I did her , but her brother infinite ; 
Rumour will voice me the contempt of manhood , 
Should I run on thus . Some way I must try 
To outdo Art , and cry a jealousy . Exeunt omnes . 


Flourish . Enter Amyolas , Nearchus leading Calantha , Armostes , Crotolon , Euphranea , Christalla , Philema , and Amelus . Amy.   Cousin of Argos , what the heavens have pleased 
In their unchanging Counsels to conclude 
For both our kingdom's weal , we must submit to : 
Nor can we be unthankful to their bounties , 
Who when we were even creeping to our graves , 
Scent us a daughter ; in whose birth , our hope 
Continues of succession : As you are 
In title next , being grandchild to our Aunt , 
So we in hear● desire you may sit nearest 
Calantha's love ; since we have ever vowed 
Not to enforce affection by our will , 
But by her own choice to confirm it gladly . 


Near.   You speak the nature of a right just father : 
I come not hither roughly to demand 
My Cousin's thraldom , but to free mine own : 
Report of great Calantha's beauty , virtue , 
Sweetness , and singular perfections , courted 
All ears to credit what I find was published 
By constant truth : from which if any service 
Of my desert can purchase fair construction , 
This Lady must command it . 


Calan.   Princely Sir , 
So well you know how to profess observance 
That you instruct your hearers to become 
Practitioners in duty ; of which number 
I 'll study to be chief . 


Near.   Chief , glorious Virgin , 
In my devotions , as in all men's wonder . 


Amy.   Excellent Cousin , we deny no libertie● 
Use thine own opportunities . — Armoste● , 
We must consult with the Philosophers , 
The business is of weight . 


Armost.   Sir , at your pleasure● 


Amy.   You told me , Crotolon , your son 's returned 
From Athens ? wherefore comes he not to Cou●t 
As we commanded ? 


Crot.   He shall soon attend 
Your royal will , great Sir.  


Amy.   The marriage 
Between young Prophilus and Euphranea , 
Tafts of too much delay : 


Crot.   My Lord  


Amy.   Some pleasures 
At celebration of it would give life 
To th' entertainment of the Prince our kinsman 
Our Court wears gravity more than we relish . 


Armo.   Yet the heavens smile on all your high attempts , 
Without a Cloud . 


Crot.   So may the gods protect us.  


Calan.   A Prince , a subject ? 


Near.   Yes , to beauty's scepter● 
As all hearts kneel so mine . 


Calan.   You are too Courtly . 


To them , Ithocles , Orgilus , Prophilus Itho.   Your safe return to Sparta is most welcome , 
I joy to meet you here , and as occasion 
Shall grant us privacy , will yield you reason's 
Why I should covet to deserve the title 
Of your respected friend : for without Compliment 
Believe it , Orgilus , 't is my ambition . 


Org.   Your Lordship may command me your poor servant . 


Itho.   So amorously close close ? — so soon ? — my heart ! 


Proph.   What sudden change is next ? 


Itho.   Life to the King , 
To whom I here present this Noble gentleman , 
New come from Athens ; Royal Sir , vouchsafe 
Your gracious hand in favour of his merit . 


Crot.   My son preferred by Ithocles ! 


Amy.   Our bounties 
Shall open to thee Orgilus ; for instance , 
Hark in thine ear ; if out of thos● inventions 
Which flow in Athens , thou hast there engrossed 
Some rarity of wit to grace the Nuptials 
Of thy fair sister , and renown our Court 
In th' eyes of this young Prince , we shall be debtor 
To thy conceit , think on't● 


Org.   Your Highness' honours me . 


Near.   My tongue and heart are twins . 


Calan.   A noble birth 
Becoming such a father . — worthy Orgilus , 
You are a guest most withed for . 


Org.   May my duty 
Still rise in your opinion , sacred Princess . 


Itho.   Euphranea's brother , sir , a Gentleman 
Well worthy of your knowledge . 


Near.   We embrace him , 
Proud of so dear acquaintance . 


Amy.   All prepare 
For Revels and disport : the joys of Hymen , 
Like Phoebus in his lustr● , puts to flight 
All mists of dulness ; crown the hours with gladness : 
no sounds but music , no discourse but mirth . 


Calan.   thine arm I prithee Ithocles . — Nay , good 
My Lord keep on your way , I am provided . 


Near.   I dare not disobey . 


Itho.   Most heavenly Lady . Exeunt . 


Enter Crotolon , Orgilus . Crot.   The King hath spoken his mind . 


Org.   His will he hath 
But were it lawful to hold plea against 
The power of greatness , not the reason , haply 
Such under-shrubs as subjects , sometimes might 
Borrow of Nature , justice , to inform 
That licence sovereignty holds without check 
Over a meek obedience . 


Crot.   How resolve you 
Touching your sister's marriage ? Prophilus 
Is a deserving , and a hopeful youth . 


Org.   I envy not his merit , but applaud it : 
could with him thrift in all his best desires , 
And with a willingness enleague our blood 
With his , for purchase of full growth in friendship's 
He never touched on any wrong that maliced 
The honour of our house , nor stirred our peace ; 
Yet , with your favour , let me not forget 
Under whose wing he gathers warmth and comfort , 
Whose creature he is bound , made , and must live so . 


Crot.   Son , son , I find in thee a harsh condition , 
no courtesy can win it ; 't is too rancorous . 


Org.   Good Sir be not severe in your construction , 
I am no stranger to such easy calms 
As sit in tender bosoms : Lordly Ithocles 
Hath graced my entertainment in abundance ; 
Too humbly hath descended from that height 
Of arrogance and spleen which wrought the rape 
On grieved Penthea's purity ; his scorn 
Of my untoward fortunes is reclaimed 
Unto a Courtship , almost to a fawning : 
I 'll kiss his foot , since you will have it so . 


Crot.   Since I will have it so ? Friend I will have it so 
Without our ruin by your politic plot● , 
Or Wolf of hatred snarling in your breasts 
You have a spirit , Sir , have ye ? a familiar 
That posts i' th' air for your intelligence ? 
Some such Hobgoblin hurried you from Athens , 
For yet you come unsent for . 


Org.   If unwelcome , 
I might have found a grave there . 


Crot.   Sure your business 
Was soon dispatched , or your mind altered quickly . 


Org.   'T was care , Sir , of my health , cut short my journey ; 
For there , a general infection 
Threatens a desolation . 


Crot.   And I fear 
thou hast brought back a worse infection with thee , 
Infection of my mind ; which , as thou sayst , 
Threatens the desolation of our family . 


Org.   forbid it our dear Genius , I will rather 
Be made a Sacrifice on Thrasus' monument , 
Or kneel to Ithocles his son in dust , 
then woo a father's curse : My sister's marriage 
With Prophilus , is from my heart confirmed : 
May I live hated , may I die despised , 
If I omit to further it in all 
That can concern me . 


Crot.   I have been too rough , 
My duty to my King made me so earnest ; 
Excuse it Orgilus . 


Org.   Dear Sir● 


Enter to th●m● Prophilus , Euphranea , I●hocles , 〈◊〉 , Hemophil . Crot.   H●●e comes 
Euphranea , with Prophilus and Ithocles . 


Org.   Most honoured — ever famous . 


Itho.   Your true friend , 
On earth not any true● . — With s●●oth eyes 
Look on this worthy couple , you● consent 
Can only make them one . 


Org.   They have it . — Sister , 
thou pawnedst to me an oath , of which engagement 
I never will release thee , if thou aim'st 
At any other choice than this . 


Euphr.   Dear brother , 
At him or none . 


Crot.   To which my blessing 's added . 


Org.   Which till a greater ceremony perfect , 
Euphran●a lend thy hand ; here take her Prophilus , 
Live long a happy man and wife ; and further , 
That these in presence may conclude an omen , 
Thus for a Bridal song I close my wishes : 
Comforts lasting , loves increasing , 
Like soft hours never ceasing ; 
Plenty's pleasure , peace complying 
Without jars , or tongues envying ; 
Hearts by holy Union wedded 
more than theirs by custom bedded ; 
Fruitful issues : life so graced , 
Not by age to be defaced ; 
Budding , as the year ensu'th , 
Every spring another youth : 
All what thought can add beside , 
Crown this Bridegroom and this Bride . 


Proph.   You have sealed joy close to my soul : Euphranea , 
Now I may call thee mine . 


Itho.   I but exchange 
One good friend for another . 


Org.   If these Gallants 
Will please to grace a poor invention , 
By joining with me in some ●light device , 
I 'll venture on a strain , my younger days 
Have studied for delights 


Hom.   With thankful willingness 
I offer my attendance . 


Gron.   no endeavour 
Of mine shall fail to show itself . 


Itho.   We will 
All join to wait on thy directions , Orgilus . 


Org.   OH my good Lord , your favours flow towards 
A too unworthy worm ; but as you please , 
I am what you will shape me . 


Itho.   A fast friend . 


Crot.   I thank thee son for this acknowledgement , 
It is a sight of gladness . 


Org.   But my duty . Exe●●t omnes . 


Enter Calantha , Penthea , 〈…〉 Calan.   Who ever would speak with us deny his entrance● 
Be careful of our charge . 


Chri●  We shall madam . 


Calan.   Except the King himself , 〈◊〉 none admittance , 
Not any . 


Phil.   Madam it shall be our care . Ex●unt● 


Calantha , P●●thea . Calan.   Being alone , Penthea , you have granted 
The opportunity you sought , and might 
At all times have commanded . 


Pen.   't is a benefits 
Which I shall own your goodness even in death for● 
My glass of life ( sweet Princess hath few minutes 
Remaining to run down ; the sands are spent ; 
For by an inward messenger I feel 
The summons of departure short and certain . 


Calan.   You feed too much your melancholy . 


Pen.   Glorie● 
Of human greatness are but pleasing dreams , 
And shadows soon decaying : on the stage 
Of my mortality , my youth hath acted 
Some scenes of vanity , drawn out at length 
By varied pleasures , sweetened in the mixture , 
But Tragical in issue ; Beauty , pomp , 
With every sensuality our giddiness 
Doth frame an Idol , are unconstant friends 
When any troubled passion make● assault 
On the unguarded Castle of the mind . 


Calan.   Contemn not your condition , for the proof 
Of bare opinion only : to what end 
Reach all these Moral texts ? 


Pen.   To place before thou 
A perfect mirror , wherein you may see 
How weary I am of a lingering life , 
Who count the best a misery . 


Calan.   Indeed 
You have no little cause ; yet none so great 
As to distrust a remedy . 


Pen.   That remedy 
Must be a winding sheet , a sold of lead , 
And some untrod-on corner in the earth . 
Not to detain your expectation , Princess , 
I have an humble suit . 


Calan.   Speak , I enjoy it . 
Vouchsafe then to be my Ex●●●●ria , 
And take that trouble o● thou , to dispose 
Such Legacies , as I bequeath impartially● 
I have not much to give , the pains are easy , 
Heaven will reward your piety , and thank it 
When I am dead ; for sure I must not live , 
I hope I cannot . 


Calan.   Now beshrew thy sadness ; 
thou turnest me too much woman . 


Pen.   Her fair eyes 
Melt into passion ; then I have assurance 
Encouraging my boldness . — In this paper 
My Will was Charactered ; which you , with pardon , 
Shall now know from mine own mouth . 


Calan.   Talk on , prithee , 
It is a pretty earnest . 


Pen.   I have left me 
But three poor jewels to bequeath ; The first is 
My youth ; for though I am much old in griefs , 
In years I am a child . 


Calan.   To whom that ? 


Pen.   To Virgin wives , such as abuse not wedlock 
By freedom of desires , but covet chiefly 
The pledges of chaste beds , for ties of love , 
Rather than ranging of their blood● And next 
To married maids , such as prefer the number 
Of honourable issue in their virtues , 
Before the flattery of delights by marriage , 
May those be ever young . 


Calan.   A second jewel 
You mean to part with . 


Pen.   't is my Fame , I trust , 
By scandal yet untouched ; this I bequeath 
To memory , and Times old d●ughter Truth● 
If ever my unhappy name find mention 
When I am fallen to dust , may it deserve 
Be seeming charity without dishonour . 


Calan.   How handsomely thou play'st with harmless sport 
Of mere imagination ; speak the last , 
I strangely like thy william  


Pen.   This jewel , Madam , 
Is dear precious to me ; you must use 
The best of your discretion to employ 
This gift as I intend it . 


Calan.   Do not doubt me . 


Pen.   't is long agon● since first I lost my heart , 
Long I have lived without it , else for certain 
I should have 〈…〉 
Of it , to great Calantha , 〈…〉 
By service bound , and by affection vowed , 
I do bequeath in holiefe rites of love 
Mine only brother Ithocles . 


Calan.   What saidst thou ? 


Pen.   Impute not , heaven-blessed Lady , to ambition , 
A faith as humbly perfect as the prayers 
Of a devoted suppliant ●●●●indow it ? 
Look on him , Princess , with an eye of pity ; 
How like the ghost of what he 〈◊〉 appeared 
OF moves before you . 


Calan.   Shall I answer here , 
Or lend my ear too gr●ffely ? 


Pen.   First , his hear● 
Shall fall in Cinders , scorched by your disdain , 
Ever ●e will dare , poor man ; t●●pe an eye 
On these divine looks , but with low-be●t thoughts 
Accusing such presumption ; as for word● , 
OF dares not utter any but 〈…〉 
Yet this lost creature lo●es'●● . — Be a 〈◊〉 
In sweetness as in blood ; give him his do●●e , 
Or raise him up to comfort . 


Cal●●●  What new change 
Appears in my behaviour , that th●● 〈◊〉 
Tempt my displeasure ? 


Pen.   I 〈…〉 the world 
To revel Elysium , and 't is 〈◊〉 
To wish my brother some advantage her●● 
Yet by my best hopes , Ithocles is ignorant 
Of this pursuit . But if you please to kill him , 
Lend him one angry look , or one ●●●sh w●rd , 
And you shall soon conclude how ●●rong a power 
Your absolute authority h●ld● 〈◊〉 
His life and end . 


Calan.   You hau● forgot , P●nthea , 
How still I have a father . 


P●● .  But remember 
I am a sister , though to me this ●●●ther 
Hath been you know unkindest most unkind ! 


Calan.   〈…〉 — Lady , 
Your check lies in my 〈◊〉 . 


Both.   Madam , here . 


Calan.   I think thou sleep , ●ee dro●eses ; wait on Penth●a 
Unto her lodging . — Ithoc●●s● ● wronged Lady ! 


Pen.   My reckonings are made even , Death or Fate 
Can now nor strike too soon , nor force too late . Exeunt . 


Actus Qua●tus : 

Scaena prima . 

Enter Ithocles and Armostes . Itho.   Forbear your Inquisition ; curiosity 
Is of too subtle , and too searching nature : 
In fears of love too quick ; too slow of credit : 
I am not what you doubt me . 


Arm.   Nephew , bethen 
As I would wish ; — alilis not right , — Good heaven 
Confirm your Resolutions for dependence 
On worthy end● which may advance your quiet . 


Ith.   I did the Noble Orgilus much injury , 
But grieved Penthea more : I now repent it ; 
Now , Uncle , now ; this Now , is now too late : 
So provident i● 〈◊〉 in sad iss●● , 
That afterwit , like Bankrupts debts , stand tallye● 
Without all possibilities of payment : 
Sure he 's an honest , very honest Gentleman ; 
A man of singl● meaning . 


Arm.   I believe it : 
Yet Nephew , 't is the tongue informs our cares ; 
Our eyes can never pierce into the thoughts , 
For they are lodged too inward : — but I question 
no truth in Orgilus . — The Princess ( Sir ) 


Ith.   The Princess ? ha ? 


Arm.   With her the Prince of Arg●s . 


Enter Nearchus leading Calantha , Amel●● , Christalla , Philema . Near.   Great ( fair one ) grace my hopes with any instance 
Of Livery , from the allowance of your favour , 
This little spark . 


Cal.   A Toy● 


Ne●r .  Love's fea●● on Toys , 
For Cupid is a child , — vouchsafe this bounty 
It cannot benyed . 


Calan.   You shall not value 
( Sweet Cousin ) at a price what I count cheap , 
So cheap , that let him take it who dares stoop for 't , 
And give it at next meeting to a Mistress , 
she 'll thank him for 't , perhaps . Casts it to Ithocles . 


Ame.   The Ring , Sir , is 
The Princesses , I could have taken it up . 


Ith.   Learn manners , prithee . — To the blessed owner 
Upon my knees . 


Near.   y' are saucy . 


Cal.   This is pretty , 
I am , belike , a Mistress . — wondrous pretty : 
Let the man keep his fortune , since he found it ; 
he 's worthy on 't . — On Cozen.  


Ith.   follow Spaniel . 
I 'll force'●e to a fawning else . 


Am● .  You dare not . 


Exeunt . Mane●t Ith● . & Armost.  Arm.   My Lord , you were too forward . 


Ith.   Looke'ee Uncle : 
Some such there are whose liberal contents 
Swarm without care in every sort of plenty ; 
Who , after full repasts , can say them down 
To sleep ; and they sleep , Uncle : in which silence 
Their very dreams present 'em choice of pleasures : 
Pleasures ( observe me Uncle ) of rare object : 
Here heaps of gold , there Increments of honours ; 
Now change of garments , than the votes of people ; 
Anon varieties of beauties , courting 
In flatteries of the night , exchange of dalliance , 
Yet these are still but dreams : give me felicity 
Of which my senses waking are partakers ; 
A real , visible , material happiness : 
And then too , when I stagger in expectance 
Of the lest comfort that can cherish life : 
I saw it ( Sir ) I saw it ; for it came 
From her own hand . 


Arm.   The Princess threw it t' ee : 


Itho.   True , and she said — well I remember what . 
Her Cousin Prince would beg it . 


Arm.   Yes , and parted 
In anger at your taking on 't . 


Ith.   Penthea ! 
O thou hast pleaded with a powerful languaged . 
I want a fee to gratify thy merit . 
But I will do — 


Arm.   What is 't you say ? 


Itho.   In anger , 
In anger let him part ; for could his breath , 
Like whirlwinds , toss such servile slaves as lick 
The dust his footsteps print , into a vapour , 
It durst not stir a ●aire of mine ; It should not , 
I 'd rend it up by th' roots first . To be any thing 
Calantha smiles on , is to be a blessing 
more sacred than a petty-prince of Argos 
Can wish to equal , or in worth or Title . 


Arm.   Contain yourself , my Lord , Ixion aiming 
To embrace juno , bosomed but a cloud , 
And begat Centaurs : 't is an useful moral , 
Ambition hatched in clouds of mere opinion , 
Proves but in birth a prodigy . 


Itho.   I thank thou ; 
Yet , with your Licence , I should seem uncharitable 
To gentler Fate , if relishing the dainties 
Of a soul's settled peace , I were so feeble 
Not to digest it . 


Arm.   He deserves small trust 
Who is not privy Counsellor to himself . 


Enter Nearchus , Orgilus , and Amelus . Near.   Brave me ? 


Org.   Your Excellence mistakes his temper● 
For Ithocles in fashion of his mind 
Is beautiful , soft , gentle , the clear mirror 
Of absolute perfection . 


Amel.   Was 't your modesty 
Termed any of the Prince his servant's Spaniel ? 
Your Nurse sure taught you other language . 


Itho.   Language . 


Near.   A gallant Man at arms is here : a Doctor 
In feats of Chivalry ; blunt , and rough spoken , 
Vouchsafing not the fustian of civility , 
Which rash spirits style good manners . 


Ith.   Manners . 


Org.   no more ( Illustrious Sir ) 't is marchlesse Ithocles . 


Near.   You might have understood who I am . 


Ith.   Yes , 
I did — else — but the presence calmed th' affront ; 
YE are Cousin to the Princess . 


Near.   To the King too ; 
A certain Instrument that lent supportance 
To your Colossic greatness : — to that King too 
You might have added . 


Itho.   There is more divinity 
In beauty then in Majesty . 


Arm.   OH fie , fie 


Near.   This odd youth's pride turns heretic in loyalty . 
Sirrah ! low Mushrooms never rival Cedar's . 


Exeunt Nearchus & Amelus . Itho.   Come back : what pitiful dull thing am I 
So to be tamely scolded at ? Come back ; 
Let him come back and echo once again 
That scornful sound of Mushroom ; painted colts , 
Like Herald's coats , guilt o'er with Crowns and Sceptres , 
May bait a muzzled Lion.  


Arm.   Cousin , Cousin , 
Thy tongue is not thy friend . 


Org.   In point of honour 
Discretion knows no bounds . Amelus told me 
'T was all about a little Ring . 


Itho.   A Ring 
The Princess threw away , and I took up : 
Admit she threw 't to me ; what arm of brass 
Can snatch it hence ? no , could of grinned the hoop 
To powder , of might sooner reach my heart 
then steal and wear one dust on 't . — Orgilus , 
I am extremely wronged . 


Org.   A Lady's favour 
Is not to be so slighted . 


Itho.   Slighted . 


Arm.   Quiet 
These vain unruly passions , which will render ye 
Into a madness . 


Org.   Griefs will have their vent . 


Enter Tecnicus . Arm.   Welcome ; thou comest in season ( revereud man ) 
To pour the balsam of a supplying patience 
Into the festering wound of ill-spent fury . 


Org.   What makes He here ? 


Tecn.   The hurts are yet but mortal , 
Which shortly will prove deadly : To the King , 
Armostes , see in safety thou deliver 
This sealed up counsel ; bid him with a constancy 
Peruse the secrets of the gods : — o Sparta , 
OH Lacedaemon ! double named , but one 
In fate : when Kingdoms reel ( mark well my Saw ) 
Their heads must needs be giddy : tell the King 
That henceforth he no more must inquire after 
My aged head : Apollo wil● it so ; 
I am for Delphos . 


Arm.   Not without some conference 
With our great master . 


Tecn.   Never more to see him , 
A greater Prince commands me . — Ithocles , When youth is ripe , and Age from time doth part , 
The liveless Trunk shall wed the Broken Heart . 





Ith.   what 's this , if understood ? 


Tecn.   List Orgilus , 
Remember what I told thee long before , 
These tears shall be my witness . 


Arm.   Alas good man  


Tecn.   Let craft with courtesy a while confer , 
Revenge proves its own Executioner . 


Org.   Dark sentences are for Apollo's Priests : 
I am not Oedipus . 


Tecn.   My hour is come ; 
Cheer up the King : farewell to all . — OH Sparta , 
OH Lacedaemon . 


Arm.   If prophetic fire Exit . Tec●● 
Have warmed this old man's bosom , we might construe 
His words to fatal sense . 


Ith.   Leave to the powers 
Above us , the effects of their decrees ; 
My burden lies within me . Servile fears 
Prevent no great effects . — Divine Calantha . 


Arm.   The gods be still propitious . — Exeunt , manet Org.  


Org.   Something oddly 
The bookman prated ; yet of talked it weeping Let craft with courtesy a while confer , 
Revenge proves its own executioner . 



Conne it again ; for what ? It shall not puzzle me ; 
't is dotage of a withered brain . — Penthea 
Forbade me not her presence ; I may see her , 
And gaze my fill : why see her than I may ; 
When if I faint to speak , I must be silent . Exit Org.  


Enter Bassanes , Gransis , and Phulas . Bass.   Pray use your Recreations , all the service 
I will expect , is quietness amongst amongst e● : 
Take liberty at home , abroad , at all times , 
And in your charities appease the gods 
Whom I with my distractions have offended . 


Grans.   Fair blessings on thy heart . 


Phul.   here 's a rare change● 
My Lord , to cure the itch , is surely gelded ; 
The Cuckold , in conceit , hath cast his horns . 


Bass.   Betake thou to your several occasions , 
And wherein I have heretofore been faulty , 
Let your constructions mildly pass it over , 
Henceforth I 'll study reformation , — more , 
I have not for employment . 


Gran.   OH sweet man ! 
thou art the very honeycomb of honesty . 


Phul.   The garland of goodwill ; — Old Lady , hold up 
Thy reverend snout , and troth behind me softly , 
As it becomes a Moil of ancient carriage . Exeunt , manet Bass● 


Bass.   Beasts only capable of sense , enjoy 
The benefit of food and ease with thankfulness ; 
Such silly creatures , with a grudging , kick not 
Against the portion Nature hath bestowed ; 
But men endowed with reason , and the use 
Of reason , to distinguish from the chaff 
Of abject scarcity , the Quintessence , 
Soul , and Elixir of the Earth's abundance , 
The treasures of the Sea , the Air , nay heaven 
Repining at these glories of creation , 
Are verier beast's than beasts ; and of those beasts 
The worst am I ; I , who was made a Monarch 
Of what a heart could wish , for a chaste wife , 
Endeavoured what in me lay , to pull down 
That Temple built for adoration only , 
And level 't in the dust of causeless scandal : 
But to redeem a sacrilege so impious , 
Humility shall pour before the deities : 
I have incensed a largeness of more patience 
Than their displeased Altars can require : 
no tempests of commotion shall disquiet 
The calms of my composure . 


Enter Orgilus . Org.   I have found thee , 
thou patron of more horrors than the bulk 
Of manhood , hooped about with ribs of Iron , 
Can cram within thy breast : P●nthea ( Bassanes ) 
Cursed by thy jealousies ; more , by thy dotage 
Is left a prey to words . 


Bass.   Exercis● 
Your trials for addition to my penance , 
I am resolved . 


Org.   Play not with misery 
past cure● some angry Minister of Fate hath 
Deposed the Empress of her soul , her r●●son , 
From its most proper Throne ; but what 's the miracle 
more new , I , I have seen it , and yet live . 


Bass.   You may delude my senses , not my judgement : 
't is anchored into a firm resolution , 
Dalliance of Mirth or Wit can never unfixe it . 
Practise yet further . 


Org.   May thy death of love to her 
Damn all thy comforts to a lasting fast 
From every joy of life : thou barren rock , 
By thee we have be split in ken of harbour . 


Enter Ithocles , Penthea her bar about her ears , Philema , Christalla . Ith.   Sister look up , your Ithocles , your brother 
Speaks t' ee : why do you weep ? Dear , turn not from me : 
Here is a kill sight : lo , Bassanes , 
A lamentable object . 


Org.   Man , dost see 't ? 
Sports are more gamesome ; am I yet in merriment ? 
Why dost not laugh● 


Bass.   Divine , and best of Ladies , 
Please to forget my outrage ? mercy ever 
Cannot but lodge under a root so excellent : 
I have cast off that cruelty of frenzy 
Which once appeared , Impostors , and then juggled 
To cheat my sleeps of rest . 


Org.   Was I in earnest ? 


Pen.   Sure if we were all Sirens , we should sing pitifully ; 
And 't were a comely music , when in parts 
One sung another's knell : the Turtle sighs 
When he hath lost his mate ; and yet some say 
OF must be dead first : 't is a fine deceit 
To pass away in a dream : indeed i  slept 
With mine eyes open a great while . no falsehood 
Equals a broken faith ; there 's not a hair 
Sticks on my head but like a leaden Plumber 
It sinks me to the grave : I must creep thither . 
The journey is not long . 


Ith.   But thou , Penthea , 
Hast many years , I hope , to number yet 
Ever thou canst travel that way . 


Bass.   Let the Swan first 
Be wrapped up in an everlasting darkness , 
Before the light of nature , chiefly formed 
For the whole world's delight , feel an Eclipse 
So universal . 


Org.   Wisdom ( look thou ) 
begins to rave : — art thou mad too , antiquity 


Pen.   Since I was first a wife , I might have been 
Mother to many pretty prattling Babes : 
They would have smiled when I smiled ; and , for certaine● 
I should have cried when they cried ; — truly brother , 
My father would have picked me out a husband , 
And then my little one● had been no bastards : 
But 't is too late for me to marry now , 
I am past childbearing ; 't is not my fault . 


Bass.   Fall on me , if there be a burning Aetna , 
And bury me in flames ; sweats hot as sulphur , 
Boil through my pores : affliction hath in store 
no torture like to this . 


Org.   Behold a patience● 
Lay by thy whining gr●y dissimulation , 
Do something worth a Chronicle ; show justice 
Upon the Author of this mischief ; dig out 
The jealousies that hatched this thraldom first 
With thine own poniard : every antic r●pture 
Can roar as thine does . 


Ith.   Orgilus forbear . 


Bass.   Disturb him not , it is a talking motion 
Provided for my torment : what a fool am I 
To bawdy passion ? ever I 'll speak a word 
I will look on and burst . 


Pen.   I loved you once . 


Org.   thou didst , wronged creature , in despite of malice ; 
For it I love thee even . 


Pen.   Spare your hand , 
Believe me , I 'll not hurt it . 


Org.   Pain my heart to 
Complain not though I wring it hard : I 'll kiss it ; 
OH 't is a fine soft palm : hark in thine care , 
Like whom do I look , pre●he ? nay , no whispering . 
Goodness ! we had been happy : too much happiness 
Will make folk proud they say — but that is he ; points at Ithocles . 
And yet he paid for 't home ; alas , his heart 
Is crept into the cabinet of the Princess ; 
We shall have points and bridelaces . Remember 
When we last gathered Roses in the garden 
I found my wits , but truly you lost yours : 
that 's He , and still 't is Herald  


Ith.   Poor soul , how idly 
Her fancies guide her tongue . 


Bass.   Keep in vexation , 
And break not into clamour . 


Org.   She has tutored me : 
Some powerful inspiration cheques my laziness : 
Now let me kiss your hand , grieved beauty . 


Pen.   Kiss it . 
Alack , alack , his lips be wondrous cold ; 
Dear soul , h 'as lost his colour : have thou seen 
A straying heart ? all crannies , every drop 
Of blood is turned to an Amethyst , 
Which married Bachelors hang in their ears . 


Org.   Peace usher her into Elysium : 
If this be madness , madness is an Oracle . Exit Org.  


Ith.   Christalla , Philema , when slept my sister , 
Her rave are so wild . 


Chri.   Sir , not these ten days . 


Phil.   We watch by her continually ; besides , 
We cannot any way pray her to eat . 


Bass.   O — misery of miseries ! 


Pen.   Take comfort , 
You may live well , and die a good old man : 
By yea and nay , an oath not to be broken , 
If you had joined our hands once in the Temple , 
'T was since my father died , for had he lived 
He would have don 't : I must have called you father : 
O my wracked honour ruined by those Tyrants , 
A cruel brother , and a desperate dotage ! 
There is no peace left for a ravished wife 
Widowed by lawless marriage ; to all memory , 
Penthea's , poor Penthea's name is strumpeted : 
But since her blood was seasoned by the forfeit 
Of noble shame , with mixtures of pollution , 
Her blood ( 't is just ) he henceforth never heightened 
With taste of sustenance . Star●e , l●● that fullness 
Whose pleurisy hath severed faith and modesty , 
Forgive me : o I faint . 


Arm.   Be not so wilful . 
Sweet Niece , to work thine own destruction . 


Ith.   Nature 
Will call her daughter , monster , — what ? not eat ? 
Refuse the only ordinary meane● 
Which are ordained for life ? be not , my sister , 
A murderess to thyself . — Hearest thou this , Bassanes ? 


Bass.   Foyes , I am busy ; for I have not thoughts 
Enough to think all shall be well anon . 
't is tumbling in my head there is a mastery 
In Art to fatten and keep smooth the outside ; 
Yes , and to comfort up the vital spirits 
Without the help of food , fumes or perfumes , 
Perfumes or fumes : let her alone , I 'll search out 
The trick on 't . 


Pen.   Led me gently ; heavens reward ye 
Griefs are sure friends ; they leave ( without control ) 
Nor cure nor comforts for a leprous soul . 


Exeunt the maids supporting Penthe●●'s Bass.   I grant t' ee ; and will put in practice instantly 
What you shall still admire : 't is wonderful , 
't is supper singular , not to be matched : 
Yet when i  don 't , i  don 't ; ye shall all thank me . 


Exit Bassanes . Arm.   The sight is full of terror . 


Ith.   On my soul 
Lies such an infinite clog of massy dulness , 
As that I have not sense enough to feel it . 
See , Uncle , th' augury thing returns again , 
  welcome him with Thunder ? we are haunted , 
And must use exorcism to conjure down 
This spirit of malevolence . 


Arm.   Mildly , Nephew . 


Enter Nearchus and Amelus . Near.   I come not , Sir , to chide your late disorder : 
Admitting that th' enurement to a roughness 
In Soldiers of your years and fortunes , chiefly 
So lately prosperous , hath not yet shaken off 
The custom of the war in hours of leisure : 
Nor shall you need excuse , since y● are to render 
Account to that fair Excellence , the Princess , 
Who in 〈◊〉 private Gallery expect it 
From your own mouth alone : I am a messenger 
But to her pleasure . 


Ith.   Excellent Nearchus , 
Be Prince still of my services , and conquer , 
Without the combat of dispute , I honour ' ee . 


Near.   The King is on a sudden indisposed , 
Physicians are called for ; 't were fit , Armostes , 
You should be near him . 


Arm.   Sir , I kiss your hands . Exeunt . 


Manent Nearchus & Amelus . Near.   Amelus , I perceive Calantha's bosom 
Is warmed with other fires then such as can 
Take strength from any fuel of the love 
I might address to her : young Ithocles , 
Or ever I mistake , is Lord ascendant 
Of her devotions ; one , to speak him truly , 
In every disposition nobly fashioned , 


Ame.   But can your Highness' brook to be so rivalled , 
Considering th' inequality of the persons ? 


Near.   I can , Amelus ; for affections injured 
By tyranny , or rigour of compulsion , 
Like Tempest-threatened Trees unfirmely rooted , 
Never spring to timely growth : observe , for instance , 
Life-spent Penthea , and unhappy Orgilus . 


Ame.   How does your grace determine ? 


Near.   To be jealous 
In public , of what privately I 'll further ; 
And though they shall not know , yet they shall find it . 


Exeunt omnes . Enter Hemophil and Grone as leaving Amyclas , and placing him in a Chair , followed by Armostes , Crotolon , and Prophilus . Amy.   Our daughter is not near ? 


Arm.   She is retired , Sir , 
Into her gallery . 


Amy.   where 's the Prince our Cousin ? 


Proph.   New walked into the Grove ( my Lord ) 


Amy.   All leave us , 
Except Armostes , and you Cr●tol●n , 
We would be private . 


Proph.   Health unto your Majesty 


Ex●unt Prophilus , Hemophil , & Gro●● Amy.   What , Tec●i●us is gone ? 


Arm.   He is to Delpho●● ● 
And to your Royal hands presents this box . 


Amy.   Unseal it , good Armostes , therein lies 
The secrets of the Oracle ; out with it ; 
Apollo live our patron : read , Armostes . 


Arm.   The plot in which the Vine takes root , 
begins to dry , from head to foot , 
The stock soon withering , w●nt of sap 
Doth cause to quail the budding grape : 
But from the neighbouring Elm , a d●w 
Shall drop and feed the Plot 〈◊〉 


Amy.   That is the Oracle , what exposition 
Makes the Philosopher ? 


Arm.   This briefs one , only : The plot is Sparta , the 〈◊〉 a Vine the King ; 
The quailing grape his daughter ; but the thing 
Of most importance , not to be revealed , 
Is a near Prince , the Elme● the r●st concealed . 





Te●nicus . Amy.   Enough ; although the opening of this Riddle 
Be but itself a Riddle , yet we construe 
How near our labouring age drewes 〈◊〉 rest● 
But must Calantha quail to the young grap● 
Untimely budded ! I could mourn for her , 
Her tenderness hath yet deserved no ●igor 
So to be crossed by Fate . 


Ar● .  You misapply , Sir● 
With favour let me speak it what Apollo 
Hath clouded in hide sense : I here co●iectur● 
Her marriage with some neighbouring Prince , the dew 
Of which befriending Elm shall ever strengthen 
Your Subjects with a Sovereignty of power . 


Crot.   Besides , most gracious Lord , the pith of Oracles 
Is to be then digested , when th● events 
Expound their truth , not brought 〈◊〉 to light 
As uttered ; Truth is Child of Time● and herein 
I find no scruple , rather cause of comforts 
With unity of kingdoms . 


Amy.   May it prove so● 
For weal of this dear Nation . — where is Ithocles ? 
Armostes , Crotolon ; when this withered Vine 
Of my frail carcase , on the funeral Pile , 
Is fired into its ashes , let that young man 
Be hedged about still with your cares and loves ; 
Much owe I to his worth , much to his service . 
Let such as wait come in now . 


Arm.   All attend here . 


Enter Ithocles , Calantha , Prophilus , Orgilus , E●phranea , Hemophil , and Groneas . Cal.   Dear Sir , King , Father ! 


Ith.   OH my royal Master ! 


Amy.   Clean not my heart ( sweet Twins of my life's solace ) 
With your forejudging fears : there is no Physic 
So cunningly restorative to cherish 
The fall of Age , or call back youth and vigour , 
As your consents in duty : I will shake off 
This languishing disease of time , to quicken 
Fresh pleasures in these drooping hours of sadness : 
Is fair Euphranea married yet to Prophilus ? 


Crot.   This morning , gracious Lord  


Org.   This very morning's 
Which with your Highness leave you may observe too 
Our sister looks ( me thinks ) mirthful and sprightly ; 
As if her chaster fancy could already 
Expound the riddle of her gain in losing 
A trifle ; Maids know only that they know not : 
Pish , prithee blush not ; 't is but honest change 
Of fashion in the garment , loose for straight , 
And so the modest maid is made a wife : 
Shrewd business , is 't not sister ? 


Euph.   You are pleasant . 


Amy.   We thank thee , Orgilus , this mirth becomes thee : 
But wherefore sits the Court in such a silence ? 
A wedding without Revels is not seemly . 


Cal.   Your into indisposition , Sir , forbade it . 


Amy.   Be it thy charge , Calantha , to set forward 
The bridal spo●tss , to which I will ●e present : 
If not , at least consenting● 〈◊〉 own Ithocles , 
I have done little foe th●e yet . 


Ith.   You've built me 
To the full height I stand in . 


Cal.   Now or never 
May I propose a suit . 


Amy.   Demand and have it . 


Cal.   Pray Sir give me this young man , and no further 
Accounted him yours , than he deserves in all things 
To be thought worthy mine ; I will esteem him 
According to his merit . 


Amy.   Still thou art my daughter , 
Still growest upon my heart , give me thine hand ; 
Calantha take thine own ; in noble actions 
thou 'lt find him firm and absolute : I would no● 
Have parted with thee , Ithocles , to any 
But to a mistress who is all what I am . 


Ith.   A change ( great King ) most wished for , cause the same . — 


Cal.   thou art mine . — Have I now kept my word . 


Ith.   Divinely . 


Org.   Rich fortune's guard to favour of a Princess , 
Rock thee ( brave man ) in ever crowned plenty ; 
y' are minion of the tim● , be thankful for it : 
Ho , here 's a swinge in Destiny . — Apparent , 
The youth is up on tiptoe , yet may stumble . 


Amy.   On to your recreations ; now convey me 
Unto my bedchamber : none on his forehead 
Were a distempered look . 


Omnes .  The gods preserue'ee . 


Cal.   Sweet be not from my sight . 


Ith.   My whole felicity . 


Exeunt carrying out of the K●ng , Orgilus stays Ithocles● Org.   Shall I be bold my Lord ? 


Ith.   thou canst not , Orgilus ; 
Call me thine own , for Prophilus must henceforth 
Be all thy sisters ; friendship , though it cease not 
In marriage , yet is oft at less command 
then when a single freedom can dispose it . 


Org.   Most right , my most good Lord , my most great Lord , 
My gracious Princely Lord , I might add royal . 


Ith.   Royal , a Subject royal ? 


Org.   Why not , pray Sir ? 
The Sovereignty of Kingdoms in their nonage 
Stooped to desert , not birth : there 's as much meri● 
In clearness of affection , as in puddle 
Of generation : you have conquered Love 
Even in the loveliest ; if I greatly err not , 
The son of Venus hath bequeathed his quiver 
To Ithocles his manage , by whose arrows 
Calantha's breast is opened . 


Ith.     be possible ? 


Org.   I was myself a piece of suitor once , 
And forward in preferment too ; so forward , 
That speaking truth , I may without offence ( Sir ) 
Presume to whisper , that my hopes , and ( hark thou ) 
My certainty of marriage stood assured 
With as firm footing ( by your leave ) as any 's 
Now at this very instant — but. — 


Ith.   't is granted : 
And for a league of privacy between us , 
Read o'er my bosom , and partake a secret ; 
The Princess is contracted mine . 


Org.   Still : why not ? 
I now applaud her wisdom ; when your kingdom 
Stands seated in your will secure , and settled , 
I dare pronounce you will be a just Monarch : 
Greece must admire , and tremble . 


Ith.   then the sweetness 
Of so imparadised a comfort , Orgilus , 
It is to banquet with the gods . 


Org.   The glory 
Of numerous children , potency of Nobles , 
Bend knees , hearts paved to tread on . 


Ith.   With a friendship 
So dear , so fast as thine . 


Org.   I am unfitting 
For Office , but for service . 


Ith.   we 'll distinguish 
Our fortunes merely in the Title ; partners 
In all respects else but the bed . 


Org.   The bed ? 
Forfend it jove's own jealousy , till lastly 
We slip down in the common earth together ; 
And there our beds are equal , save some Monument 
To show this was the King , and this the Subject . 
List , what sad sounds are these ? extremely sad ones . 


Ith.   Sure from Penthea's lodgings . 


Org.   Hark , a voice too . 


Soft sad music . A Song . 

O no more , no more , too late 
Sighs are spent ; the burning Tapers 
Of a life as chaste as Fate , 
Pure as are unwritten papers , 
Are bur●t out : no heat , no light 
Now remains 't is ever night . 
Love is dead , let lover's eyes , 
Locked in endless dreams , 
th' extremes of all extremes , 
Open no more , for now Love dies , 
Now Love dies , implying 
Love's Martyrs must be ever , ever dying . 


Ith.   O my misgiving heart ! 


Org.   A horrid stillness 
Succeeds this deathful air , let 's know the reason : 
Tread softly , there is mystery in mourning . Exeunt . 


Enter Christalla and Philema , bringing in Penthea in a chair veiled : two other servants placing two chairs , one on the one side , and the other with an Engine on the other ; the maids sit down a● her feet mourning , the servant's ge● out , meet them Ithocles and Orgilus . Ser● .  't is done , that on her right hand . 


Org.   Good , begun . 


Ith.   Soft peace enrich this room . 


Org.   How fares the Lady ? 


Phil.   Dead . 


Chri.   Dead ! 


Phil.   Starved . 


Chri.   Starved ! 


Ith.   Me miserable ! 


Org.   Tell us 
How parted she from life ? 


Phil.   She called for music , 
And begged some gentle voice to tune a farewell 
To life and griefs : Christalla touched the Lute , 
I wept the funeral song . 


Chri.   Which scarce was ended , 
But her last breath sealed up these hollow sounds , 
OH cruel Ithocles , and injured Orgilus ! 
So down she drew her veil , so died . 


Ith.   So died . 


Org.   Up ; you are messengers of death , go from us ; 
here 's woe enough to court without a prompter . 
Away ; and hark ye , till you see us next , 
no syllable that she is dead . — Away , Exeunt Phil. & Chri.  
Keep a smooth brow . — My Lord  


Ith.   Mine only sister , 
Another is not left me . 


Org.   Take that chair , 
I 'll seat me here in this : between us sits 
The object of our sorrows ; some few tears 
we 'll part among us ; I perhaps can mix 
One lamentable story to prepare ' 'em . 
There , there , sit there , my Lord  


Ith.   Yes , as you please . 
Ithocles sits down , and is caught in the Engine . What means this treachery ? 


Org.   Caught , you are caught 
Young master : 't is thy throne of Coronation , 
thou fool of greatness : see , I take this veil off ; 
Survey a beauty withered by the flames 
Of an insulting Phaeton her brother . 


Ith.   thou meanest to kill me basely . 


Org.   I foreknew 
The last act of her life , and trained thee hither 
To sacrifice a Tyrant to a Turtle . 
You dreamt of kingdoms , did ' ee ? how to bosom 
The delicacies of a youngling Princess , 
How with this nod to grace that subtle Courtier , 
How with that frown to make this Noble tremble , 
And so forth ; whiles Penthea's groans , and tortures , 
Her agonies , her miseries , afflictions , 
Never touched upon your thought ; as for my injuries , 
Alas they were beneath your royal pity , 
But yet they lived , thou proud man , to confound thee : 
Behold thy fate , this steel . 


Ith.   Strike home ; a courage 
As keen as thy revenge shall give it welcome : 
But prithee faint not ; if the wound close up , 
Tent it with double force , and search it deeply . 
thou look'st that I should whine , and beg compassion , 
As loath to leave the vainness of my glories ; 
A statelier resolution arms my confidence , 
To cozen thee of honour ; neither could I , 
With equal trial of unequal fortune , 
By hazard of a duel , 't were a bravery 
Too mighty for a slave intending murder : 
On to the Execution , and inherit 
A conflict with thy horrors . 


Org.   By Apollo , 
thou talk'st a goodly language ; for requital , 
I will report thee to thy mistress richly : 
And take this peace along ; some few short minutes 
Determined , my resolves shall quickly follow 
Thy wrathful ghost ; then if we tug for mastery , 
Penthea's sacred eyes shall lend new courage . 
Give me thy hand , be healthful in thy parting 
From lost mortality : thus , thus , I free it . kills him . 


Ith.   Yet , yet , I scorn to shrink . 


Org.   Keep up thy spirit : 
I will be gentle even in blood ; to linger 
Pain , which I strive to cure , were to be cruel . 


Ith.   Nimble in vengeance I forgive thee ; follow 
Safety , with best success o may it prospero ! 
Penthea , by thy side thy brother bleeds : 
The earnest of his wrongs to thy forced faith , 
Thoughts of ambition , or delicious banquet , 
With beauty , youth , and love , together perish 
In my last breath , which on the sacred Altar 
Of a long looked for peace-now-moves-to heaven . moritur . 


Org.   Farewell , fair spring of manhood ; henceforth welcome 
Best expectation of a noble sufferance : 
I 'll lock the bodies safe , till what must follow 
Shall be approved — Sweet Twins shine stars for ever . 
In vain they build their hopes , whose life is shame , 
no monument l●sts but a happy Name . Exit Orgilus . 


Actus Quintus : 

Scaena prima . 

Enter bassanes alone . Bass.   Athens , to Athens I have sent , the Nursery 
Of Grease for learning , and the Fount of knowledge : 
For here in Sparta there 's not left amongst us 
One wise man to direct , we 're all turned madcaps : 
't is said , Apollo is the god of herbs ; 
then certainly he knows the virtue of 'em : 
To Delphos I have sent to ; if there can be 
A help for nature , we are sure yet . 


Enter Orgilus : Org.   Honour 
Attend thy counsels ever . 


Bass.   I beseech thee 
With all my heart let me go from thee quietly , 
I will not aught to do with thee of all men . 
The doublers of a Hare , or , in a morning , 
Salutes from a splay-footed witch , to drop 
Three drops of blood at th' nose just , and no more , 
Croaking of Ravens , or the screech of Owls , 
Are not so boding mischief as thy crossing 
My private meditations : eat me , prithee ; 
And if I cannot love thee heartily , 
I 'll love thee as well as I can . 


Org.   Noble Bassanes 
Mistake me not . 


Bass.   Phew , than we shall be troubled ; 
thou wert ordained my plague , heaven make me thankful , 
And give me patience too , heaven I beseech thee . 


Org.   Accept a league of amity ; for henceforth 
I vow by my best Genius , in a syllable , 
Never to speak vexation ; I will study 
Service and friendship with a zealous sorrow 
For my past incivility towards ' ee . 


Bass.   Heighday ! good words , good words , I must believe 'em , 
And be a Coxcomb for my labour . 


Org.   Use not 
So hard a Language ; your misdoubt is causeless 
For instance ; if you promise to put on 
A constancy of patience , such a patience 
As Chronicle , or history never mentioned , 
As follows not example , but shall stand 
A wonder , and a Theme for imitation , 
The first , the Index pointing to a second , 
I will acquaint'ee with an unmatched secret , 
Whose knowledge to your griefs shall set a period . 


Bass.   thou canst not ( Orgilus ) 't is in the pow●r 
Of the gods only ; yet for satisfaction , 
Because I note an earnest in thine utterance , 
Unforced , and naturally free , be resolute 
The Virgin Bayes shall not withstand the lightning 
With a more careless danger , than my constancy 
The full of thy relation : could it move 
Distraction in a senseless marble statue , 
It should find me a rock : I do expect now 
Some truth of unheard moment . 


Org.   To your patience 
You must add privacy , as strong in silence 
As mysteries looked up in jove's own bosom . 


Bass.   A skull hid in the earth a treble age , 
Shall sooner prate . 


Org.   Lastly , to such direction 
As the severity of a glorious Action 
Deserves to lead your wisdom and your judgement , 
You ought to yield obedience . 


Bass.   With assurance 
Of will and thankfulness . 


Org.   With manly courage 
Please then to follow me . 


Bass.   Where ever , I fear not . 


Exeunt omnes . Scene 2.  Loud music . 

Enter Groneas and Hemophil leading Euphranea , Christalla and Philema leading Propholus , Nearchins supporting Calantha ; Crotolon , and Amelus ; cease loud Music , all make a stand . Cal.   We miss our servant Ithocles and Orgilus , 
On whom attend they ? 


Crot.   My son , gracious Princess , 
Whispered some new device , to which these ; Revels 
Should be but usher : wherein I conceive 
Lord Ithocles and he himself are Actors . 


Cal.   A fair excuse for absence : as for Bassanes . 
Delights to him are troublesome ; Armostes 
Is with the King.  


Cr●t .  He is . 


Cal.   On to the dance : 
Dear Cousin , hand you the Bride , the Bridegroom must be 
Entrusted to my Courtship : be not ica●o●●● 
Euphranea , I shall scarcely prove a temptress : 
Fall to our dance . 


Music . Nearchus' dance with Euphranea , Prophilus with Calantha , Christalla with Homophil , Philema with Groneas . Dance the first change ; during which , Enter Armostes . Arm.   The King your father's dead . — in Calantha's eared 


Cal.   To the other change . 


Arm.   Is 't possible ? 


Dance again . Enter Bassanes . Bass.   OH Madam ! 
Penthea , poor Penthea's starved . 


Cal.   Beshrew thee , 
Led to the next . 


Bass.   Amazement dulls my senses . 


Dance again . Enter Orgisus . Org.   Brave Ithocles is murdered , murdered cruelly . 


Cal.   How dull this music sounds ? strike up more sprightly ? 
Our footings are not active like our heart 
Which treads the nimbler measure . 


Org.   I am thunderstruck . 


Last change . Cease music . Cal.   So , let us breathe a while : hath not this motion 
Raised fresher colour on your cheeks ? 


Near.   Sweet Princess . 
A perfect purity of blood enamels 
The beauty of your white . 


Cal.   We all look cheerfully : 
And Cousin , 't is , me thinks , a rare presumption 
In any , who prefers our lawful pleasures 
Before their own sour censure , to interrupt 
The custom of this Ceremony bluntly . 


Near.   None dares , Lady . 


Cal.   Yes , yes ; some hollow voice delivered to me 
How that the King was dead . 


Arm.   The King is dead : 
That fatal news was mine ; for in mine arms 
He breathed his last , and with his Crown bequeathed thou 
Your mother's wedding Ring , which here I tender . 


Crot.   Most strange ! 


Cal.   Peace crown his ashes : we are queen then . 


Near.   Long li●e Calan●ha , Sparta's Sovereign Queen . 


Omnes .  Long live the Queen . 


Cal.   What whispered Bass●●●● ? 


Bass.   That my Penthea , miserable soul , 
Was starned to death . 


Cal.   she 's happy ; she hath finished 
A long and painful progress . — A third murmur 
Pierced mine unwilling ears . 


Org.   That Ithocles 
Was murdered ; rather butchered , had not bravery 
Of an undaunted spirit , conquering terror , 
Proclaimed his last Act triumph over mine . 


Arm   How ? murdered ? 


Cal.   By whose hand ? 


Org.   By mine ; this weapon 
Was instrument to my revenge : the reasons 
Are just and known : quit him of these , and then 
Never lived Gentleman of greater merit , 
Hope , or habiliment to steer a kingdom . 


Crot.   Fie Orgilus . 


Euph.   Fie brother . 


Cal.   You have done it . 


Bass.   How it was done let him report , the forfeit 
Of whose allegiance to our laws doth covet 
Rigour of justice ; but that done it is , 
Mine eyes have been an evidence of credit 
Too sure to be convinced : Armostes , rend not 
thine Arteries with hearing the bare circumstances 
Of these calamities : thou 'st lost a Nephew , 
A Niece , and I a wife : continue man still , 
Make me the pattern of digesting evils , 
Who can outlive my mighty ones , not shrinking 
At such a pressure as would sink a soul 
Into what 's most of death , the worst of horrors : 
But I have sealed a covenant with sadness , 
And entered into bonds without condition 
To stand these tempests calmly ; mark m● , Nobles , 
I do not shed a tear , not for Penth●a : 
Excellent misery ! 


Cal.   We begin our reign 
With a first act of justice : thy confession , 
Unhappy Orgilus , dooms thee a sentence ; 
But yet thy fathers , or thy sister's presence 
Shall be excused : give , Crotolon , a blessing 
To thy lost sonne● Euphranea , take a farewell , 
And both be gone . 


Crot.   Confirm thee , noble sorrow , 
In worthy resolution . 


Euph.   could my tears speak , 
My griefs were sleight . 


Org.   All goddess dwell amongst yee● 
Enjoy my sister , Prophilus ; my vengeance 
Aimed never at thy prejudice . 


Cal.   Now withdraw : 
Exeunt Crotolon , Prophilus , & Euphran●a●'s Bloody relator of thy stains in blood ; 
For that thou hast reported him whose fortunes 
And life by thee are both at once snatched from him , 
With honourable mention ; make thy choice 
Of what death likes thee best , there 's all our bounty . 
But to excuse delays , let me ( dear Cousin ) 
Entreat you and these Lords see execution 
Instant before thou part . 


Near.   Your will commands us.  


Org.   One suit , just Queen , my last ; vouchsafe your clemency 
That by no common hand I be divided 
From this my humble frailty . 


Cal.   To their wisdoms 
Who are to be spectators of thine end , 
I make the reference : those that are dead , 
Are dead ; had they not now died , of necessity 
They must have paid the debt they owed to nature , 
One time or other . — Use dispatch , my Lords , 
we 'll suddenly prepare our Coronation . 


Exeunt Calantha , Phile●a , Christa● Arm.   't is strange , these Tragedies should never touch on 
Her female pity . 


Bass.   She has a masculine spirit : 
And wherefore should I pule , and like a girl , 
Put finger in the eye : let 's be all toughness , 
Without distinction betwixt sex and sex . 


Near.   Now Orgilus thy choice . 


Org.   To bleed to death . 


Arm.   The Executioner . 


Org.   Myself , no Surgeon . 
I am well skilled in letting blood : bind fast 
This arm , that so the pipes may from their conduits 
Convey a full stream : here 's a skilful Instrument : 
Only I am a beggar to some charity 
To speed me in this Execution , 
By lending th' other prick to th' t'other arm , 
When this is bubbling life ou● . 


Bass.   I am for ' ee . 
It most concerns my art , my care , my credit ; 
Quick , fillet both this arms . 


Org.   Gramercy friendship's 
Such courtesies are real , which flow cheerfully 
Without an expection of requital . 
Reach me a staff in this hand : if a proneness , 
Or custom in my nature , from my cradle , 
Had been inclined to fierce and eager bloodshed ; 
A coward guilt , hid in a coward quaking , 
Would have betrayed fame to ignoble flight , 
And vagabond pursuit of dreadful safety : 
But look upon my steadiness , and scorn not 
The sickness of my fortune , which since Bassanes 
Was husband to Penthea , had lain bedrid : 
We trifle time in words : thus I show cunning 
In opening of a vein too full , too lively . 


Arm.   Desperate courage . 


Org.   Honourable infancy . 


Lem.   I tremble at the sight . 


Gron.   Would I were loose . 


Bass.   It sparkles like a lusty wine new broached ; 
The vessel must be sound from which it issue's ; 
Grasp hard this other sticke● I 'll be as nimble . 
But prithee look not pale ; have at thou stretch out 
thine arm with vigour , and unshooke virtue . 
Good ; o I envy not ● Rival fitted 
To conquer in extremities ; this pastime 
Appears majestical : some high tuned poem 
Hereafter shall deliver to posterity 
The writer's glory , and his subject's triumph : 
How is 't man , droop not yet . 


Org.   I feel no palsies : 
On a pair royal do I wait in death ; 
My Sovereign , as his Liegeman ; on my Mistress , 
As a devoted servant ; and on Ithocles , 
As if no brave , yet no unworthy enemy : 
Nor did I use an engine to entrap 
His life , out of a slavish fear to combat 
Youth , strength , or cunning , but for that I durst not 
Engage the goodness of a cause on fortune , 
By which his name might have outfaced my vengeance : 
〈◊〉 Tecnicus , inspired with Phoebus' fire , 
I call to mind thy Augury , 't was perfect ; 
Revenge proves its own Executioner● 
When feeble man is bending to his mother , 
The dust he was first framed on , thus he totters . 


Bass.   Life's fountain is dried up . 


Org.   So falls the Standards 
Of my prerogative in being a creature : 
A mist hangs o'er mine eyes ; the sun 's bright splendour 
Is clouded in an everlasting shadow : 
Welcome thou ice that sittest about my heart , 
no heat can ever thaw thee . 


Near.   Speech hath left him . dies . 


Bass.   OF has shaken hands with time : his funeral urn 
Shall be my charge : remove the bloodless body ; 
The Coronation must require attendance : 
That past , my few days can be but one mourning . Exeunt . 


An altar covered with white . Two lights of Virgin wax , during which music of Recorders , enter four bearing Ithocles on a ●ease , or in a chair , in a rich robe , and a Crown on his bead ; place him on one side of the Altar , after him enter Calantha in a white robe , and crowned Euphran●a ; Philema , Christalla in white , Nearchus , Armostes , Crotolon , Prophilus , Amelus , Bassanes , Lemophil , and Groneas . Calantha goes and kneels before the Altar , the rest stand off , the women kneeling behind ; cease Recorders during her devotions : So●a music . Calantha and the rest rise doing obeisance to the Altar . Cal.   Our Orisons are heard , the gods are merciful : 
Now tell me , you whose loyalties pays tribute 
To us your lawful Sovereign , how unskilful 
Your duties or obedience is , to render 
Subjection to the Sceptre of a Virgin , 
Who have been ever fortunate in Princes 
Of masculine and stirring composition ? 
A woman has enough to govern wisely 
Her own demeanours , passions , and divisions . 
A Nation warlike and enured to practice 
Of policy and labour , cannot brook 
A feminate authority : we therefore 
Command your counsel , how you may advise us 
In choosing of a husband whose abilities 
Can better guide this kingdom . 


Near.   Royal Lady , 
Your law is in your william  


Arm.   We have seen tokens 
Of constancy too lately to mistrust it . 


Crot.   Yet if your highness settle on a choice 
By your own judgement both allowed and liked of , 
Sparta may grow in power , and proceed 
To an increasing height . 


Cal.   Hold you the same mind . 


Bass.   Alas great mistress , reason is so clouded 
With the thick darkness of my infinites woes 
That I forecast , nor dangers , hopes , or safety : 
Give me some corner of the world to wear out 
The remnant of the minutes I must number , 
Where I may hear no sounds , but sad complaints 
Of Virgins who have lost contracted partners ; 
Of husbands howling that their wives were ravished 
By some untimely fate ; of friends divided 
By churlish opposition , or of father's 
Weeping upon their children's slaughtered carcases ; 
Or daughters groaning o'er their father's hearses , 
And I can dwell there● and with these keep consort 
As musical a● their●● what can you look ●●r 
From an old foolish peevish doting man , 
But craziness of age ? 


Cal.   Cousin of Argos . 


Near.   Madam . 


Cal.   Were I presently 
To choose you for my Lord , I 'll open freely 
What articles I would propose to treat on 
Before our marriage . 


Near●  Name them virtuous Lady . 


Cal.   I would presume you would retain the royalty 
Of Sparta in her own bounds : then in Argos 
Armostes might be Viceroy ; in Mess●ne 
Might Crotolon bear sway , and Bassanes — 


Bass.   ay , Queen ? alas ! what I ? 


Cal.   Be Sparta's Marshal : 
The multitudes of high employments could not 
But set a peace to private griefs : these Gentlemen , 
Gron●as and Lemophil , with worthy pensions 
Should wait upon your person in your Chamber : 
I would bestow Crystals on Amelus , 
she 'll prove a constant wife , and Phil●m . 
Should into Vesta's Temple . 


Bass.   This is a Testament , 
It sounds not like conditions on a marriage . 


Near.   All this should be performed , 


Cal.   Lastly , for Prophilus●'s ● 
He should be ( Cousin ) solemnly invested 
In all those honours , titles , and preferments 
Which his dear friend , and my neglected husband 
Too short a time enjoyed . 


Proph.   I am unworthy 
To live in your remembrance . 


Euph.   Excellent Lady ! 


Near.   Madam , what means that word neglected husband ? 


Cal.   Forgive me : now I turn to thee thou shadow 
Of my contracted Lord : bear witness all , 
I put my mother wedding Ring upon 
His finger , 't was my father's last bequest : 
Thus I new marry him whose wife I am ; 
Death shall not separate us : o my Lords , 
I but deceived your eyes with Antic gesture , 
When one news strait came huddling on another , 
Of death , and death , and death , still I danced forward , 
But it struck home , and here , and in an instant , 
Be such mere women , who with shrieks and outcries 
Can vow a present end to all their sorrows , 
Yet live to vow new pleasures , and outlive them : 
They are the silent griefs which cut the heartstrings ; 
Let me die smiling . 


Near.   't is a truth too ominous . 


Cal.   One kiss on these cold lips , my last ; crack , crick . 
Argos now 's Sparta's King : command the voices 
Which wait at th' Altar , now to sing the song 
I fitted for my end . 


Near.   Sirs , the ●ong● 


A Song . 

Glories , pleasures , pomps , delights , and ease , 
Can but please 
outward senses , when the mind 
Is not untroubled , or by peace refined . 
Crown's may flourish and decay , 
Beauties shine , but fade away . 
Youth may revel , yet it must 
Lie down in a bed of dust : 
Earthly honours flow and waste , 
Time alone doth change and last . 
Sorrows mingled with contents , prepare 
Rest for care ; 
Love only reigns in death : though Art 
Can find no comfort for a broken heart . 


Arm.   Look to the Queen . 


Bass.   Her heart is 〈…〉 
OH royal ma●d , would thou hadst mis● this part : 
Yet 't was a brave one : I must weep to see 
Her smile in death . 


Arm.   Wise Tecnicus , thus said ●e● When youth is ripe , and age from time doth part , 
The liveless Trunk shall wed the broken hearts 



't is here fulfilled . 


Near.   I am your King.  


O●●●● .  Long live 
Nearchus' King of Sparta . 


Near.   Her last will 
Shall never be digressed from ; wait in order 
Upon these faithful lovers as becomes us. 
The Counsels of the gods are never known , 
Till men can call th' effects of them their owne● 


FINIS . 





All.  1  2.  3.  All.  