Eirenopolis : THE CITY OF PEACE . 

Surveyed and commended to all Christians . 

By THO. ADAM'S . 

LONDON , Printed by Aug. Matthewes for john Grismand , and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's Alley , at the Sign of the Gun . 1622.  

ERRATA . 

Page 7. for proposition , read pro portion . page 18. for imitates , read intimates . page 19 for if read as . 

To all that love PEACE and TRUTH . 

PEACE , take it with all faults , is better than War : and the end of a just war , is but Studium Pacis , the intention of a right peace . The Subject than is beyond exception , to all that love Peace . But commonly they , with whom it meddles , refuse to meddle with it . Let such take the course of their unhappy precipice into everlasting unquietness , who wilfully reject the cure of their affected malady : denying their consciences a trouble that may save them , for fear of losing a trouble that ●o●h please them . As if a man were less than mad , that will leap into the fire , oh avoid the smoke . There is Pax fundamenti , the peace of Doctrine : and Pax Ordinis , the peace of Discipline . The Heretic would pull down the first Pillar , the Schismatic the other : The former would break our peace with Christ ; the latter with ourselves & the Church : both these are almost desperate . But there is a third , Pax Politica , a civil Peace : and the common disturbers of this are such contentious spirits ; that either unprovoked , out of mischievous intention : or being provoked , out of malicious revenge ; set all in uproar , make a mutiny in manners , an ataxy in the course of life . To cure this Babel , if at least she will be cured , is the scope of this Tractate . Peace was Christ's blessed Legacy to his Church ; and we are the Ministers whom he hath chosen to see it paid . Executours' are often sued for the bequests given by dead Testators : Lo here a Legacy without suing from a living Father . Embrace it , and be regulated by it : so shall your hearts find present comfort , and your souls eternal life in it . 

The hearty desirer of your Peace . TH. ADAMS . 

THE CITY OF PEACE . 

PEACE is the Daughter of Righteousness , and the moher of knowledge , the nurse of Arts , and the improvement of all blessings . It is delectable to all that taste it , profitable to them that practise it ; to them that look upon it , amiable ; to them that enjoy it , a benefit invaluable . The building of Christianity knows no other materials : if we look upon the Church itself , There is one body : if upon the very soul of it , There is one Spirit : if upon the endowment of it , There is one Hope : if upon the head of it , There is one Lord : if upon the life of it , There is one Faith : if upon the door of it , There is one Baptism : if upon the Father of it , There is one God , and Father of all . 

Peace is a fair Virgin , every one's Love , the praise of all tongues , the object of all eyes , the wish of all hearts ; Pacen●te poscimus omnes . She hath a smiling look , which never frowned with the lest scowl of anger : snowy arms , soft as Down , and whiter than the Swan's feathers ; always open to pious embracements . Her milken hand carries an Olive branch , the Symbol and Emblem of quietness . She hath the face of a glorious Angel , always looking towards righteousness , as the two Cherubins looked one upon the other , and both unto the Mercy-seat . Her Court is the invincible Fort of integrity ; so guarded by the diviue providence ; that Drums , Trumpets , and thundering Canons , those loud Instruments of war , ( I mean Blasphemy , Contention , Violence ) may affronted her , but never affright her . She hath a bounteous hand , virtual like the Garment of Christ ; if a faithful soul can come to touch it , to kiss it ; all her vexations are fled , her conscience is at rest . Her bowels are full of pity : she is always composing salves for all the wounds of a broken heart , Sedition and tumult her very soul hate's : she tramples injuries and discords under her triumphant feet . She sits in a Throne of joy , & wears a Crown of Eternity : and to all those that open the door of their heart to bid her welcome , she will open the door of Heaven to bid them welcome , and repose their souls in everlasting Peace . In these continual Dogge-days of ours , wherein love waxeth cold , and strife hot , we had need set our Instruments to the tune of Peace . This was the blessed legacy which Christ bequeathed to his Church : the Apostle from his Master sent it as a token to the Corinthians : and I from the Apostle commend it as a jewel to all Christians ; Live in Peace , and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you . Which conclusion of the Epistle contains the blessing of the Apostle ' : a Valediction , and a Benediction . They are in part Hortatory , in part Consolatory : the virtue to which he persuades them , and the reward which he promises them . There is a sweet symphony , and respondent proposition between the Counsel and the Comfort ; the Active Peace , and the Factive Peace : for seeking peace on Earth , we shall find peace in Heaven : for keeping the peace of God , we shall be kept by the God of peace . The one is the regular Compass of our life on Earth , the other is the glorious Crown of our life in Heaven . 

That we may not cherish too weak an opinion of this duty , we must know , that this Apostolical counsel is an evangelical law ; and binds us all to the peace . Live in Peace : there are in it all the concurring qualities , that define a good law ; as Lycurgus taught : Generalitas , Bonitas , Possibilitas . It must be General , Good , Possible . 

General , so that all be tied to the obedience of it . Else it were like Anacharsis law , a cobweb to catch flies : or those tyrannous censures , which are made to vex Doves , while they are indulgent to Buzzards . 

It must be Good , for none are bound to the obedience of unjust things . If it have an indifferent extent to good or bad , there is easily found some colour of evasion . 

It must be Possible ; for if things be imposed ultra posse , and so men be made liable to the mulct , when they are not culpable of the guilt ; they may object that Naturae dictamen . Nemo tenetur ad impossibile : none are to be tied to the obedience of impossible things . Such are Tyrant's Laws ; not vincula , sed retia : not limits to confine , but nets to ensnare : not Pales , but Toils . 

But the Law of Peace is General , none can pled immunity . Good , none tax it of iniquity . Possible , none can say , it is beyond their ability . But it may be objected . If you require it General , it is not Possible : for we cannot have peace with all men . If it were Possible , yet is it not lawful and good ; for we may not have peace with all men . To direct us in this , the Apostle inserts two cautions . If it be possible , as much as lieth in you ; live peaceably with all men . For there are some cases in which 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , it is not possible . What communion hath light with darkness ! and what concord hath Christ with Belial ! We must have no peace with it , if there be no grace in it . Blessed is he that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly , etc.  Forbear not only to sit in the Chair of pestilence with them , which is Sin reigning : but even to stand and discourse with them , which is Sin delighting : yea even to walk a turn with them , which is Sin entering : teaching us to shun the very acquaintance of their counsels . 

But wicked men cannot be avoided ; and so long as we are in this world , we must con verse with men of the world . To answer this , we must distinguish between offenders , and offences : we may have no peace with the one , true peace with the other . There are two names , Homo & Peccator : a Man , and a Sinner . Quod Peccator est , corripe : quod Homo , miserere . As he is a Sinner , reform him : as he is a man , the Image of God , pity him . Doth thy Brother sin of ignorance ? Dilige errantem , interfice errorem : kill the error , preserve thy brother . Doth he offend of frailty ? Be at peace ( cum hominibus , non cummoribus ) with the man , not with the manners . Trespasseth he of malice ? Hate ( vitium , not virum ) the disease , not the patient . Howsoever these infirmities are inevitable , still we may have Peace , Cum malis , licet non in malis : with evil men , though not in evil matters . 

Indeed let him that hath authority , correct malicious offences : for that is not like a ravisher to abuse , but like a Champion to vindicate the honour of peace . Yet still Cum corrigat malitiam , diligat personam ; let him correct the transgression , love the person . 

But how shall we answer that of the Psalmist ? Be not merciful to them that sin of malicious wickedness . This was not Precantis votum , sed Prophetantis vaticinium : not the request of a Petitioner , but the prediction of a Prophecier . He did not wish it should be so , but saw it would be so . 

But if all this be true , we may then admit peace with Rome ? We do accept a Civil , not a Religious peace . In a treatise of pacification , both parties must yield somewhat : but nothing is to be yielded that may prejudice the Truth . In a Musical Instrument the strings that be out of tune , are set up , or set down to the rest : the strings that be in tune , are not stirred . Our Doctrine and Profession are tuned to the blessed Gospel , that infallible Canon of Truth , and therefore must not be changed . Their Faith and Religion jarreth and erreth from that ; therefore must be proportioned to ours , if they will endenour a perfect Harmony . 

Thus far , & upon these terms we may have peace , if we seek it : we may live in peace , and peace may live in us , if we desire it . Therefore still 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Live in peace . Calvin renders it , Pacem agite , Do peace . Or , as if God should say to men , whom he found quarrelling , or too loud ; Peace . The word is emphatical , and imitates a continual habit : we may call it , The Exercise of peace , or the Practice of peace . 

Some have a good mind to peace , but they will be at no labour about it : many are content to embrace it , but they are ashamed to seek it : most men love it , few practice it . The use commends the virtue : the beauty and praise of peace consists not in motion , but in action : nor is the benefit of it in a knowing discourse , but in a feeling sense . A Speculative peace , is like an Historical knowledge : such as he that hath been always confined to his study , may have of foreign countries : so we make a conquest of peace , as the byword says , our Fathers won Boulogne ; who never came within the report of the Canon . Or if the Grecians kept Philosophy in their leaves , but kept it not in their lives . A ieiune and empty speculation , like some subtle air in the head , only breaks out into crotchets : it is experience that brings the sweetness of peace home to the heart . Use breeds perfectness , and disuse loses the most serviceable things . Gold loses more of the weight by rusting in corners , then by continual running in commerces , the proper end it was coined for . The best land will yield small increase , if it be not tilled : though some have the most profitable trades , the want of industry hath made them the poorest men . The throne of peace is in the heart , not in the head . 

To recover , therefore the swooning life of this virtue , I will compare Peace to a City : if you will , to this City : which should be like jerusalem , A City of Peace . And so much we will pray for it ; that it may preserve peace , and peace may preserve it , to the world's end . 

Let the walls of this City be Unity and Concord . Let her have four Gates ; Innocence , and Patience ; Benefaction , and Satisfaction . The first gate of peace is Innocence ; she must do no wrong . The second is Patience ; she must suffer wrong . The third is Beneficence ; she must do good in stead of wrong . The fourth is Recompense ; she must make liberal and just satisfaction for any committed wrong . There is also a Postern Gate , and that is Humility . A gate indeed , but a small and low one ; whosoever enters the City of peace that way , must stoop before he get in . The enemies of this City are many ; divided into two bands ; Hostility and Mutiny The Governor of it , is Magistracy : the Law , Religion : the Palace , the Temple : the life of the Citizens is Love. It is served by the River of Prosperity ; the State of it , is Felicity : the Inheritance , eternal Glory . 

The Walls of Peace . 

Are Unity and Concord . Omnis Societas est corpus politicum : and it is in a City , as in a Body : there are many members , one body : many Citizens , one City . The Body is one of the most lively figures and examples of peace . We are all one Body : not only one Kingdom ; so disparity in Religions make many differences . Nor only one City , Inter dites erunt lights ; so disparity of estates will breed quarrels . Nor only one House , so we may have enemies of our own household . But one Body , here must be all love & peace . Where all are tied by bonds , joints , & ligaments to the head ; there also by the fame Nerves one to another . 

Some members are single ; as the tongue is one , to speak one truth : the heart one , to entertain one God. Other are Gemina , Germana ; their forces are doubled to supply mutual defects . Some are stronger , as the arms and legs ; for the supportation of the weaker . Thus qualified are all the faithful citizens of Peace ; preserving an unanimity in affection , a sympathy in affliction , a ready help to the most needful condition . Comforting the minds of those that are perplexed , supplying the wants of those that are distressed , rectifying the weakness of those that are unsettled , informing the ignorance of those that are seduced , and reforming the errors of those that are perverted : all endeavouring the deliverance of the oppressed . 

The members provide one for another : the eye sees not only for itself , but for the Body : the hand works not only for itself , but for the Body : the ear hearkens , the tongue talks , the foot walks , all parts exercise their functions for the good of the whole . In the City of peace men must not only seek their own , but the glory of their Maker , and the good of their Society . That God who hath given us honour by our Ancestors , would also have us add honour to our Successors . To prefer a private good before a public ; is to famish ▪ and starve the whole Body , to fat a toe , or pleafe a finger . Such Monopolies and Patents , as impoverish the whole , to enrich a part are not tolerable in the City of Peace . 

There is no envy and grudging among the members : the eye doth not grieve to see the arm grow strong , nor the foot to be sensible of the Stomaches health . In this City , one should not envy another's thriving ; as if all were taken from ourselves that is given to our neighbours . The Lord sees that an inequality is best for his glory : distributing ( to whomsoever jest , yet ) to every one more than he deserves . Shall the Ear say , Because I am not the Eye , I am not of the Body ? no , but as john Baptist said of Christ ▪ He cometh after me , yet is before me : Some come after us in wealth , that may go before us in grace . The poor man is not so many pounds behind the rich for this world , as he may be talents before him for the world to come . They often with their poverty , misery , ignominy , are saved ; whiles others with all their honour and opulencie go to hell . 

If one member suffer , the rest suffer with it . If there be a thorn in the foot , the eye shedds a tear , the heart aches , the head grieves , the hand is ready to pull it out . If a man tread on our toe , we say , Why do you tread on Me ? Quod cuiquam , cuivis : let us sorrow for the afflictions of others , as if we were in the body . He is no sonn of Peace , that forgets the breaking of his brother joseph . 

The Walls of the City must be whole , no breaches in them , lest this advantage the enemy's entrance . There must be no schism in a City , as no division in the Body : one must not be for Paul , another for Apollo's , another for Cephas ; but all for Christ ; & all for Peace . Many evil men may have one will in wickedness . It is said of Pilate Tradidit jesum volun●a ti●earum ; He delivered jesus to their Will ; not wills : many sinners , one william Shall then the Sons of grace jar ? The Children of Peace be mutinous ? Vnica columba mea , saith Christ : My Dove is but one ; the Dove is a Bird of peace . Many of them can agree lovingly together in one house : every one hath a little cottage by herself , wherein she sits content without disquieting her neighbours . Thus Dum singulae quaerunt unionem , omnes conseruant unitatem . We have them that rush into others Tabernacles , swallowing a man and his heritage : would Doves do thus ? Poor Nabaoths portion is many a rich ahab's eyesore ; would Doves do thus ? Numbers are still on the wing , to pray upon prostrate fortunes ; these be Ravens , not Doves : If the Law cannot make work for their malice , their malice shall make work for the law . This is like Cocks of the Game , to peck out one another's eyes , to make the Lawyer's sport . When two friends are fallen out of loves into blows , and are fight ; a third adversary hath a fair advantage to kill them both . We have an enemy that watcheth his time , and while we wound one another , he wounds us all . 

If the members be pulled a sunder , they all rot : the distraction of parts is the dissolution of the whole . If we forsake the peace of our Mother , we put ourselves upon record for bastard's Discontent with our own portions and places , overthrows the City of Peace . When the Woods and the Floods were at variance , the Sand and the Fire were fain● to quiet their insurrections . While men will not rest satisfied with their own determinate stations ; but invade the severalls and proprieties of others ; what can be expected but destruction ? If there be Contention on this side , and Ambition on that side , there will be confusion on all sides . While judah was hot against Israel , and Israel hit against judah , the King of Syria smote them both . God shall supply the part of Syria ; and when brother is against brother , he will be against them all . He that doth not what he can to maintain the walls doth what he can to betray the City . So I come from the Walls to the Gates . 

The first Gate 

Is Innocence ; and this may be called Bishopsgate ; the Ministers of the Gospel being both the Preachers and Precedents of Innocence . If men would abstain from doing wrong ▪ the Peace could not be broken . St. Bernard writes of the Dove , that Felle caret , she hath no Gall : Let us be such Doves to purge our hearts from all bitterness . 

Now the first shelf that wracks Innocence , is Anger . It were rare if the wrath of man should fulfil the righteòusnesse of God : even a cursed anger breaks the Peace . It is an evidence whereby God will judge men guilty : now there is no malefactor going to the bar for his try all , would willingly have that evidence found about him , that should cast him . Iratus non videt legem , sed Lex videt iratum . The wrathful man takes no notice of the Law , but the Law takes notice of the wrathful man Let us take heed lest we carry our anger with us unto God. That which offends our eyes , we remove either our sight from it , or it from our sight ▪ but that which offends our souls , we too often lay next our heart . But , it is the voice of transportive fury , I cannot moderate my anger . Cannot ? Wherefore serveth grace , but to mortify such natural , yea rather unnatural passions ? 

How easily doth this rage often inveter at ; making some so angry with men , that they will searse be pleased with God himself ! And either he must take them with their anger , or let them alone . So soon it rankles into malice , & that is full opposite to Innocence . 

What shall a man do ? In this sudden fit shall he come to the Lords Table , or forbear it ? Si non accesserit , periculum : Si accesserit , damnum . To refuse the Sacrament in anger , is evil : to receive it in anger , that 's worse . Is the Body & Blood of Christ no more worth , but that for love of a peevish humour we should neglect it ? Shall we starve our consciences , to feed our misbegotten passions ? What is then to be done in this strait ? The answer is easy : Let us excommunicate our wrath , that we may communicate with the Church : leave our lusts behind us , and we are welcome ; as Abraham left his Ass when he went about his Sacrifice . In the Leviticall Law no unclean thing might be touched : if it were touched , the Temple by that person must not be approached . Now for the Israelite to absent himself from the assembly of Saints , and service of God , was ponderous : to come so polluted , was dangerous . He knew the remedy ; either not to be unclean at all , or soon to get himself cleansed . The first best is to harbour no malice ; the next to deliver ourselves from it with all possible speed . 

In a word , let us turn our anger when it comes , another way . Let all our hate be the hate of sin ; and all our anger bend against our own corruptions . Let our wrath , like the Shepherd's dog , sleep till the Wolf comes . Be we at peace with God by repentance , with our neighbour by innocence , with our own heart by a purified and pacified conscience ; and the Prince of peace , the Lord jesus shall embrace us.  

The second Gate 

Is Patience ; which is not unlike to Ludgate : for that is a School of patience ; the poor souls there learn to suffer . The first entrance of peace is to do no injury , the next is to suffer injury . It is one special commendation of Charity , that it Suffers all things ; Pro fratribus , a fratribus , propter fratres . For our brethren we must sustain some loss : he that suffers not an abatement of his own fullness , to supply their emptiness , is no brother . Of our brethren we must put up some wrong , rather than make a slaw in the smooth passage of peace . Because of our brethren , and for the Elects sake , we must endure all things , that they may obtain Salvation . Let us be infirmed , to have them confirmed : brooking a temporal loss , to procure their eternal good . 

According to the Apostles counsel , Let us bear the burden one of another , and God shall bear the burden of us all . As in the Arch of a building , one stone bears mutually , though not equally , the weight of the rest . Or as Dear swimming over a great water , do ease themselves in laying their heads , one upon the back of another : the foremost having none to support him , changes his place , and rests his head upon the hindmost . Bear thou with his curiousness , he doth bear with thy furiousness : let me bear with his arrogance , he doth bear with my ignorance . In Architecture , all stones are not fit to be laid in every part of the building : but some below , as the fundamental , and chief cornerstone to sustain the load of the rest : some higher in the wall , other in the top for ornament . In the Church , which is built of Living Stones , Christ is the Head of the corner , the Foundation that supports all . Gracious Saints have the next places , and are so set that they may help to bear up the weaker . 

Materials that be only of a hard nature , will never fadge well in an Edifice . The Italians have a Proverb ; Hard without soft , the wall is naught . Stones cobbled up together , without mortar to combine them , make but a tottering wall . But if there be mortar to cement them , and with the tractable softness of the one to glue and fix the solid hardness of the other ; this may fortify it against the shock of the Ram , or shot of the Canon . The society that consists of nothing but stones , intractable and refractory spirits , one as froward and perverse as an other , soon dissolves . But when one is reaking with the fire of rage , and another shall bring the water of patience to cool and quench it ; here is a duration of peace . When iron meets iron , there is a harsh and stubborn jar : let wool meet that rougher metal , and this yielding turns resistance into embracements . 

Let not then the voice be an echo of ill words , nor the hand a Racket to bandy back fireballs . Patience makes even the wicked confess ; thou art more righteous than I Infoelix victoria qua hominem superamus , vitio succumbi . It is a wretched victory that overcomes our souls , and slaves us to our lusts . Patientia mea à Domino , as the Fathers read it : and indeed who can give this patience , but God ? Paul had many lives , yet he sacrificed them all ; I die daily . Etsi non mortis experientia , tamen proposito . Though he could lose but one , yet in regard of his patience and purpose , he was ready to lose them all . 

Nor is Christian patience thus confined within the bearing of injuries ; but it extends also to the remitting of them . Some can suffer for the present , as Haman before Mordecay , Animo vindicandi . Forgiveness is the demonstration of patience . Not to contest because we cannot conquer , is called Patience perforce : but can we remit ? The civil man can forbear , the Christian must forgive . Let us be remiss to note a wrong , remissive to forget it , writing all our injuries in the dust . Yea , let humility sweetly order our forgiveness : for Gravissima poena est contumeliosa venia : a proud and scornful pardon , is a reproachful wrong ; there is in it more bitterness than mercy ; more punishment than reconcilement . 

Otherwise how can we pray , Forgive us our trespasses , As we forgive them that trespass against us ? OH but say some , God is merciful : what , shall we therefore be unmerciful ? I may forgive , but I cannot forget ; is the faint reservation of another . Take we heed , let not us be in jest with God , lest he be in earnest with us. Do we not otherwise beg a removal of mercy and pardon from our own souls ? Will not God say , Evil servant , Ex ore tuo , out of thy own mouth will I judge thee ? Hath Christ with his own blood made thee friends with God , and cannot that blood entreat thee to be friends with thy brother , when thou comest to the holy Altar with thy gift , and remember'st thy offended brother : Leave there thy gift ▪ first be reconciled to him , then offer to God. A gift doth pacify wrath , and God is pleased with our Sacrifice upon his Altar : yet Cum omnis culpa munere soluatur , sola iniuria incondonata reijcitur : when every fault is solued with a gift , Injury alone is sent away without pardon . 

Therefore Qualem vis erga te esse Deum , talem te exhibeas erga proximum : be thou to thy brother on earth , as thou wouldst have thy Father in heaven be to thee . Si laedens , pete veniam : st laesus , da veniam . If an injurer , ask pardon : if a sufferer , give pardon . Be we so far from expecting his submission , that we tender our●●emission ; and meet the trespasser with a pardon before he ask it . Dissensio ab aliis , à te reconciliatio incipiat . Let strife begin from others , be thou first in reconcilement . Christ healed Malchus his ear , that came to arrest him . Which amongst us so loves his benefactors , as Paul loved his malefactors ? He would do any thing to save them , that would do any thing to kill him . others offences to us are but small ; valued with ours against God who is infinite . If he forgive the pounds , let not us stick at the farthing tokens . 

The next Gate 

Is Beneficence ; Doing good , is the fortification of peace . This may be called Aldgate ; not only because there is the picture of Charity : ( at the gate : I do not say , as near going out ; but at the gate , to keep goodness in . ) But because that is called the Old-gate , and Charity was a virtue of old times , not so much now in fashion . The heathen Moralist said , we must use men thus ; Benevelle omnibus , benefacere amicis ; wish well to all , and do good only to our friends . But the clear light of nature , which is the Gospel , charges us while we have opportunity , to do good to all men ; albeit with some preferment of the best , especially to the household of Faith.  

All men may be ranked under one of these combinations : Rich and poor , home-born and strangers , friends & enemies . First for the rich and poor ; the Pharisee will stand on good terms with the rich , invite them for a re-inuitation as men at Tennisse , toss the ball to another , that he may toss it to them again : but who helps the poor ? Wealth maketh many friends , but the poor is separated from his neighbours . If he do well , he is not regarded : if ill , he is destroyed . The poor man by his wisdom delivered the city from the force of a puissant enemy ; yet when all was done , no man remembered that poor man But if he stumble , they will help to overthrow him . How contemptibly doth a rich epicure look upon a poor beggar ! yet the rich and the poor meet together , and the Lord is the maker of them all . In all our grand Feasts , the guests that Christ spoke for , are left out . 

For Domestickes and strangers ; many have so much religion as to provide for their own ; yea so much irreligion as to do it with the prejudice of the public good , and hazard of their own souls : but who provides for strangers ? Entertain strangers , for thereby some have entertained Angels unawares : but for all this possible happiness , few will put it to the venture : and were they indeed Angels without angels in their purses to pay for it , they should find cold entertainment . 

Friends and enemies ; for friends , many will be at peace with them , till they be put to the trial by some expressive action . And then they will rather hazard the loss of a friend , than the lest loss by a friend . But suppose we answer our friends in some slight courtesy , hoping for a greater : who will do good to his enemies ? If thine enemy hunger , feed him ▪ so thou shalt heap soles of fire on his head . Do it , not with an intent to make his reckoning more , but thy own reckoning less . Love's your enemies , bless them that curse you , do good to them that hate you , and pray for them that despitefully use you . Do unto them deeds of amity , deeds of charity , deeds of piety . Of amity , Love them that hate you : of Charity , Do good to them that hurt you : of Piety , Pray for them that persecute you . There is the Diligite of the Heart , Love your enemies . The Benedicite of the Tongue , Bless them that curse you . The Benefacite of the Hand , Do good to them that hate you . The Benevelle of all , Pray for them that persecute you . Love's your enemies , there is Affectus cordis : Do them good , there is Effectus operis : Pray for them , there is Perfectio charitatis . But the wiseman counsels ; Do well to him that is lowly , but give not to the ungodly . And Give unto the good , not to the sinner . Though not Qua impius , and quia impiu● ; yet qua homo ; and quia homo , we must relieve him . Cherish himself , not his sin . We must love him , non quoad culpam , sed quoad naturam . They are Gods children , licet insani , although they be sick ; and our brethren , licet infirmi , although they be weak . Therefore for the conformity of nature , because we are the same workmanship : for our own benefit , for he that doth good to his enemy , even in that doth better to himself : and for the imitation of Him we worship , let us uphold Peace by Charity . His Sun rises , and rain falls , both on the just and unjust . Noli negare , quod Deus nulli negat . Thus looking up with piety to the Lords perfection , and down with pity upon man's imperfection , let us do good to all . 

Through the gate of Beneficence , doth the charitable man enter into the City of Peace . He that is covetous , must needs be mutinous . He that is greedy of gain , troubleth his own house Solomon calls him a trouble-house , and we do find him a trouble-citie ; as Demetrius did all Ephesus . But Charity makes peace ; Divitem voluit Deus ut pauperem adiuvaret , Pauperem voluit ut divitem probaret . God makes some rich , to help the poor : and suffers some poor , to try the rich . The loaden would be glad of ease : now charity lighteneth the rich man of his superfluous and unwieldy carriage . When the poor find mercy , they will be tractable : when the rich find quiet , they should be charitable . Would you have your goods kept in Peace ? First , lock them up by your prayers , then open them again with your thankful use , and trust them in the hands of Christ by your Charity . 

This City hears ill for oppression , and is ( I fear too justly ) suspected of Injustice : now the most noble confutation of jealousy , is by deeds of charity . This is the East-gate to the City of Peace , and I may ( from Saint Paul ) call it the principal , and most excllent way . Whosoever can show you the way better , yet certainly none can show you a better way . 

The fourth Gate 

Is Recompense , or Satisfaction ; and this we may liken to Creeple-gate . It is the lamest way to peace , yet a way : it is a halting gate , but a gate . It were far better coming into this City by any of the former gates , yet better at this then none . All come not in by Innocence , nor all by Patience , nor all by Beneficence : but if they have failed in these , they must be admitted by recompense , or not at all . The first best is to do no injury ; the next is Satisfaction , to make amends for that we have done . Hortensins said of his mother , Ego nunquam cum ea inivi gratiam , I never was reconciled to her , because we two never fell out . OH that the Inhabitants of this city could say so of their neighbours ; We never were made friends , because we never were foes . But as our Saviour saith , It is necessary that offences do come : not that it should be so , but that it will be so . There is no necessity that compels a man to sin ; except that the heart being evil , will give offence . As it is necessary for him that comes to the fire , to be made hot : but there is no necessity that he come unto the fire . 

The malady of offences , will be contracted , therefore the only Cure is by Satisfaction . That we may know how to do this , the Scripture sets down diverse degrees in the accomplishment of this Satisfaction for injuries . First , he must go to the party wronged . Secondly , He must confess his fault . Thirdly , He must humble himself . Fourthly , He must make restitution . Fiftly , He must reconcile himself . Sixtly , and this must be done quickly , with all possible speed . 

He must go to him , not tarry till he meet him , or till some occasion bring them together ; not Obuiamda ; But Go to thine adversary , go on purpose : inquire for him , seek him out , rest not till thou find him . 

Humanity may work some to this undertaking , and overtaking of peace : but man is naturally so good a constructor of his own doings , that will he confess his fault ? Yes , He shall confess his trespass . 

An ingenious nature may be brought to acknowledge his fault : but will Pride , the contention-maker , admit Humility ? will he stoop to him he hath abused ? From insultation will he descend to submission ? He must ; Go and humble thyself . 

Touch of conscience may procure Humility ; but yet will he not spend twice as much at Law , ere he make restitution ? Yet even here , a quiet man for his own peace sake may be brought to give somewhat , for a part of amends : but will he satisfy him the whole ? The law of nature requires total satisfaction , but will he besides give damages ? The law of the Land allows damages ; but now will he give any overplus to make an atonement ? or be at so much coast as to buy a reconcilement , rather than miss it ? He must : Zacheus restores fourfold ; and by the Law he is bound to add a fifth part . 

But if all this be done , will he yet ever be friends with him ? will he be truly reconciled ? He must : Reconcile thyself to thy brother . Otherwise , when he desire's of the Lord to be forgiven , as he forgiveth ; God will answer as joseph did to his brethren ; Look me not in the face , unless thy brother be with thee . Shall the father think well of that son , which rejecteth his brother ? Do we call the Author of Peace , our God , while we are the children of dissension ? Will he ever agree with him , that delights to quarrel with his ? But suppose the injurer doth entreat and persuade himself , without prevailing , will he use his friends about such a business ? Yes , saith Seolomon , he must employ his friends . 

Time may work all this , but to do it when the flesh trembles , and the blood boils for revenge , suddenly ; who can so prevail over himself ? He must do it quickly ; agree with thine adversary quickly . Yes perhaps , when leisure may serve : but will any man neglect business to go about it ? Yes , all business set apart , though it were as important as offering sacrifice at Gods own Altar ; Leave there thy gift , etc. Non experieris Deum tibi propitium , nisi proximus te sentiat sibi placatum . Strife with our brother makes our best services unacceptable to our Father . The Lord despiseth his own worship , to maintain our charity : and will not be found of us , till we have found our brother , to make our peace with him . Come not to the Temples , hear no Sermons , say not your prayers , forbear all worship and devotions , while a festering and rankling hatred is in your souls . 

Yet now all this may be done of an Inferior to a Superior , either for fear or hope of gain by his love : but would you have a Superior yield thus to an Inferior , to deprecate strife ? Yes , Abraham disdained not to go unto Lot , the elder to the younger , the uncle to the nephew , the worthier to the meaner , and that in the kindest manner , to compose a controversy begun by their servants . OH that this age , which seldom wakes but to do mischief , would yet think , how after all injuries to others , they do this greatest injury to their own souls ; that for want of a just compensation , they exclude themselves from the blessing of Peace ! 

These be the main Gates , there is a little Postern besides , that is Humility : for of all vices , Pride is a stranger to Peace . The proud man is too guilty , to come in by Innocence : too surly , to come in by Patience : he hath no mind to come in by Benefaction : and he scorns to come in by Satisfaction . All these Portculliss be shut against him : there is no way left but the Postern for him , he must stoop , or never be admitted to peace . Pride is always envious & contumelious , thinking she adds so much to her own reputation , as she detracts from others : she is no fit neighbour for Peace . 

Heaven is a high City , yet hath but a low Gate . Celsa patria , via humilis . Tolle super biam , quod habes meum est ▪ tolle invidiam , quod habe● tuum est . Take away pride , and that which thou hast is mine : take away envy , and that which I have is thine . Pride and envy are too uncivil for a peaceable city : the one cannot endure a vicine prosperity , nor the other a superior eminency . All men must be poor to please the one , and all must be base to content the other . Peace is humble , pride quite overlookes her . The Philosopher might have seen the stars in the water , he could not see the water in the stars , when he stumbled into the ditch . Men may behold glory in humility , they shall never find peace in ambition . The safest way to keep fire , is to take it up in embers : the best means to preserve peace , is in humbleness . The tall Cedars feel the fury of tempests ; which blow over the humble shrubs in the low valleys . There was no rule with Paul at first ; raising tumults , speeding Commissions , breathing out slaughters against poor Christians . But when Christ had thundered him from his horse , broken his wild spirit to humility , them he was fit for peace . God , that often effectuates his own will by contraries , makes trouble the preparation for peace : as a father corrects his unruly children that they may be quiet . Let us examine our own experience : when the Lord hath sound scourged us , we go from under his fingers as tame as lambs : farewell strife , all our care is to find rest and peace in jesus Christ.  

We have seen the City of Peace , with her walls and gates , and we wish well to her ; Peace be within thy walls , and prosperity within thy palaces . But hath she no adversaties ? Yes , there is an enemic that beleaguers this City ; Contention . Whose army is divided into two Bands or Troops ; the one called the Civil , the other the Uncivil : the Civil are Law-quarrels , the uncivil are Sword-quarrels . The one is the smooth-faced company , the other the rugged or ragged Regiment . The city of peace hath gates for these also , when she hath subdued them . Either she turns them out at Moore-gate , as fitter for the society of Moors and Pagans' ; she banisheth them . Or lays them up in Newgate ; a place very convenient , being not so old as peace , built since the birth of strife . These enemies pursue us , vel ferro , vel foro , as that Father saith . 

Ferro , when upon every punctilio of honour , as they falsely call it , Reason & Religion must be thrown by , and Fury govern . The Gallant , as if he knew no Law but his own will , or as if the least aspersion upon his honour were more weighty , then if the state of Christian doom , or the glory of God lay upon it ; cries Revenge , offers the stab , threatens the pistol . How is that precious account forgotten which God requires of man and beast ! Men study to be mad with reason , they have an Art of kill , that teaches murder by the book : as cunning as joab was , that could stab in the fifth rib , a speeding place : so he treacherously slew Abner and Amasa . OH that men should venture their lives upon one another's sword , as if they had no souls to be ventured upon the sword of God's vengeance ! That he should be held base , who being challenged , doth not write his mind with a pen of steel , in the ink of blood , on the white paper of man's life ! 

Cannot the tears of our Mother prevail with us , when seeing us quarrel , she says as jocasta advised her two unbrotherly sons ; Bella geri placuit nullos habitura triumphos . Or as Rebecca said of her twins ; Why should I be deprived of you both in one day ? But if our Mother cannot still us , our Father will part us : & they whose souls have peace , shall be sent to a prison where is no peace : that seeing they love quarrels , they may have fight enough with infernal spirits . But perhaps there be some who make no other reckoning , resolving with him in the Orator , Hodie coenabimus apud Inferos : to night we will sup together in hell . As it is reported of two to have fought under the gallows : desperately forecasting , that if the one were there killed , the other should there be hanged . 

By the toleration of this Duel in France , that kingdom lost in ten years six thousand Gentlemen ; as themselves report . Wretched men ! for Occiser lethaliter peccat , & occisus aeternaliter perit : the homicide sin's deadly , and the slain ( without unexpectable mercy ) perishes eternally . How dare they lift up those hands to God for mercy , that have been lifted up against their brother in cruelty ? Every base vermin can kill , it is true prowess and honour to give life , and preserve it Simeon and Levi seemed to have just cause ; the Whoring of their own Sister : yet their father calls them brethren in evil for it , blesseth his honour from their company , & his soul from their secrecy . thou sayst of thy contendent , he shall have as good as he brings , yet thyself condemnest that he brings for evil . Ne utaris inimico praeceptore , let not thy enemy teach thee to due that , which thyself detestest in him . Because we receive injuries without right , shall we return them without law ? 

Sometimes this ariseth from the wine , Bacchus ad arma vocat : and lightly it makes men aptest to use their arms , when they cannot stand on their legs . But shall this serve for a plea , and get a pardon , it was done in drink ? no , this rather deserves a double punishment , as it is a double fault . Commonly it proceeds from unaduised anger ; as if any thing done in fury , were not done in folly . The choleric man is like one that dwells in a thatched house ; who being rich in the morning , by a sudden fire is a beggar before night . It was the decree of Theodosius , by the counsel of S. Ambrose ; that execution after a severe sentence should be deferred thirty days : that the heat being qualified , the severity might be moderated . 

But they object , This is to stand by like fools , while we suffer others to abuse us : no , that is not folly , which the Lord hath commended for wisdom . The shot of the Cannon hurts not Wool , and such yielding things ; but that which is hard , stubborn , and resisting : the rage of our roaring sons is tamed by patience . Turn to the brawling cur , and he will be more fierce : ride on neglecting him , and he will soon be quiet . This is the furious Band.  

Forobosco ; there is another Battalions of adversaries that turn their challenge into a Writ ; the field appointed is Westminster Hall , or some other Court of justice : the weapons , the Law : the postures of the fight are Demurs , Delays , Quirks , Remoovals : the Victory , a Verdict : the Doom , a Sentence : and the death itself , an Execution . One says , To bear this , is against my conscience : when indeed he means it is against his concupiscence . If the Plaintiff go no further than the Court of his own affections , the defendant shall never have audience : for he is Amicus Curiae . He that is first in his own cause , seemeth just : but his neighbour cometh , and searcheth him : he is no competent judge in his own matter . It will bear an action , saith the Lawgiver , this inflameth passion in the Law-goer . 

OH that men could see the folly of this litigiousness . 1.  That he is not in the state of grace , but a mere carnal man This is Saint Paul's argument to the Corinthians ; If there be contentions amongst you , Are ye not carnal ? whereas the Fruit of the Spirit is Peace , Long-suffering , Gentleness . 2.  That he doth not so much find , as make himself enemy : we may say of him as the Angel said to Hagar concerning her son Ishmael ; His hand is against every man , and every man's hand against him . 3.  That he vexeth himself without need : they that go to Law for trifles , are like nice people that continually lie in the hands of Chirurgeons , and Physicians , for pimples & warts : whereas as the Physician and Lawyer are for necessity , not wantonness . Their boxes and papers are the Books & Badges of their profession : they trudge up and down , more busy to cast away their money , than Lawyers are to catch it : their word is Currat Lex , let the law have his course : but by their wills that course should never have an end . 

They pled , we have stood before the best , in Courts of highest honour : alas , so doth the spider , even in kings palaces . So did the Devil , when the Sons of God presented themselves before him , Satan was there also . 4.  They consider not the root of contentions , as the Apostle describes them : want of Wisdom to compound controversies ; Is there not one wise man among you , able to judge between brethren ? Want of love , Brother is against brother . Want of Patience ; Why do ye not rather suffer wrong ? Want of justice ; ye defraud and do wrong . For want of justice , foro conscientiae , they prosecute their malice , foro justitiae . We may add , want of Mercy , they cannot forgive : but if they forgive not others , their final Quietus est was never yet sealed ; and they shall be called to an after-reckoning . As that wicked seruamt sped ; notwithstanding the Lord forgave him at his request , because he did not forgive his brother at his entreaty , he was delivered over to the tormentors . 

Fiftly , they weigh not how they are deceived . Lawyer's first invented Laws to secure our lands and titles : now they make those laws engines to get away our lands and titles . Their frequent Session hath not been evermore to preserve a man's possession . And for those that can tarry the leisure of the Law , they have quirks & delays : which are like the corrosive plasters of an unconscinable Leach , that turns a small green wound to an incurable Fistula , by poisoning and exulceration of it for filthy lucre . When a man must die without mercy , it is some ease to die quickly , and be out of his pain . But such , when they purpose to murder a man's estate , have tricks to keep him long a dying : that he may still languish and pine away in hope of recovery . 

And what doth the winner get , that at the Terms end , he may brag of his gains ? Doth he not come home dry-founderd ? Doth he not follow the Mill so long , till the toll be more than the grist ? It is a token of unwholesome air , where the country is full of thriving Physicians : Sivaleant homines , arstua , Phoebe , iacet . It argues little health in that kingdom , which hath so many thriving Lawyers : who while unquietness feeds us , do quietly feed upon us.  

We are willing to give such self-molesters some counsel , if they will take it , and ask them no fees for it . Yea we give it not , but Christ gives it : will they take his advice , that great Counsellor of the Father ? He counsel's his clients to the everlasting possession of their souls by patience . In Olympiacis certaminibus , Diabolo consecratis ; In the games of Olympus consecrated to the Devil , he had the glory of the day , that gave most wounds , and came off himself untouched . In stadio Christi non est ea certandi lex , sed contraria : In the race of Christianity , there is a contrary Law of striving : not he that offers most blows , but he that suffers most blows , is crowned . A man is stricken , will he go to law for this ? no , rather let him turn the other cheek ; this is Christ's counsel . His cloak is taken from him , it is near him a garment ; of necessary comeliness , a cloak : of singular use , he hath but one cloak : he hath the propriety of it , it is his cloak : must he go to Law for this ? no , rather let him take his coat also . Foelix ille , si nudus corpore , sit nudus malicia : there is a wedding garment to clothe such . 

I am no Anabaptist , nor Libertine , to deny the Magistracy , or lawfulness of authority , and our just appeal thereto . Rather than every man should be his own judge , I would appease uproars with the Town-clerke of Ephesus ; The Law is open , and there are Deputies , let them implead one another . Saint Paul himself took this course , appealing to the judgement seat of Caesar. Our Saviour's practice is a clear Comment and declaration of his Law : he that bade us rather turn out other check to the smiter , than revenge ourselves ; did himself sweetly reprove him that smote him . If I have spoken evil , bear witness of the evil : but if well , why smitest thou me ? So Paul to Ananias , Sittest thou to judge me after the Law , & commandest me to be smitten contrary to the Law ? The Lord himself hath apppointed Tribunals : and no law , no love . I know there is a Christianly seeking of justice , when injurious persons grow worse by forbearance , and ground their insolence upon others patience . As Christians may war in love , so they may jar in love : when the party cast in the suit , may be bettered , if not in his money , yet in his manners ; and Satan only conquered . Vt qui vincitur , simul vincat , & unus tantummodo vincatur diabolus . Sed repriman me , I will hold me where I was . I have laboured to bring men into peace , I must show them no way out again . The Fathers sometimes in confuting an Heresy much spread ; if they did run a little within the brinks of a contrary error , not then questioned , nor so dangerous ; were never censured for that to have erred Dogmaticè . So if to convince that Heresy in manners , ( It is lawful to go to law for every thing ; ) I should a little lean to and favour that other opinion , ( It is lawful to go to law for nothing ; ) either excuse me , or at least suspend your judgements , till I come on purpose to handle that point . If men would promise not to go to Law till then , I would promise , when they did go to Law , to bear all their charges . 

Howsoever , let them not do it animo litigandi , nor for every wrong enter an action , lest God enter his action against them . The Lord hath a controversy with the Inhabitants of the land : a terrible action , which the jury of heaven and earth will find . Let them therefore leave all , and study God's Law , with that royal Prophet ; Thy Testimonies are my delight and my Counsellors : and I will meditate in thy Statutes . Blessed is he that meditates on God's Law day and night : but cursed is he that wastes his time to meditate and study Law-tricks . Let the litigious soul learn a new course of law : let Conscience be his Chancery , Charity his Chancellor , Patience his Counsellor , Truth his Attorney , and Peace his Solicitor . Litem in proximum , divertat in seipsum . Let him go to Law with his own heart ; arraign his passionate will at the Bar of God's judgement ; let the twelve Apostles be a jury against him , who all condemned Contention . Thus let him judge himself , that he be not judged of jesus Christ. For he that avengeth his own quarrel , steps into the Prince's Chair of Estate , yea into Gods own Seat ; dethroning both ; and so disturbs neaven and earth . Mad men , that thus presume , as if God did not see malice in the heart ! Hell and destruction are before the Lord , much more than the hearts of the children of men . Or as if seeing men contend , he had nothing to do with it : but must sit still like an idle looker on , and take part with neither . 

Dear beloved , avenge not yourselves , but rather give place unto wrath : for it is written , Vengeance is mine , I will repay , saith the Lord This sounds a Retreat to all quarrels : Paul seeing the Daggers drawn , and the peace in danger to be broken ; steps in with the sword of the Spirit , to part the fray . It is a Writ of Reversment from the high Court of heaven : if we break open the writ , we shall find the King's pleasure in it ; an Arrest of revengers . He begins with Dear beloved ; a sweet ingredience , to qualify a bitter medicine . As if he should say , It is my love that I write so much against malice : not for your hurt , but for your eternal good : if you will not believe me , believe God himself : To me belongeth vengeance . 

The Devil when he gets audience , tells a man how much he is hated of others : the holy Spirit tells him how much he is loved of others . The argument of our charity to them , is God's charity to us. Put on ( as the elect of God , holy and beloved ) bowels of mercies , kindness , humbleness of mind , long suffering : seeing you are beloved of God , love his . 

This is God's challenge , Vengeance is mine : God's execution , I will repay : God's Subscription , to which his great Name is affixed , Thus saith the Lord Scriptum est , it is a transcript and faithful copy out of the Original , to show it the Lords true act and deed : twice written , that it might never be forgotten . Once hath God spoken , twice have I heard it , that Vengeance ( so well as Power ) belongeth unto God. He pleads the continuance of Succession without interruption ; vengeance , judgement , and Glory are His alone . Therefore to avenge ourselves , is both to lose God's protection , and to incur his condemnation . It is faithless and fruitless : faithless , not to believe that God will deal with us according to his Word . With thine eyes thou shalt see the reward of the wicked . It is then infidelity not to commit our case to God , and his Deputy the Prince ; but to make them both our deputies and instruments of revenge . What is this but to exalt ourselves above all that is called God ; and to play the Devil in jest , and the Pope in good earnest ? Fruitless , for if being wronged , we draw out our wooden dagger of revenge , God will put up his sword , and leave us to ourselves . The injured child turns not again , but runs to his father . When the Italians hear how God hath reserved Vengeance to himself , they say blasphemously , He knew it was too sweet a bit for man , therefore kept it for his own tooth . But if man were is own carver , he would carve too deep . God only is wise and just , wise to know , & just to give the due proportion . Now the Great and Omnipotent Lord chief justice , bind us all to the peace on earth , and bring us all to the peace of heaven . 

Now because every City must have an established Government ; Order being the good of every creature , & it is better not to be , then to be out of order : therefore this City of Peace must have a Lord , and a Law : a Ruler to govern it , and a Rule whereby it must be governed . The King is Christ , who is therefore called Princeps Pacis , The Prince of Peace . And he hath a Deputy or Vicegerent under him , whom he hath set to promove the good , and to remove the evil , of Peace . The Law is Truth , that is the Gospel , Regula Pacis , the Rule of Truth . 

The Governor of this City 

Is supreme Authority : as God is a great King , so the king is ( as it were ) a little God. I have said , Ye are Gods. God is an invisible King , the King is a visible god . ye must be subject , not only for wrath , but also for Conscience sake . All must obey : the bad for fear , the good for love . To compel the one , there is a Writ out of the King's Bench : to persuade the other , there is a motion in the Chancery . 

Of all Nations we are blessed with peace , under a King of peace : therefore all bound to be children of peace . There are three ways of choosing Kings . 1.  An immediate nomination from God. 2.  A Succession of blood . 3.  An election of the people . The first ceaseth , the last hath been found dangerous , the best remains . They that are suddenly chosen out of the flock , do seldom manifest such royal behaviour , nor become their Majesty ; for it is not their Trade . jehu remitted much of his noble zeal , when he was settled in his kingdom . It is one thing to say , With a great sum of money , obtained I this kingdom : and for another to say , I was a King born . We may justly say of our King , Dignissimus Regno , si non natus ad Regnum . When the Poets called some men the Sons and offspring of the gods ; they meant that they were men of a more noble and uncommon nature : and that those graces were , Ex Divino afflatu . It was as familiar with Homer , to make a King fight with a god at his elbow , as a common Soldier with his sword in his hand . To whom the Lord gives most honour , he gives most assistance . The heart of the King is in his hand , as rivers of waters ; the heart of a private man as a little brook : in the former is more need of his omnipotence . Howsoever , the grace of adoption , in the Apostles time , was not given to many mighty or noble ; yet the graces of administration are . 

Anarchie is the mother of division , the stepmother of peace . While the State of Italy wants a King , all runs into civil broils . It is the happiness of this City , that there is no distraction . Not a King at judah , and another at Dan : not one in Hebron , another in Gibeon : not the red Rose here , and the white there . We are not shuffled into a popular government , nor cut into Cantons , by a headless , headstrong Aristocracy : but Henricus Rosas , Regna jacobus : in Henry was the union of Roses , in james of the kingdoms . Every King is not a Peacemaker ; ours , like a second Augustus , hath shut the rusty door of janus' Temple ; so making Peace , as if he were made of peace . That blessed Queen of sweet and sacred memory before him , was Filia Pacis : who , as by her Sexuall graces shed deserved to be the Queen of women , so by her masculine virtues to be the Queen of men . Certainly , it would have troubled any King but Him , to have succeeded such a Queen ; yet no man complains the want of peace . This he promised , and Verbum Regis , Rex Regi , this he hath performed to every good soul's content . When he was first proclaimed , what heard we but peace ? What heard the Nobles ? a King that would honour them . What the Senators ? a King that would counsel them . What the Schools ? a King that would grace them . What the Divines ? a King that would encourage them . What the rich ? a King that would defend them . What the poor ? a King that would relieve them . 

When a Tyrant comes abroad , all seek to hide themselves : When the wicked rise , men hide themselves . But when a clement Prince progresseth , all flock to him , the streets and ways are filled with people , the air with acclamations . We call our peace , the King's peace : and say to brawlers , Keep the King's peace . Peace , Plenty , Traffic , Learning , Administration of justice , flourishing of arts , preaching of the Gospel , Rex jupiter omnibus idem . Like David , he leads the Dance to heaven : and like Augustus , makes a sweet spring wheresoever he goes . Israel had rest forty years , we have had a jubilee of fifty years , and begun again . The Peacemaker doth both bliss , and is blessed : therefore let us bless him , and bless God for him , and hold ourselves blessed in him . 

Away then with those discontented spirits , that grudge these outward rights , whether tributes of money , or attributes of Supremacy . Soluatur subsidium , ne contingat excidium . For this cause pay we tribute also , etc.  It is the mediate due to God , as prayers & praises are his immediate rents . Some have observed , that Christ did no miracle about Honour or money , except that one of giving tribute to Caesar . Much more intolerable are those our Cousins of Samaria , that fly off in a rage ; What portion have we in David ? For this cause certainly , if David were now a live , he would never admit a jesuit to his Chaplain . But perish his enemies , and upon his own Head let his Crown flourish . May not the Sceptre departed from jacob , nor a Seed from his loins , till Shiloh come again . May his Posterity have a Crown on earth , when himself hath a crown in heaven . Amen . 

The Law of this City 

Is the Gospel of Christ : a law indeed , but a law of peace . It made peace betwixt God and man , and it must make peace between man and man If it cannot reconcile us one to another , it shall reconcile none of us to the Lord It is a law , not to be observed for State , but for Conscience . Indeed those Catuli Catilinarij , Statising Jesuits , turn all their Religion into Statisme , yea into Atheism . And there be many Church-recusants , a monstrous , menstruous brood , the Mooncalves of that lunatic religion . Come they do , but more for fear of the Law , then for love of the Gospel . And all the children that even hang on the breasts of peace , cannot be excused : for some through nescience or negligence , scarce cast an eye on the statutes of peace . 

I will hear what the Lord will speak : for he will speak peace unto his people . One takes snuff at his poor neighbour ; perhaps it is Mordecai's cap that hath put Haman out of his princely wits : and now he resolves to trounce him : proud beggar ! He will teach him to know his betters . OH but tarry , and hear the Statute of Peace . Rob not the poor because he is poor : for the Lord will plead his cause , and spoil the soul of them that spoil him . Lust makes this a spur to opression , Quia pauper , because he is poor : the Law makes this a bridle from it , Quia pauper , because he is poor . Another is erop-sicke of Ceremonies ; he hath a toy in his head , that the Church's garment should not be embroidered , nor have more lace and fringe than his own coat : there is in him so little of man , that he talks of nothing but the Beast . Rather than his children shall be crossed in Baptism , he will out of the Ark into some fantastical Wherry . Let him tarry , and hear what the Lord speaks , in his Law of peace . In Christ jesus neither Circumcision availeth anything , nor uncircumcision , but a New creature . That is , neither Ceremony , nor no Ceremony , but the Substantial ; a new Creature . 

Another flatters himself ; I need not stand on strict performance of Tithes , the Gospel requires nothing but Benevolence : experienced men justify it , I have the warrant of good Lawyers for it . OH but such a Lawyer is the Barrister of Barathrum , a sworn enemy to the law of peace . The voice of Christ is not in it , hear that . Let him that is taught in the word , communicate unto him that teacheth , in all good things . 

This City of Peace hath one immutable Rule , and it is sufficient to direct all actions . And as many as walk according to this Rule , peace be on them , and mercy , and upon the Israel of God. A man is proud of his victorious mischiefs , fleshed with his fortunate wickedness ; thinks he hath carried himself bravely , in out-bribing his adversary , fooling judge and jury by false testimony , and triumphs in his unblessed gain ; but is this according to the rule of Peace . Vincat veritas , let Truth overcome . The loser may sit down with content , but the winner shall ye down in torment . A rich man carries himself proudly , ; above others in scorn , above himself in folly : he thinks all his Titles beneath him , and even those that worship him , still to underualue him : others he looks upon , as if they were made to serve him , yea , and be proud to be commanded by him . Cross him , and he rages , swells , foams , like the Sea in a storm : but is this after the Rule of Peace ? Learn of me who an meek and lowly in heart . Alas , what is the difference in dust ? The Beggar dies , so doth the rich man Before , the rich could not endure the beggar near him , here one verse contains them both . In life the rich hath the pre-eminence of ease , and wealth , and honour : in death the poor man goes first to peace . 

In driving a trade , it is Mammon's prime policy , to take advantage of others necessity , or simplicity . Sold you it for so much ? saith Peter : For so much , answers Ananias . Did it cost so much ? says the buyer : yes , saith the seller . Let him tremble at the judgement , which was a sudden death . This is the Rule of an unjust City , not of the City of Peace . Pereat mundi lucrum , ne fia● animae damnum . Perish that gain which comes with the soul's loss . 

Many think Charity to the poor , to be a work of mere Supererogation ; that they are not bound liberally to give part of that to lazy beggars , which they have laboriously gotten by their endeavours . But hear the Rule of Peace ; Break thy bread unto the hungry ; sell that thou hast , and give to the poor . But as when Christ dissuaded from Covetice , by the difficulty of entrance that wealth finds to heaven , they amazedly replied , Who then can be saved ? Who can walk after this Rule ? When we preach this doctrine , the world cries , Durus Sermo , this is a hard saying , a harsh Sermon . Yet is this the law of peace , and thus minded are the citizens of peace . When the poor at your gates ask you Panem quotidinum , their daily bread ; they after a sort make you gods ; therefore show yourselves at least to be men . Charity is the food of Peace on earth , and the Seed of peace in heaven . 

The Palace of Peace 

Is the Temple : the peace of man can never be preserved without the worship of God. It is not enough for the city to have laws , but these must be diwlged , made known to the Inhabitants ; the observation of them continually urged : for by nature men are apt enough to fly out . Howsoever the Romans built their Templun Pacis without the gates , yet here it is the chief honour and ornament of the City . here Peace keepsher Court , and sits like a royal Queen in her Chair of Estate . Which is not like Solomon's Throne , guarded with Lions ; but with milk-white Doves , and covered over with Olive branches . 

But alas ! how doth her Palace now fall to ruin for want of reparation ? Few there be that repair it , but to impair it thousands are ready . The question was once ; What shall we bring to the man of God ? Now it is a motion suffered in all Courts , What shall we take away from the man of God ? The noble Shunamite built him a chamber , with a bed and a candlestick : We have those that pull down his rooms , disturb his rest , and put out his light . Nehemiah reduced the Tithes to the primitive institution and order : But if any Nehemiah should now undertake it , and restore our portion to our own hands ; there are ten thousand Harpies ready to catch it ere it come to our mouths . We may sing , or rather sigh one to another , as little children chant in the streets : When shall we eat white Bread ? When the Puttock is dead : when there is not a Sacrilegious Lawyer left . If the walls of jerusalem should begin to rise , there is a Tobiah or Samballat to flout us , that a Fox is able to break them down . Corrupt Advocates are those Foxes , and by their wills the Vine of Peace should bear no Grapes that ecape their fingers . Some have written wittily in the praise of folly , some have commended Baldness ; other in a acquaint Paradox extolled deformity : but in former times it was never heard that any wrote Encomiums of Sacrilege . 

That the Kings of the earth should conspire against Christ , it was no wonder : for they knew him not . That the Edomites and Ishmaelites should oppose him , no wonder : for they stood on terms of hostility . That the jews should confederate against him , no wonder : for they hated him . But that men baptised in his Faith , bearing his Name as their honourable Title , and wearing his Profession , as their chief ornament ; should consent to rob him , and justify it by their law ! this is such a thing as the very Barbarians would blush at . Suppose the Ministers of this City , the Pencioners of Peace , by some humble complaint request their own , or ( at most but ) so me small part of their own ; is the Spoiler at a nonplus ? Cannot he find an Advocate to pled for him , and make his cause ( though not be , yet ) appear good ? What , not one for his fees , that can cry down the Temple , the Gospel , Christ himself ? Is there no Bill to be framed ? no false plea to be found ? Is Satan turned fool ? Hath none of his scholars any brains left ? Yes , we might think the devil were dead , if there could not be found an Advocate to pled for Sacrilege . The Lord in his justice for sin , hath broken down her hedges ; and now every hand hath a snatch at her Grapes . 

In many places , Ahab - like , they have engrossed the whole vineyard : but if the poor , exposed , & unsupported Vine be left , it shall bear the owner but a few grapes . This may hold in jure Fori , it never shall hold in jure Poli. God promised that the faith of the Church should remove mountains : such were Domitian , Dioclesian , and those Imperial persecutors . The Church prays , Dorsum corum incurua , Bow down their backs ; and so the Lord did . Valerian was so bowed down , that he became a footstool for the King of Persia , to mount up to his horse OH that the Church of Peace had still this miraculous Faith , to remove these mountains ; malicious and truth-hating pleaders , the pioners of the Temple , and the maintainers of those that pillage it . 

They tell us , the Law is open , and there be deputies ; but who be the deputies in this City ? Is there any other than a judge of their own ? And is it not then a proverbial answer of any man questioned in this Sacrilege ; Ask my father if I be a thief ? When David decided the matter to Mephibosheth ; thou and Ziba divide the land : he answered , Yea let him take all : For the misery of Law , I never by experience found it , because I never tried it : but when they have leave to divide the Inheritance of Christ with their Ministers ( and it were something tolerable if they did but divide it ) I say , yea let them take all , seeing all they will have , rather than we go to recover it by such a judgement . But certainly Good cannot long abide to see that people prospero , who cannot abide to see his Church prospero . They that spoil the Palace of Peace on earth , shall never be entertained into her glorious Court of heaven . 

The River that serves this City of Peace 

Is Prosperity . It is one principal happiness of a City , to be situated by a River's side : that as it hath fortified itself by land , so it may have command of the Sea. Prosperity is the River to this City , that like a loving Meander , winds itself about , throwing his silver Arms upon her sides ; ebbing slowly , but flowing merrily , as if he longed to embrace his love . Peace is the mother of Prosperity , but Prosperity is too often the murderer of Peace . For peace breeds wealth , wealth breeds pride , pride breeds contention , and contention kills peace . Thus she is often destroyed by her own issue , as Senacherib was by his own bowels . 

Take this City we live in for an Instance . Peace hath brought God's plenty : the Inhabitants neither plough , nor sow , nor reap ; yet are fed like the fowls of heaven . They fare well with less trouble , then if come grew at their doors , and cattle grased in their streets . But as Nilus may rise too high , and water Egypt too much ; so the inundation of opulency may do them hurt . Thus may the influence of heaven , and the plenty of earth , be a Snare unto us ; and our abundance , an occasion of our falling . Prosperity is hearty meat , but not digestible by a weak stomach , strong wine , but naught for a weak brain . The prosperity of fools destroyeth them . It is not simply prosperity , but the prosperity of fools that destroyeth them . The swelling River by the surfeit of a Tide , doth not sooner bring in our increase ; but our increase doth breed in our minds another swelling , in our bodies another surfeiting : we swell in pride , and surfeit in wantonness . The Israelites never fared so well , as when they lived at God's immediate finding ; and at night expected their morrow's breakfast from the clouds . When they did daily ask , and daily receive their daily bread . 

There be ( as I heard a worthy Divine observe ) three main Rivers in the land , whereof this is held the best : and this City is placed in the best Seat of the River , upon the gentle rising of a hill , in the best air , and richest soil . When a Courtier gave it out , That Queen Mary being displeased with the City , threatened to divert both Term and Parliament to Oxford : an Alderman asked whether she meant to turn the channel of the Thames thither , or no ▪ if not , saith he , by God's grace we shall do well enough . The lines are fallen to us in pleasant places , we have a goodly Heritage . Both the Elements are our friends ; the Earth sends us in her fruits , the Sea her merchandise . We are near enough the benefits , and far enough from the dangers of the Ocean . Nothing is wanting to the consummation of our happiness : to keep us in our own Country , in our own City , in our own Houses , but that which keeps men in their wits , Temperance , and Thankfulness . 

But do we not requite this River of Prosperity , with ungrateful impiety ? and use the Ocean of God's bounty , as we do the Thames ? It brings us in all manner of provision ; clothes to cover us , Fuel to warm us , Food to nourish us , Wine to cheer us , Gold to enrich us : and we in recompense , foil it with our rubbish , filth , common sewers , & such excretions . It yields us all manner of good things , and we requite it with all plenty of bad things . It comes flowing in with our commodities , & we send it loaden back with our injuries . 

Such toward God is the impious ingratitude of this famous City , which else had no Parallel under the Sun . She may not unfitly be compared to certain Pictures , that represent to diverse beholders , at diverse stations , diverse forms . Looking one way , you see a beautiful Virgin : another way , some deformed monster . Cast an eye upon her Profession , she is a well graced creature : turn it upon her conversation , she is a mishapen stigmatic . View her Peace , she is fairer than the daughters of men : view her Pride , the children of the Hittites and Amorites are beauteous to her . Think of her good works , then Blessed art thou of the Lord : number her sins , then How is that faithful City become an harlot 〈…〉 To tell of her Charity , and how many hundred she feeds in a year , you will say with Paul , In this I praise her . To tell of her oppressions , and how many thousands she undoes in a year , you will say with him again , In this I praise her not . Behold her like a Nurse drawing her Breasts , and giving milk to Orphans , you wish her Cup to run over with fullness . Behold her like a Horse leech , sucking the blood of the Church , to feed her own sacrilegious avarice ; you will say her Cup is too full . When we think of her prosperity , we wonder at her impiety : when we think of her impiety , we wonder at her prosperity . OH that her Citizens would learn to manage their liberal fortunes , and to entertain the River of Peace that makes glad the City of God , with Humility and Sobriety . That when Death shall disfranchise them here , they may be made free above , in that triumphant City , whose glory hath neither measure , nor end . 

The Life of the Citizens 

Is Love : for without the love of men there can be no peace of God , and there is no love of God in them that desire not peace with men . He that loves not the members , was never a friend to the Head. To say we love Christ , and hate a Christian ; is as if a man , while he was saluting or protesting love to his friend , should tread on his toes . I know indeed , that every creature is to be loved , but in ordine ad Deum : Religion doth not forbid , but rectify our affections . Our Parents , spouses , children , allies , countrymen , neighbours , friends ; have all their due places in our love : and it were a brutifh doctrine to dispossess us of these human relations . Only they must know their orders and stations , and by no means usurp upon God : they must not be mistresses , but handmaids to the love of Christ.  

But let us love them , because they love God : as reflections of our sight , which glance from the Lord upon his Image : if God have their hearts , let them have our hearts . It is poor to love a man for that is about him : he must be loved for that is within him . If we should accounted of men as we do of bags ; prise them best that weigh heaviest , and measure out our love by the Subsidie-booke ; honouring a man because he is well clothed : I see then no reason , but we should do greater reverence to the Basin and Ever on the stall , then to the Goldsmith in the Shop ; and most humbly salute Satin & Velvet in whole pieces , because their virgin-glory was never yet ravished and abused into fashion . 

no , but especially let us love others , because they fear God , and serve jesus Christ. For as the brain is to the sinews , the liver to the veins , and the heart to the arteries ; so is God's love to human societies : as the very soul by which they live , and the form that gives them being . Otherwise our companies are conspiracies ; when we fall in one with another , to fall out with God. Let us begin our loves above , deriving this holy fire from the Altar of Heaven ; let our faith enkindle it at the heart of Christ , and then like the Cherubins , we shall look graciously one upon another , while all faithfully look up to the Mercy-seat of God.  

The general State of this City . 

This is the Corollary of all ; every particular being cast up , here is the sum ; her universal felicity . For the illustration whereof , it will not be unuseful , to borrow an instance : and we need not travel far to seek out such an image or resemblance . 

Look we upon our own Nation , the happy Module of this City of peace . It was said , that in Rome a man might see all Countries : and the Romans used to solace themselves ; It is good looking on a Map of the World , ubi nihil in orbe videmus alienum , when we find nothing in the world which is not our own . What doth the whole earth produce , which is not yielded to our enjoying ? What was once said of Ormus , is true of this City , Turn the world into a Ring , and this is the Diamond of it . Like to Gideons' Fleece , it hath been wet with the dew of heaven , when drought was on the whole earth besides : Or like Nilus , which keeps within the Banks , when other Rivers overflow their continents . Some Nations have peace , but without the Truth : other have the Truth , but without Peace : we have both Truth and Peace . Our neighbours have been exercised with troubles , whirled about with hostile tumults ; their ears affrighted with the thunder of those murdering pieces : their eyes agashed with their Temples and Tabernacles flaming about their heads : Infants bleeding upon the stones , and their amazed mothers ravished ere they can be permitted to die . The shrieks of the dying , and slavery of the living , under the merciless hands of a kill or insulting adversary ; these have been their distracting objects : none of them come near us. There is no rifling of houses , no flying to refuges , no rotting in Dungeons , no ruinating of Monuments , no swelling the channels with blood , no firing of Cities , no Rapes of Virgins , no dashing of Babes against the stones , nor casting them , as they drop from their mother's wombs , into their mother's flames . But in stead of these , the truth of the Gospel is preached , piety professed , the practice of it encouraged ; Grace promising , and Peace performing , blessed rewards . 

That is verified in us , which is recorded of the days of Solomon ; That he had peace on all sides round about him : and judah & Israel dwelled safely , every man under his Vine , and under his Figgetree , from Dan to Beersheba . Or as Silvius said of Rhodes ; Semper in sole sita est . The Sunshine of mercy embraceth us , and hath made us a day of peace , not shorter than sixty years : the favours of God over shadowing us , as the Cherubins did the Mercy-seat . I know that Rome frets at this , and let the Harlot rage her heart out : she thunders out Curses , but ( praised be God ) we never more prospered , then when the Pope most cursed us. Yea , OH Lord , though they curse , do thou bless : their thunder doth more fear then hurt , thy favour doth more good than they can blast . Convert or confound them that have evil will at Zion : & still let us inherit thy Peace , that thou mayst inherit our praise . 

This is the Reward of Peace , and of all those that in sincerity of heart love her : the God of peace shall be with them . There be six kinds of peace , but the peace of God contains all the rest . The peace of God passeth all understanding : therefore whosoever loses this peace , hath a loss past all understanding . But Christ foretold us , that in the world we shall have no peace . Indeed no peace Quoad oppositionem seculi , yet much peace quoad dispositionem Domini . The most savage disturbers , Si non reformentur ne pereant , tamen reprimentur ne perimant : if they be not reform to save them themselves , they shall be restrained from harming us. If they will not do us the good they should , yet they shall not do us the evil they would . Vel inimieus tuus non manebit , vel non manebit inimicus . Either our enemies shall not live , or they shall not live our enemies . Either the righteous shall rejoice when they see the vengeance , and wash their feet in the blood of the wicked . Or the Lord will give them favour in the sight of their enemies , and those that hated them , shall cleave unto them . 

From hence ariseth peace with ourselves : a conformity of affection to reason , of reason to grace : that the conflicts which a distressed conscience finds with legal terrors , shall be turned to mild embracements . Faith leading the understanding , the understanding guiding the will , the will ruling the operative powers , & Christ jesus governing all . For indeed he is the Fountain of peace , and we through him being justified by faith , have peace with God. Through the corruption of our nature , and justice of God's nature , we are enemies : and there is no reconciliation , but through the blood oh the everlasting Covenant . He reconciles us to God , as joab did Absalon to David by the woman of Tekoah : when the whole family rose up , & said , Deliver him that smote his brother , that we may take his life for the life of the slain : and so the father & mother shall have no name nor remainder upon earth . God hath two sorts of sons Angels & men : the Angels that fell , are lost for ever : men fell , if they were lost too , where should God have sons ? I know that he needs not man : he hath still the elect Angels , and is able to raise sons of stones : he can want nothingwhile he possesseth himself . Well , yet in mercy Christ reconciles us : David asks , Is not the hand of joab in all this ? so we may admire , Is not the hand of jesus in all this ? Yes , he hath made our peace . The Minister always ends his public devotions with the peace of God , & the blessing of this Peace rest upon us.  

Thus we have a real abridgement of this mystical City of Peace ; happy every way . Vigilancy is her Officer of Peace ; that hath an eye in the darkest angles , and discovers the first conceptions of strife . Discipline is her Clerk of the peace , that keeps the Records , and indicts offenders . Authority is her justice of peace : that if any will not be ruled , binds them over to the peace . Equity is her Burse , where men exchange kindness for kindness : on whose stairs Injury and imposture durst never set their foul feet . Truth is her Standard , which with the Trumpet of Fame shall resound her happiness to all nations . Plenty is her Treasurer , Liberality her Almoner , Conscience her Chancellor , Wisdom her Counsellor , Prayer her Clerk of the Closet , Faith her Crown , justice her Sceptre , Masculine Virtues her Peers , Graces her Attendants , and Nobility her Maid of Honor.  

All her Garments are green and orient ; all her paths be Milk , her words Oracles , and her works Miracles : making the blind to see , and the lame to go , by a merciful supply to their defects . Her breath is sweeter than the new blown Rose ; million of souls lie sucking their life from it : and the smell of her garments is like the smell of Lebanon . Her smiles are more reviuing then the Vertumnall Sunshine : and her favours , like seasonable dews , spring up flowers and fruits wheresoever she walks . Holiness is the Canopy of State over her head , and Tranquillity the Arras where she sets her foot . All her Servants wait in order ; and can with contentful knowledge , distinguish and accept their own places . Her Court is an Image of Paradise ; all her channels slow with milk , and her Conduits run wine . Envy and murmuring , as privy to their own guilt , fly from her Presence . Her Guard consists not of men , but Angels : and they pitch their Tents about her Palace . Lastly , having preserved and blessed all her children on earth , she goes with them to heaven ; is welcomed into the arms of her Father , invested Queen with a Diadem of glory , & possessed of those joys , unto which Time shall never put 

An End.  





Ephes. 4. 4  The Picture of Peace . The requisitenesse & reward of Peace . 2.  Cor. 13. 11  The form of a right Law.  the equity of Peace  Ro. 12. 18 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ● Cor. 6 , 15  Psalm 1  Peccatum dominans , Peccatum delectans , peccatum ●n●●ans . The terms of Peace distinguished . August . Psal. 59 5.  The life of Peace . The neglect . The Method . The Body is a figure of Unity . 1 Cor. 12  Mutual Love.  Providence of parts for the whole ▪  Discontents removed . ● Cor. 12. 16.  Condolency of the members . Amo. 6. 6.  Schism dangerous . Luk 23. 25  Distraction mortal . 2 Esdr. 4. 1.  The first Foundation of Peace . The angry man cannot be Innocent . Gen. 22. 5  The second Foundation of Peace . 2 Tim 2. 18  Gal. 62.  1.  Sam. 24.  18.  Bern.  Psal. 62. 5.  Cor. 15.  31.  Chrys.  Sen.  Mat. ● ▪ 24.  Aug.  Isodo● . Sen.  The third foundation of Peace . Gal. 6. 10.  Pro. 19 4.  Eccl. 9 15.  Ecclus. 13. 23.  Prou. 22. 2  Luk. 14. 14.  Heb. 13. 2.  Ro. 12. 20.  Mat. 5. 44.  Eccl. 12. 5. 7.  Mat. 5 , 45.  Pro. 15. 27.  1.  Cor. 12. 31.  Non operter Officii , sed potius officiendi . Hieron . Mat. 5. 24.  Num. 5. 7.  Prou. 6. 3.  Num. 5. 7.  Mat. 5. 24.  Gen. 43. 3.  Mat 5. 25.  Pelican . Chysost . Humility the conservation of Peace . Aug.  Psal. 122. 7.  The Enemies of Peace . Aug.  The first Troop . Gen. 9 5.  ● Sam. 3. 27.  & 20. 10.  Gen. 27. 45.  Bern.  Aug.  Gen. 34. 31  Gen. 49. 6.  Basil.  The other Troop . Pro. 18. 17.  1.  Cor. 3. 4.  Gal. 5. 22.  Gen. 16. 12  Pro. 30. 28.  job. 2. 1.  1 Cor. 6. 5.  etc.  Mat. 18. 22  ●hysoft . Act. 19 38.  Act 25. 10.  john 18. 23  Act. 23. 3.  Host 4. 1.  Psal. 119. 24. 48.  Psal. 1. 2.  Pro ●5 . 11  Rom. 12. 19  Deu. 32. 35  Col. 3. 12  Psal. 62. 11  Psal. 91. 8.  The King of Peace . Rom. 13. 5.  Acts 22. 28  1 Cor. 1. 26  Pro. 28. 28  judg. 5. 31  Rom. 13. 6  Mat. 17. 27  The Law of Peace . Psal. 85. 8  Pro. 22. 22.  Gal. 6. 15.  Gal. 6. 6  Gal. 6 , 16  Mat. 11. 29  Luk. 16. 22  Acts 5. 8.  Mat. 19 21  The Court or Palace of Peace . 1 Sam. 9 7  Neh. 4. 3.  Psal. 2. 2.  1 Cor. 2. 8  Psal. 13. 6.  Acts 4. 27  Psal. 80. 12  Acts 19 38  2 Sam. 19 30.  The River of this City . Pro. 1 , 32  Psal. 16. 6  Esa. 1. 21.  The life of Peace . The Estate . 1.  Kings 4. 25.  2.  Cor. 13. 11.  joh. 16. 33.  Psal. 58.  1● . Exod. 11. 3  Rom. 5. 1.  2 Sam. 14 7  Verse 19  