An Anniversarie MEMORIAL OF ENGLAND'S DELIVERY FROM The Spanish Invasion : DELIVERED IN A Sermon on Psal. 48.7.8 . By THOMAS GATAKER B. of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith . 

LONDON , ¶ Printed by John Haviland for Philemon Stephens and Christopher Meredith , at the Golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard . 1626.  

TO THE WORSHIPFUL HIS VERY LOVING Friend M. Thomas Chapman , Son and Heir to the Religious Founder of this Exercise . 

Worthy Sir , 

What yourself , and others with yourself have through your means formerly by word of mouth heard from me , you shall now upon your second request receive here in writing . I should not have deemed it worthy the reservation , but that it pleased you ( who have best right to it ) to require it . In scattered notes only ( like Absyrtus his limbs ) I had the sum and heads of it ; which I have again here recollected , & cast ( as near as I could ) into that mould and frame that it was delivered in at first . If much seem missing of that little grace that it than had , it must be remembered , that the liveless letter for vivacity and efficacy cometh far short of the living voice . As it is , you have it , and no more than your own in it , from him , who for your pious building on your worthy Father's foundation in this kind , doth deservedly affect you , and shall always continue 

Yours to be commanded in the Lord , THO. GATAKER . 

TO THE READER . 

BE pleased ( good Reader ) to understand in few words the occasion whereupon this Sermon was preached , and thou wilt judge it to be a kind of necessity to make that public to the common view , which was first intended for the ear only of a private Auditory . There is , we see , too great and general a want ( in these our days ) of monuments and memorial of that miraculous deliverance which God wrought for this Land in 88  When Tongue and Pen , Pulpit and Press are silent for that , we may expect the stones to cry out against us , and to celebrate that praise to God whereof we are neglective . But man's memory being a table book to register acts passed , and not able to comprehend all that is to be recorded therein , when new things of note come to be imprinted in it , the old are wiped out : so God affording us a daily supplie of new preseruations , those other which we have formerly received grow quite out of date , are razed out , and buried in oblivion . Therefore to revive this blessing ( which ought never to be forgotten ) amongst the rest in this Land , and for it to eternize God's praise amongst us , it hath been religiously provided by Mr. Thomas Chapman ( sometimes a worthy Citizen ) that yearly three Sermons shall be preached in the Church of St. Pancras in Soper-lane , where he lately lived a well deserving parishioner : One of the Sermons to be preached Novemb . 17. in thankful remembrance of the coronation of that Virgin Queen ELIZABETH of famous and neverdying memory , with whose gracious government accompanied much happiness to our kingdom ; but this as chief of all , ( scil . ) the establishment of that truth of the Gospel & discipline of the Church which we now enjoy under our dread Sovereign Lord King CHARLES ( whom God long preserve a religious Defender of this truth and peace amongst us. ) Another Sermon to be preached August 12. for our deliverance from that Spanish Armado ( in which course this Sermon was preached . ) A third Novemb. 5. for the preservation of our King and State from that damnable powder-plot as yet unparallelled in any age since the world began . In each of these we may behold God's goodness : first in bringing us to the glorious light of the Gospel by making that Queen a Mother over his Israel and a Nurse over his Church : neither was it less goodness in him to preserve us in this happy state , then to confer it upon us ; and this he hath done maugre the malice of our enemies , who have not wanted both power and policy in these their attempts , yet when they were strong and many , our God was mightier than they , and there were more with us than against us : when they had laid their plots and trains , God confounded the wicked imaginations of those Achitophel's , and let them fall into the pit they had digged for others . This good man , famous in his generation , in thankful remembrance to God of these three blessings , in his life time solemnly observed three Sermons , and hath left large Legacies at his death for their continuance unto posterity ; that in succeeding ages fathers may declare unto their children how great things God hath done for us in the old times before them . By this godly care of his , he hath built himself a monument of fame to remain longer than those Egyptian Pyramids , or that Pillar which Absolom reared up in the King's dale for the perpetuity of his name upon earth . Thus they that honour God , God will honour them , in seeking the glory of God's name , God hath made an honourable memorial of his name to redound upon his own head . He was second to none , being the first Founder ( of late ) of this pious act : but I hope he shall not stand alone , but that there will be many found to second him hereafter in so good a work worthy the imitation . So now ( Reader ) I commit this Sermon to thy perusal : whilst in it thou seest Gods wonderful works which he hath done for our Nation , or what good soever thou shalt reap else in this Exercise , be thankful to God and pray for the Author . 

PSALM 48.7 , 8.  

7.  As with an East wind , thou breakest the Ships of Tarshish ; so were they destroyed . 

8.  As we have heard , so have we seen in the City of the Lord of Hosts , in the City of our God : God will establish it for ever . Selah . 



AS in all well-governed States there are public Registers , and Records , that the memory of judgements and Acts may not perish : So hath God in man's Soul erected a Register , to wit , the faculty of Remembrance , for the preservation of such occurrents , as are of weight , and may be of use for the direction of man's life . 

But this Register is very much abused by the greatest part of those that have the custody of it . For if the Records that the most enter therein , and keep there , were surveyed , there would be found filled there large rolls fraught with frivolous and frothy stuff , of little weight , and less use , yea ( it may be ) with much filthy , and unsavoury matter , not once to be mentioned , much less to be remembered : scarce any script , or scroll of aught , that is aught worth , or worthy to be entered in so royal a Register . 

Now if any thing deserve to be there carefully recorded , that it may by that means be transmitted to posterity , it should be God's word , and his works , his extraordinary Acts especially either of judgement , or of Mercy . For the former , the Prophet joel willeth the people of his time , both to record them themselves , and to cause their Children to record them , and them also to relate them to their posterity . Tell it you to your Children ; and let them tell it to their children ; and their Children to those that rise in their room . Of the latter saith the Psalmist , Asaph , or who ever he were ; He commanded our Fathers to teach it to their Children , that posterity might know it , and the Children that are yet unborn might declare it to their Children hereafter ; that God's works might not be forgotten . 

In which kind the pious , and religious Act of the Founder of this Exercise is very much to be commended , who having culled out three principal Acts of God's extraordinary Mercy exhibited to the Land wherein we live , as great as any ever vouchsafed to any State whatsoever , hath established a solemn Anniversarie Memorial of them to perpetuate them to all posterity . 

To my Lot is fallen that admirable Deliverance in 88 from that Invincible Armado , as it was then styled and termed . 

For the remembrance whereof , and of God's mercy in it , I have made choice to entreat of some parcel of this Psalm , not unbefitting ( as you may soon see ) the present occasion . 

The Psalm , is a Psalm ( not so much 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , as 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) of Praise and of Triumph . 

Of the praise of God , and his goodness to his Church . 

Of triumph over God's enemies , and the enemies of his Church . 

The Praise of God , and his goodness to his Church , is laid down from the first verse to the fifth . 

The special ground of this praise a victory through his assistance achieved against his enemies , and the enemies of his Church is , by way of triumph , related from the fifth verse to the tenth . 

And in the Relation hereof there is , 

First the enemies Attempt ; and therein 

1.  Praeparatio ; their preparation ; Conuenerunt pariter ; they met together . 

2.  Expeditio ; their expedition ; Progressi sunt pariter ; they went on together . 

Secondly , the issue , and event of it : not like that of Caesar , Veni , vidi , vici ; I came , I saw , I overcame : but , venerunt , viderunt , veriti sunt , victi sunt : they came , they saw , they were overcome , with astonishment , with fear , with defeature . 

1.  Contemplati sunt ; they but viewed the Land that they came to invade . 

2.  Obstupuerunt , they wondered that they were able to make head against them . 

3.  Conturbati sunt ; they were troubled , disarrayed , disappointed . 

4.  Festinaverunt ; they made all the haste they could to be gone . 

5.  Timor eos apprehendit ; they were full of fear , & affrightment , when they found not free passage . 

6.  Et dolour , ut dolores parturientis ; they were surprised with pains , being thus cast into such straits and distresses ; like a woman in her travel . 

Lastly , Euro conteris naves Oceani , they were discomfited , and destroyed , as the Ships of the Levant Seas are , when with a furious Eastwind they are bruised , and battered , and broken to pieces against the rocks . 

If I should say no more , but add only the words following : Prout audivimus , & vidimus ; What we have heard with them , we have seen done for us ; it were a very pregnant description of this our deliverance . But somewhat more must be said , that we may learn what use to make of it . 

The Relation of this Victory achieved for them by God ( for to him alone it is ascribed ) is here further illustrated . 

1.  By a report of what was passed : the words seem to have reference not to the predictions of God's Prophets , but to former examples rather of the like done for God's people : What we have heard done in our forefather's time for them , we have seen done in our days for us.  

2.  By a promise of further future protection . God will establish it for ever . 

And their thankfulness followeth in the next Verse : ( that which we through God's mercy survive to do this day ) We recount , or meditate on thy mercy , o Lord , in the midst of thy Temple , that is , in the midst of the Congregation there gathered together . 

Thus you see briefly the Sum , and the Substance , as of my Text , so of the former part of the whole Psalm . 

I come now to some Instructions that out of it may be observed . 

The first of them is this . Quaerunt ruinam , qui ruinam cogitant . 

They bring destruction upon themselves , that seek the ruin of Gods elect . The wicked ( saith the Psalmist ) practiseth against the righteous ; and seeketh occasion to slay him . But the Lord the while laugheth him to scorn : for he seeth that his day is coming . The wicked have drawn their sword and bend their bow , to overthrow , and destroy those , that be of an upright conversation : But their sword shall be sheathed in their own side ; and their bow shall be knapped in two All that provoke thee ( saith God by the Prophet esay to his people ) shall be confounded , and brought to naught ; all that contend with thee , shall perish . thou shalt seek them , and shalt not find them . All that strive with thee shall be as nothing : all that war upon thee , as a thing of naught . And I will make ( saith God by the Prophet Zachary ) jerusalem as a cup of rank poison to all those that besiege her ; which when a thirsty man lighteth upon , and swalloweth down suddenly , he findeth his bane in that , that he hoped to quench his thirst with . I will make jerusalem an heavy stone to all people ; such a one as shall crush to pieces all that attempt to lift it , or to remove it : so shall she tear to pieces all that attempt to stir her , though all the nations in the world should join together against her . I will make the Princes of juda like coals of fire among seare-wood , and like a firebrand in a sheaf ; & they shall devour , & destroy all the people that beset them on the right hand , and on the left . 

The Reason hereof : 

1.  Dei qui Ecclesiam impetunt , Deum petunt . They that fight against God's Church , fight against God himself . They persecute not you so much , as Christ in you , saith Saluian . Saul , Saul ( saith our Saviour ) why dost thou persecute me . And in so doing , they do but as one ( saith the Comic ) that beateth a stone , and spoileth his hand ; or as the beast that spurneth at the goad , that he was pricked with ; he maimeth but his foot by it , & getteth a worse wound ; or as the Boar , that runneth fiercely upon the Spear , and so receiveth into his body the whole weapon that the Huntsman holdeth . Why ( saith the Psalmist ) do the Nation's rage , and the people keep such a coil to no end ? The Kings of the earth band themselves together , and the Princes assemble themselves together , against the Lord , and against his Anointed ? Therefore against the Lord himself , because against the Lords Anointed . And as he that riseth against the Lords Anointed , riseth against the Lord by whom he is anointed : So they that rise against the Church of God , rise against God himself , whose Church it is ; Because thou ragest against me ( saith God to Senacherib ) therefore I will put my ring in thy nose , and my bit in thy jaws , and bring thee back the same way thou camest . Keep me ( saith David ) as the apple of thine eye : hide me under the shadow of thy wings . They that deal with them , deal with those that are as dear unto God , as the very apple of his eye , that that the eyesight consisteth in ; And therefore saith God , I will be as a wall of fire about jerusalem ( he saith not , saith Theodoret , a wall of stone , or of brass , but of fire , that it may both fray afar off , and keep off too at hand ; that may not only protect them , but destroy those that assault them ) because he that meddleth with you , meddleth with me , even with the apple of mine eye . 

2.  Lex talionis verè lex aequissima . The Law of retaliation , or like-recompence , is most equal . It is not evil , that they suffer evil , that have done evil to others . There shall be judgement ( saith S. james ) without mercy to those that would show no mercy . It is no cruelty to use them cruelly , that have showed cruelty to others . For he excludeth himself from mercy ( saith Chrysologus ) that denieth it to another . But they stand guilty of destruction that have a purpose to destroy . For the bare will alone goeth with God for the work , and the very endeavour , desire , yea or thought , for the deed . Balak rose , and fought with Israel , saith josua . And yet the story saith nothing so . But that is said to be done , that is either intended , or attempted , saith Ribera . He did it not , only because he durst not : and the woman ( saith the Heathen man ) that doth not evil , because she dare not , when she would do it , if she durst , though she do it not , yet she doth it . He that looketh but on a woman to lust after her ( saith our Saviour ) hath already in his heart committed adultery with her . And , He that hates but his brother , ( saith S. john ) hath already murdered him in his heart . A strange matter ( saith S. Augustine ) the man is alive still , and yet thou art a murderer : the woman is honest , and yet art thou an adulterer . The minding then of destruction , maketh a destroyer . He is guilty of it that doth but intend , or attempt to destroy : and deserveth himself to be destroyed . If a witness ( saith God ) shall rise against a man to take his life away from him , you shall even do unto him ( not , as he did , but ) as he would have done unto his neighbour . 

The second point of Instruction : Creaturae Deo dilectis militant . 



God's creatures fight for those that are Gods ; for those that love him , and whom he loveth ; against the enemies of his Church . The Frogs , Flies , Lice , Locusts , etc. fought for God's servants against Pharaoh , and his people . The Stars from heaven fought in their courses against Sisera : and the river Kishon swept his armies away , as the red Sea had done Pharao's before . The Sun stood still to assist joshua in the pursuit of the Canaanites : and the hailstones slew more of them than the sling or the sword did . And as here with the Eastwind dost thou dash to pieces the Ships of the Mediterranean Sea ; So the winds fought for Theodosius in that famous battle against Maximus , carrying the darts , and arrows of his companies full into the faces of their enemies , and returning back those of their enemies upon their own bodies : That which even an Heathen Poet admiring , broke out into that speech ; OH how highly art thou beloved of God , whom the heavens fight for ; and the Winds as thy confederates come in to assist thee ! To thine aid came the boisterous Northwind down from the Hills , and bore down before thee the troops that came against thee , with whirling blasts repelling their spears , and retorting their arrows , and darts upon their owners . 

The Reason hereof . 

1.  The Saints are in league , and confederacy with God. Gather me my Saints ( saith he ) that have made a league with me . Now as Princes that are in league of amity together , may have the free use of either others forces at need : My horses ( saith jehosaphat to Ahab ) are as thy horses ; and my people as thy people : thou mayest use them as thine own . So the godly being in league with God , may have all his forces , and armies for their help , and assistance , whensoever need shall be . And what are all the Creatures but God's hosts ? He is the Lord of Hosts : and ( as the Rabbins well observe ) he hath two general troops , as his horse , and foot , the upper troop , and the lower troop , or the creatures above , and the creatures beneath , all ready pressed to be employed , in wars , either defensive , or offensive , for the safeguard of his favourites , or the destruction of their opposites . Even the Angels themselves ( saith the Psalmist ) pitch their tents about those that fear God , etc. they lie in garrison , about the godly , to defend and deliver them ; they lie in camp against their enemies to offend , and to destroy them . 

2.  What are the Creatures , but God's Sergeants at Arms to arrest , and attach Rebels ? All the creatures ( saith the Psalmist ) are at his service . The winds are his messengers , and the fire and flame his ministers . And the hail , and snow his officers , and the executioners of his word : they serve him all , and they do his will , though they know not what they do . But they rebel against God himself ( as we have heard before ) that are up in arms against any of those that be his : whom he hath undertaken the protection of ; and concerning whom he hath given so express a charge by the Psalmist , Touch not mine Anointed ; that is , any one of mine holy ones . The place is commonly misunderstood ; not spoken of Kings directly ( though concerning them also , as being in a more special manner Gods Anointed ; ) but to Kings ( He rebuked even Kings for their sakes ) in the behalf of his Saints , by him spiritually anointed to be Kings , and Priests to him . These being in such manner his , the Creatures are all as his Pursuivants , and his Sergeants at Arms to apprehend , and attach them all that make head against them , and against himself in them ; and either to bring them in , or to make his charge good upon them , by destroying them , as he did Senacheribs' host , in the place . 

The third Point of Instruction . 

Est civitas Dei , Deus quam protegit . 

It is the City of God , that God thus protecteth . In the City of the Lord of Hosts ; ( saith my Text ) in the City of our God. And before , Great is the Lord , and greatly to be praised in the City of our God : In her Palaces it is that God is known for a sure retreat . It is jerusalem , that God is a wall of fire about . And upon them it was that fire fell down , and devoured them , that beset the beloved City . 

The Reason hereof . 

1.  It is the place of God's residence , where he especially resideth , This is my rest for ever ( saith he ) Here will I dwell , for I take delight in it . And Princes , though they have a general care of their whole kingdom , yet a more special care of the places of their principal abode . 

2.  It is God's inheritance . They are thy people and thine inheritance , saith Moses . And we know how loath men are ( witness Naboth the jisrelite ) to lose , or to depart with their inheritance , or any part of it . 

3.  It is God's Vineyard . Surely the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel ; and the men of juda his pleasant plantation . And his Vineyard he saith he will keep , and watch continually night and day , without any moment of intermission , that no enemy assail it , that none break into it , to make spoil and havoc of it . 

4.  It is God's Garden . My Sister , my Spouse , is as a Garden enclosed . And we know how careful men are of any place to fence and pale in their Gardens , whatsoever place else , field , or Orchard , they suffer to lie open . Nor let us think that God hath any whit less care of his , which he delighteth so much in . 

But how cometh it to pass then ( may some say ) that the Psalmist complaineth in that manner ? OH Lord the Heathen are come into thine inheritance , they have made jerusalem an heap of stones , etc.  

I answer . 1.  Beth-el sometime becometh Beth-aven . The faithful City sometime turneth Harlot . And it is just with God then to cast her off ; She kept not covenants with me , and I cast her off , saith the Lord  

2.  God's children sometime grow wanton , and provoke God to wrath . In which case God useth the wicked as rods , and scourges to correct them with . Ashur ( saith God by the Prophet esay ) is but the rod of my wrath . Even they also ( saith Gregory ) work for him , yea , and for them ( though they are not aware of it ) that in such case fight both against him and them . 

3.  Even in the deepest of their distresses God ceaseth not to regard them : He neglecteth them not , when he seemeth most of all to neglect them . Though Zion complain that God had forgotten her : yet God assureth her that he could no more forget her , than any Mother could her child . He carried her picture about him engraven on the palms of his hands , and her walls were ever in his eyes . And , Albeit ( saith God ) I have cast them far off among the Heathen , and have scattered them into many countries , yet will I be as a little Sanctuary unto them in all places , wheresoever they shall become . 

And so pass we to the fourth , and last point of Instruction . 

Ecclesia Dei , nunquam dimovebitur . 

God's Church maugre the malice of all her many , and mighty adversaries , shall never be utterly rooted out , or destroyed . They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion , that standeth fast , and can never be removed . Upon this Rock ( saith our Saviour ) will I build my Church , and the gates of Hell shall never prevail against it . The Candlestick may be removed from place to place ; but the light itself can never be put out . The Woman may be hunted , and chased into the Wilderness ; but never driven utterly out of the World. In the very Wilderness will God provide a place for her , where she● shall be safe ; and find succour , till it please him to bring her abroad again . 

The Reason hereof . 

1.  God establisheth it , ( saith my Text ) and therefore standeth it fast for ever . God is in the midst of it : and therefore shall it not stir . Yea he is not in the midst of it only , but round about it too . As the Hills stand about jerusalem , so standeth God about his people from henceforth and for evermore . He is about it to protect it ; in the midst of it to support it . He that upholdeth the Heavens , upholdeth it : for this is indeed his Heaven upon earth . And as soon may men , or devils pull down Heaven itself , as destroy it . 

2.  Christ himself hath built it , and he hath founded it upon himself . For he is the only true Rock , the Rock of eternity ; the only sure foundation , that his whole Church is built upon . And what he buildeth can by no created power be pulled down again ; the house that is built upon that Rock cannot be overthrown . Though the winds rose , and the rain fell , and the floods came , and beaten all together upon that house , yet the frame fell not , because it was founded upon that Rock . It is Christ's Masterpiece ; that that he would show his Deity , his divine Power in . Would you have me ( saith Chrysostome speaking to the jews ) prove unto you , that Christ jesus is God ? what needs it ? You yourselves wander up and down , the whole world over , preaching , and publishing his Deity to all those that consider in what sort you continue , and yet continue too , ever since that impious act of yours , in the crucifying of him . You go branded with deep and conspicuous marks of his wrath , and vengeance wheresoever you abide . But would you yet see some other pregnant proof of his Deity ? Let this one serve for all . What he razeth , none can rear again ; what he reareth , none can raze again . He pulled down your Temple , and it could never be built again . He hath built him a Church , and it could never be pulled down again . It is a memorable story , and the more remarkable , because recorded ( besides diverse others of our own , ) by an Heathen man also , one no friend to Christians , a traducer of Constantine , and an admirer of julian. julian , that wretched Apostata , to spite the Christians , whom he had professed himself formerly to be one of , but now hated most extremely , called the jews to him , and asked them , why they did not now sacrifice as in times past they had wont to do . They made him answer , that by their Law they might not sacrifice any where but in the Temple at jerusalem : which since therefore it was ruined , they had ceased to sacrifice , and must so do till it were re-edified . Hereupon julian told them that they should have their Temple eftsoons built again , if they would ; and to that purpose he sent one Alypius into those parts furnished with much treasure for the dispeeding of the work , and withal caused the Governor of that Province to assist him all that might be therein . Nor were the jews therein backward , who flocking together out of all quarters , raised a great mass of money , and provided abundance of materials , for the setting forward of so much , and so long desired a work . But no might , or industry of man is able to prevail against God , or to effect that , that he will not have done . When all things were prepared now , and they began to fall to their business ; First there arose strange storms , & whirlwinds , that dissipated , and spoilt their materials . And after that , when yet they attempted to do something , fearful balls of fire , not falling down from heaven , but bursting out of the very ground beneath , and that so oft as they assayed to go on with their work , ripped up what they had wrought , and burned up the workmen , in so much that none durst any more approach the place , and so the very elements ( saith that Heathen man ) obstinately making head against them , they were at length enforced wholly to give over their enterprise . Thus was no power of man able to raise what he had ruined ; nor shall any power ever be able to ruin what he hath raised . In stead of the Temple that he ruined hath he erected his Church ; which unless the Rock may be removed that it is built upon , shall no power of man , or devil be able ever to overthrow . Though all the wicked in the world , and all the Devils in hell to them , conspire together in one , yet as soon shall they be able to drive Christ himself out of heaven , as to destroy utterly and root out his Church here upon earth . 

Thus you see then these four Points of Instruction plainly , and evidently proved unto you . 

1.  That they seek their own ruin , that seek the ruin of God's children . 
2.  That God's Creatures are ready pressed to assist those that be his . 
3.  That it is the City of God , that God thus protecteth . 
4.  That this City , or Church of God shall never be utterly overthrown . 
Let us now proceed to the Uses that of these Points may be made . 

And first this Text may be to the enemies of God's Church , as those knuckles of a man's hand were to Baltasar , to write them their destiny ; or as Daniel was to him , to read it unto them ; to inform them , what the end and issue shall be of all their plots and projects against the Church of God. In plotting , and projecting the ruin of it , they plot and project but their own confusion : Nor shall their plots , and projects take ( as they hope ) against it , but they shall take ( which they , it may be , little deem , or once dream of ) against themselves . God will show himself to be God indeed by executing of judgement , in causing them to be ensnared , and caught in the work of their own hands , in a snare of their own setting , in a net of their own weaving : in causing Haman to be hanged on that Gibbet himself , that for Mordecai he had erected , & bringing him , and his whole House to destruction by those means , whereby he sought the destruction of the whole jewish Nation . 

In this kind may we well say , Sicut audivimus , sic & vidimus ; What we have heard we have seen ; both in that deliverance that through God's goodness this day we survive to celebrate , and in diverse others also . They that came to sink us , were sunk themselves . They that thought to blow us up , were some of them blown up themselves . They that plotted the ruin , and confusion of our estate , brought ruin and confusion upon themselves , and theirs . So let all thine enemies perish , OH Lord But let those that love thee , and stand for thee , be as the Sun when he shines in his full strength . 

Secondly , it may serve as to discourage the Adversary , so to encourage the godly . As to discourage the wicked from attempting aught against God's Church , ( They intended evil against thee , saith the Psalmist ; but they were not able to effect it ) so to encourage those that fight Gods battles ; they cannot want help . Heaven and earth fights for them . Though they may seem the weaker side , and to have fewer assistants , yet God's power is perfected , and appeareth most in man's weakness : And if we had eyes to see it , we might see more with them than against them : which way soever they turn themselves , they might see helps always at hand ; God himself , and all the creatures of God , ready pressed at God's beck to attend them , to assist them , to guard them , to fight for them , to oppose those that fight against them . 

And here we may again sing , Sicut audivimus , sic vidimus ; What we have heard we have seen . The winds , and the Seas fought for us , when time was ; the one dissipated and scattered , the other swallowed up , and devoured those , that came with hope to have dissipated , and with open mouth to have swallowed , drown , and devoured us. Blessed be God , that gave us not up as a prey unto their teeth . 

Thirdly , is it the City of God , that God thus protecteth ? then learn we the reason hence why God hath in this manner done for us. It is for his Church among us , his Name called upon , his Gospel professed by us , his worship retained with us. And certainly ( observe we , and we shall undoubtedly find it to be so that ) since God's truth and Gospel established with us , and that Romish Idolatry expelled from among us , this Island of ours hath enjoyed the quietest , the peaceablest , the most prosperous times , that ever it did , for so long time together , at any time , that any memory of man , or record of story can be produced of , notwithstanding all the power that that Man of sin , and all his adherents were able to raise up against us. And as many strange deliverances hath God vouchsafed us , as ever any Nation under the cope of heaven had . O that our thankfulness to God were in any good measure proportionable to God's goodness towards us. But it is to be feared , that that of Saluian is too too true of us ; God giveth us good things , to make us good : but we when we have received good from God , return evil again to him . And that of Hosea , As they were increased , so they sinned against me : and I will turn their glory therefore into shame . Which if it be so ; let us remember , that as the same Saluian saith , Therefore are we worse than others , whom God hath not done the like for , though we be no worse , if but as bad only , because we ought to be better . So , as the Centurists observe , great blessings , seconded with grievous sins , will at length draw down extraordinary judgements . And it had been better for us never to have had such deliverances , if we be not careful to show ourselves truly thankful unto him , that hath wrought so great deliverances for us.  

Fourthly , it may teach God's Children not to be dismayed , if the enemies of God's Church seem sometime to prevail against it . For they shall never be able to root it out for all that . God's Church is as the bush , that burned , and consumed not , as the Palmtree , that spreadeth , and springeth up the more it is oppressed : as the bottle , or bladder , that may be dipped , but cannot be drowned : as the Oak , that taketh heart to grace from the maims and wounds given it , and sprouteth out thicker than before . The blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church ; it springeth again as the Phoenix doth out of her own ashes , or as the Hydra rather repaireth herself out of her own losses with a much more plentiful increase . The more Pharaoh oppressed the Ebrewes , the more they increased , and the mightier they grew . The Children of God in the Word are compared especially to two sorts of silly creatures , to Doves , and to Sheep . no fowl more preyed upon by Eagles , Hawks , Vultures , and other birds of prey , than the poor Pigeon . And yet , let those ravenous fowls ( saith Optatus ) consume never so many of them , there will be a greater number of Doves still , than of any kind of them . There is more Doves than Hawks , or than Kites , for all that . Again , for the Sheep , it is one of the silliest creatures that is , and most unable to defend itself : neither is it unknown to us ( to spare to speak how they are preyed upon in those places where Wolves , and Bears , and Lions , & other wild beasts are rife ) how many of them are slain for man's use ; no one sort of creatures cometh so frequent to the shambles as they ; they come not by one , or two , but they are driven by troops thither ; as also how many of them die by diseases ; they are subject to rots , and murreons , that make havoc of them by whole sale ; nor are they naturally so fruitful as many other beasts are , and those of prey by name , some of them , as the Fox and others , that bring diverse at a litter , whereas the Ewe hath usually but one . And yet for all this we see what plenty there is every where of them . We may see Sheep eat out men in many places among us ; and whole Towns by them depopulated and turned into Sheep-walks . Such a providence of God is there in the preservation , and increase of that Creature that so oft he compareth his Church and Children unto , whom he hath taken into his special and peculiar protection ; and whom therefore their cruel Adversaries shall no more be able to root out , than the Hawks able to destroy all the Doves that are , or the Wolves to woory , and slay all the Sheep in the World.  

Yea but ( may some say ) may we in this Land then be sure ever of such safety , never to be overrun , or rooted out ? 

no : It is God's Church in general , not this or that Church in particular , that is sure thus constantly to continue . Now God's Church is not confined to this , or that place ; nor is God's protection tied unto , or entailed upon this , or that people . We have no promise of protection longer than we continue God's portion . We have no better evidence , nor assurance than the jews had : Here ( saith God ) shall be my rest for ever . And , God will establish it for ever . And , I will destroy all that rise against it . And yet we know what is become of them at this day , Their habitation is left desolate . And The wrath of God ( saith the Apostle ) is come upon them to the utmost . It is true indeed , that God never leaveth any , but those that leave him . But if Solomon leave God , and build Temples for Milcom , and Chamosh ; God will leave him , and raise up adversaries on all sides against him . If Ezekiaes' heart be lift up ; God will pull him down again . If the holy City become an Harlot , or a Stews ( as he speaketh ) no reason but that God should abandon it , and give her a Bill of divorce , and deal with Aholah , and Aholibah , as adulterous women are wont to be dealt with . If God's Vine grow not barren only , but bear bitter , noisome , and poisonful grapes ; it shall be a just thing with God to pluck up her hedge , and lay her waste , as a wild wilderness , or to cut her down , and cast her into the fire . If Israel begin to look back into Egypt ; it shall be just with God to bring back his Israel that was , into their former Egyptian bondage again . If the Hebrews live in those abominable courses for which God cast out the Canaanites , the Land that spewed out the Canaanite , shall now spew them out . If Gods own people grow worse than the Heathen themselves ; it shall be just with God , to bring the very worst of the Heathen in upon them , and by them , whom they justify in some sort , to destroy them . Nor may we look to far better than they did , if we be faulty as they were . God's Church may stand firm and stable still , though we fall . The Lamp may burn clear elsewhere , though the Light be done out with us. If we desire therefore to have this Protection continued unto us , let us continue to be Gods , that God may continue to be ours . Let us be careful to keep and maintain a Church of God with us , The holy seed upholdeth the state . In a word , as Samuel to his people ( whose words I will end all with ) Fear the Lord , and serve him with all your heart in sincerity ; and consider what great things he hath hitherto done for you . 

FINIS . 





 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 sieve 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Ezr. 6.2 . Et 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 sieve 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Ester 6.1 . & Ezr. 4.15 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Hesych . Archiva ; quae & Tabularia Ciceroni pro Arch. & Virgilio Georg. l. 2. ubi actus publici continentur . Seru.   Memoria est vis animae accepta retinens , praeterita repetens , elapsa re colligens . Aug. nom . de sp . & an . c. 37.  Omnium rerum thesaurus , & custos est memoria . Ibid. c. 34.  Memory is the storehouse of the Soul , and the Register of the Mind . Morton threefold state of Man , l. 2. c. 4.  §. 1.  The Memorative faculty is the Guardian and Register of all species and images apprehended by the sense , and reserved and sealed up by the Imagination . Charron of Wisdom , l. 1. c. 12.  Hoc est quod Scalig. the subtle . exerc . 307.  §. 2.  Imaginationis Memoria seruatrix est . Acceptas enim species ab imaginatione reponit , conditque in thesauris .  See Bern. serm . parv . 1.  Morton ibid. §. 2. and Marbury of Repentance .  Ephes. 5.3 , 4.   Archiwm planè regium , imò etiam divinum .  Psal. 105.5 . & 111.2 , 3 , 4.  Malac. 4.4 .  joel 1.2 .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Asaphi Psalmꝰ . jun. A Psalm of Asaph . Reg. Bibl. for Asaph . Geneu.   Psal. 78.5 , 6.   Mr Thomas Chapman .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Occasion .  Octogesimꝰ octaws mirabilis annus Clade Papistorum ; faustus ubique p●js . Fulk . in Rhem.   The invincible Navy . See Hackluits' relation .  Psal. 48.7 , 8.  Text.   Piscat . Sum of the Psalm .  junius . Parts 2.  Part 1   Verse 1 . 5 . Praise . Part 2.   Verse 5 . 10 . Triumph . Relation . 1.  Attempt .  Verse 4.  1.  Preparation . 2.  Expedition . 2.  Event .  Sueton. Caes. c. 37.  Sic de Pompeio Atheniens●s , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 .  Verse 5.  Degree 1.  Degree 2.  Degree 3.  Degree 4.  Degree 5.   Vers. 6.  Degree 6.  Degree 7.   Verse 7.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 unde Grae. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , quasi 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Brought . Oceanus , sed peculiariter Mediterraneus , à regione Tarsis , i Cilicia , quam alluit . Application .  Verse 8.  Illustration .  Psal. 44.2 , 3.  & 115.1 .  Verse 8.  1.  Report .  Ab adiuncta praedictione , & promissione divina . Piscat . Ita & R. Kimchi . Amb. Apollin . Aug. Ruffin . Theodoret . Euthym. Lomb. Cassiod . Hug. Lyr. Bucer . Brent . Moller . Strigel . Loss . etc. unde Aug. OH beata Ecclesia , quodam tempore audisti ; quodam tempore vidisti : audivit in promissionibus , vidit in exhibitionibus . Verum isti plaerique sensum mysticum sequuntur .  Ab exemplis antegressis . Chrysost. Beza . Buchan . Hessec . Sic Psal. 44.1 . utrumque ponunt Calu. Muscul. jun.   Verse 9  2.  Promise . Thankfulness . Transition from Distribution to Instructions . Instruction 1.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Hesiod . oper . l. 1.  Prou. 11.27 .  Psal. 37.12 , 13.   Ibid. 14 , 15.   Isai. 41.11 , 12.   Zech. 12.2 .  Ibid. 3.   Matth. 21.44 .  Zech. 12.6 . Reason 1.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Act. 5.39 . & Tertull. ad Scapul .  Non tam vos , quam Christum in vobis persequuntur . Saluian . de provide . lib. 8. cap. 4.  Patitur enim in vobis Deus . Martial . epist. 2. c. 18.   Act. 9.4 .  Verberare nol● lapidem n● laedas manum . Plaut . Curcul . 1.3 .  Acts 9.5 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Aeschyl . Prometh . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Pindar . Pyth. 2.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Eurip. Bacch . Quae inscitia est , adu●rsum stimulum calces ● Ter. Ph●rm . 1.2 .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Scholar Aeschyl . Si stimulos pugnis caedis , manibus plus dolet . Plaut . Trucul . 4.2 . vide & Chrysost . in Psal. 11.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Greg. Naz. ad Eunom . 5.   Psal. 2.1 , 2.   Qui insurgit in Christum Domini , insurgit in Dominun Christi . Sic Psal. 89.51 .  Esai . 37.29 .  Psal. 17.8 .  Zach. 2.8 .  Non saxeus , non aheneus , sed igneus , qui & cominus arceat , & eminus terreat . Theo. in Zach.   Zach. 2.5 .  Ad exprimendam teneritudinem p●etatis suae , tenerriman ( said & charissimam ) partem humani corporis nominavit , etc.  Saluian . de provide . l. 8. c. 4.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Pythag. an Radamanth . Aristot. ethic . lib. 5. cap. 5.  Reason 2.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Pindar . Nem ▪ 4.  Quod quisque fecit , patitur . Sen. Herc. fur . 3.2 . Non est iniuria pati , quod prior feceris . Sen. de ira , lib. 2. cap. 30. - neque enim lex iustior ulla est , quam necis artifices arte perire sua . Ouid. art . l. 1.   jam. 2.13 .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Cleon apud Thucyd. l. 3.   Misericordiam qui non praestat alteri , tollit sibi . Petr. Chrysol . ser. 42.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Pythia Glauco apud Herodot . lib. 6.   Decrevisti facere ? iam perfecisti . August . de verb. Dom. 43.   Voluntas faciendi reputatur pro opere facti : & actionis crimine cogitatio condemnatur . Pel●g . ad Demetr .  Nam scelus intra se tacitè qui cogitat ullum , Facti crimen habet . Iwen. sat . 13.   josu. 24.9 .  Fieri dicitur , quod tentatur aut intenditur . Riber . in Amos 9.5 .  Quae quia non licuit , non facit , illa facit . Ouid. amor . lib. 3. el. 4.  Non dicam pudicam , quae aut legem , aut virum timuit : non immeritò in numerum peccantium refertur , quae pudicitiam timori praestitit , non sibi . Sen. de ben . l. 4. c. 14.   Matth. 5.28 .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Clem. Rom. constit . Apost . l. 1. c. 1.   1 John 3.5 .  Quantum ad te pertinet , occidisti , quem odisti . Aug. homil . 42.   Res mira : ille vivit , tu tamen homicida 〈◊〉 ; illa casta est , tu tamen adulter es . Aug. de verb. Dom. 46. & the 10. chord . 3. & the temp . 237. & homil . 5.  & 40.  & 42. said & Council . Tolet. 11. c. 4.   Latro est etiam antequam manus inqu●net , qui ad occidendum armatus est , & habet spoliandi , atque interficiendi voluntatem . Sen. the benef . l. 5. c. 13.  Illo ●s homicida venenum quo misces die . Idem de constan . c. 7.   Potest aliquis nocens fieri , quamuis non noc●at . Omnia scelera ante effectum operis , quantum culpae satis est , perfecta sunt . Sen. ibid.   Deut. 19.19 . Instruction 2.   Exod. 8.  & 9  & 10.   judg. 5.20 , 21.   josua 10.13 .  Joshua 10.11 .  Vers. 7.   Exod. 14.27 , 28.  & 15.4 .  Milites nobis qui aderant , retulerunt , extorta sibi esse de manibus quaecunque iaculabantur , cum à Theodosit partibꝰ in adversarios vehemens ventus iret ; & non solum quaecunque in eos iaci●bantur concitatissimè raperet , verume●iam ipsorum tela in eorum corpora retorqueret . Aug. the civet . l. 5. c. 26.   A Christi nomine al●enus . Aug. ibid.   OH nimium dilecte Deo , cui militat Aether ; Et coniurati veniunt ad classicaventi ! Te propter gelidis Aquilo de monte procellis Obruit adversas acies , renolutaque tela Vertit in autores & turbine reppulit hastas . Claudianus 3  Coss. Honor.  Reason 1.   Psal. 50.5 .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Eurip. Electr . & Phaeniss . & Orest. Amicorum inter se communia sunt omnia . Ter. Adelph . 5.3 .  1 King. 22.4 . 2 Chron. 18.3 .  Dominus exercituum . Amos 4.13 . verse 8.   Vide Davidem Kimchi in Radic .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉  Copiae tam inferiores , quam supernae . Mercer .  Psal. 34.7 .  Piis assident ; impios obsident . Ambros. in Psal.  Reason 2.   Psal. 119 91.   Psal. 104.4 .  Psal. 148.8 .  Nec operis sunt consciae . Bern. the great . & lib. arb .  Point 1  Reason 1.   Psal. 105.15 .  1 Sam. 24.7 . & 26.9 , 11.   Psal. 89.20 .  Psal. 105.14 .  2 Cor. 1.21 .  Apoc. 1.6 . & 5.10 . & 20.6 . 1 Pet. 2.9 .  Insectantur vos & in vobis Deum . Saluian . de provide . l. 8. c. 4.   Esai . 37.36 .  Esai . 37.35 . Instruction 3.   Verse 8.   Verse 1.   Verse 3.   Zech. 2.5 .  Apoc. 20.9 . Reason 1.   Psal. 132.14 .  2 Sam. 5.9 . Reason 2.   Deut. 9.29 .  1 King. 21.3 . Reason 3.   Esai . 5.7 .  Esai . 27.3 . Reason 4.   Cant. 4.12 . Objection . Solution 1.   The house of God. Gen. 28.19 , 22.   The house of vanity . Hosh. 5.8 . & 10.5   Esai . 1 . 2● .  Esai . 50.1 . jer. 3.8 .  Heb. 8.9 .  Hosh. 4.16 . Tanquam indomita iwenca . Quae velut latis eq●a trima campis ludit exultim , metintque tangi . Horat. car . 3.11 . Solution 2.   Vtitur Deus creatura rationali , sed malevola tanquam disciplinae virga . Bern. de lib. arb .  Esai . 10.5 .  Eius consiliis militant , etiam qui eiꝰ consiliis repugnant . Greg. mor. l. 6. c. 14.   esay 10.7 . Solution 3.   Deus suos non negligit cum negligit .  Esai . 49.14 .  Ibid. 15.   Ibid. 16.   Ezek. 11.16 .  Esai . 8.14 .  Psal. 25.19 .  Psa 3.1 . & 69 4.   Psal. 18.17 . & 69 4.  Instruction 4.   Psal. 125.1 .  Matth. 16.18 .  Apoc. 2.5 .  Esai . 60.19 , 20.   Apoc. 12.14 .  Heb. 11.38 .  Apoc. 12.14 . Reason 1.   Verse 8.   Psal. 46.5 .  Zach. 2.5 .  Psal. 125.2 .  Coeli sancti & iusti : sanctae animae omnes , in quibus habitat Deus , & quae factae sunt sedes eius . Aug. in Psal. 18.  & ●9 . & 67.  & 96.  & 122.  Esai . 57.15 . & 66.1 , 2.  Coelum Ecclesia est . Tychon . in Apoc. 11.19 . & 12.1 .  Matth. 16.18 . Reason 2.   1 Cor. 10.4 .  Psal. 18.31 .  Esai . 26 4.   Esai . 28.16 . Quoth Bellarm. blasphemè Papa tribuit in praefat . ad lib. de Pont. Rom.   1 Cor. 3.11 .  Matth. 7.25 .  Luke 21.  ●4 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Chrysost . quod Christus Deus . Ejus ipsius , cuius fuerunt negatores , persecutores , interfectores , ubique sunt testes . Aug. epist. 59 & in Psal. 39  & 56.  & 58. & the temp 31.  Nulla turpior seruitus graviorque , quam seruitus judaeorum , quam quocunque ierint post se trahunt , & ubique Dominos offendunt suos . Bern. de consider . l. 1.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Chrysost. quod Christus Deus .  Greg. Naz. in julian. orat . 2.  Chrysost. contr . jud. orat . 2. & quod Christus Deus , & in Matth. home . 4.  Ambr. ad Theodos. epist. 29.  Theodoret. hist. eccles . l. 3. c. 20.  Cassiod . hist. tripart . l 6. c. 43. & alij .  Ammian . Marcellin . hist. l. 23.   Greg. Naz. Chrysost. & Theodor.   Deut. 12.5 , 6 , 12 , 13 , 14.   Templum instaurare sumptibus cogitabat immodicis , negotiumque maturandum Alypio dederat . cum itaque rei idem fortiter instaret , iwaretque provinciae rector etc. Ammian . l. 23.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Theodor. l. 3. c. 20.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Greg. Naz. stelit . 2.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Chrysost. contr . jud. 2.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Esai . 14.27 . Ibid.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Theodor. l. 3. c. 20.  Vis magna ventorum repentè spirans , tempestatesque ac procellae subitò factae , quicquid congregatum fuerat , disperserunt . Cassiod . l. 6. c. 43.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Chrysost. quod Christus Deus . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Ibid. Metuendi globi flammarum propè fundamenta crebris assultibus erumpentes , fecere locum exustis aliquoties operantibus inaccessum . Ammian . l. 23.   Ho●que modo elemento destinatius repellente cessavit inceptum . Ibid.  Recapitulation . Points 4.  Point 1  Point 2.  Point 3  Point 4.  Uses 4.  Use 1. of Point 1   Dan. 5.5 .  Ibid. 24 , 25.   Suo sibi iumento arcessunt malum . Plaut . Amphitr .  Psal. 9.16 .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Apolinar . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Dolscius .  Psal. 9.15 .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Theodoret. dialog . 1. c. 24.   Ester 7.9 , 10.  Prou. Ebr. Cippum occupavit ipse , quem fecit , faber . Drus. decur . 1. adag . 4.  Et Lat. Gestat faber , quas fecit ipse , compedes . Auson . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Theogn .  Ester 9.10 , 13 , 14.   Ester 3.6 . Application .  Verse 8.   The powder-plot etc.   judg. 5.31 . Use 2. of Point 2.   Psal. 21.11 .  1 Sam. 18.17 .  2 Cor. 12.9 .  2 King. 6.16 . 2 Chron. 32.7 .  Quocunque se verterit , ibi te videat . Sen. the benef .  Psal. 46.1 .  Job 5.23 .  Psal. 91.11 .  Dan. 10.12 , 13.   Psal. 34.7 .  judg. 5.30 .  Exod. 23.28 . Application .  Verse 8.   Quam benè te , ambitio , mersit , vanissima , ventus ? Et tumidos tumidae vos superastis aquae ? Quam benè totius raptores orbis avaros , Hausit inexhausti iusta u●rago maris ? Theod. Beza .  Psal. 27.2 . & 124.3 .  Psal. 124.6 . Use 3. of Point 3   2 Thess. 2.3 .  Deus bona dat , ut boni simus . Nos ubi bona accepimus , mala cumulamus . Saluian . de provide . l. 3.   Hosh. 4.7 .  Ideò deteriores sumus , quia meliores essè debemus . Saluian . Ibid.   Ingentia beneficia , ingentia flagitia , ingentia supplicia . Magdeburg . in prafat . ad Centur. 5.  Use 4. of Point 4.   Dan. 8.24 , 25.  Apoc. 13.6 , 7.   jer. 31.35 , 36 , 37.  & 33.20 , 21 , 25 , 26.   Exod. 3.2 .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 etc. Plut. sympos . l. 8. q. ●●   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Sibyl . Mergitur interdum , sed non submergitur unquam . Merses profundo ; pulchrior evenit . Luctere ; multa proruet integrum Cum laude victorem . Horat. Carm. 4.4 .  Duris ut ilex tonsa bipennibus per damna , per caedes ab ipso ducit opes animumque ferro . Ibid.   Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae . plures efficimur , quoties metimur à vobis . Semen est sanguis Christianorum . Tertull. apolog . Sparsus est sanguis iustus : & illo sanguine tamquam seminatione facta seges surrexit Ecclesiae . August . in Psal. 39 veritas per orbem terrae pullulavit faecundius , cum in Martyrum sanguine sereretur . Idem Civit. l. 22. c. 7.   V●● est quae reparet , seque ipsa reseminet ales . Ouid. met . l. 15.  Faecunda reparat sic morte iwentam . Claudianus in Stilic . l. 2.  De Palma quadam in Chora mirum accepimus , cum Phoenicia ave , quae putatur ex huius palmae argumento nomen accepisse , emori , ac renas●i ex seipsa . Plin. hist. nat . l. 13. c. 4.  Hinc error Tertulliani enatus , qui illud Psal. 92.12 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Graecè , de ave ( non arbore , Hebraicae linguae ignarus ) intellexit , quae se funerans renovat , natali fide decedens atque succedens iterum . Lib. the resurr . Si tamen ut creditur de sua morte renascitur . Aug. the orig . anim . l. 4. c. 20.  Vide & Clement . Apost . constit . l. 5. c. 7.  Plin. hist. nat . l. 10. c. 2.  Oppian . de ancup . Orum in hieroglyph . Claudian . & Lactant. nom carm . de Phoenicia etc.   Non hydra secto corpore firmior vinci dolentem crevit in Herculem succisa serpens caede se reparans sua . Sen. Med. 4.1 .  Exod. 1.12 . Sic foenum graecum qu● peius tractatur , provenit melius . Plin. hist. l. 18. c. 16.   Cant. 2.14 . & 6.9 . Matth. 10.16 .  Vt fugit accipitrem penna trepidante columba , Vt solet accipiter trepidas urgere columbas . Ouid. Met. l. 1.   Quantum vult consumat edacitas vulturum , tamen maior est numerus columbarum . Optat. contr . Parmen . l. 2.   jer. 50.6 . Esai . 56.9 . 1 Sam. 17.34 . Ezek. 34.5 . In praedam lupis ferisque r●liquis exp●siti sunt cum primis ovium greges . Spin. de provide .  Psal. 44.11 , 22.  jer. 12.3 . Ouium homini cibꝰ frequentissimus , ut nullus fere alius in lavienam veniat . Spin. ibid.   Saevissima inter eos pestis gr●ssatur . Ibid.   Illa cateruatim dat stragem . African . in Geopon .  Vnicum duntaxat quotannis parit . Spin.   Nullum animal frequentius in agris accurrit . Idem .  Oues olim mite pecus , nunc tam indomitum & edax , ut homines devorent , oppida diruant . Th. Morus Vtop . l. 1.   Psal. 23.1 , 2.  & 74.1 . & 77.20 . & 79.13 . & 80.1 . & 95.7 . & 100.3 . Esai . 40.11 . & 63.11 . jer. 23.1 , 3.  & 31.10 . & 49.20 . & 50.6 . Question . Ezek. 34.22 , 23 , 31.  & 36.37 , 38.  & 37.24 , 26.  Answer . Mica 2.12 . & 7.14 . Zach. 9.16 . & 10.3 . & 11.7 , 11.  & 1● . 7 . Matth. 10.16 . & 9.36 . & 26.31 . & 25.32 , 33.  john 10.2 , 3 , 4 , 7 , 8 , 11 , 12 , 15 , 16 , 26 , 27 , 28.   Psal. 119.57 , 94.  jer. 2.3 .  1 Cor. 10 . 1-12 .  Psal. 132.14 .  Verse 8.   Psal. 89.23 . Esai . 41.11 , 12.   Luk. 19.44 . & 21.24 .  Matth. 23.38 .  1 Thess. 2.16 .  Deus nisi deserentem se non deserit , priusquam deseratur neminem deserit . Aug. ad imposs . sibi art . 7.  Recessurum non deserit antequam deserat . Ibid. 14.  Non enim nos deserit fons , si nos fontem non deseramus . Idem in joan. 32.   1 King. 11.7 , 9   2 Chron. 32.25 .  Esai . 39.6 , 7. 2  Chron. 32.26 .  Esai . 1.21 . jer. 3.2 . & 9.2 .  Facta est urbs tota lupanar . Iwen. sat . 1.  Vnus gurges omnium gula : unum pene lupanar est omnium vita . Saluian . de prou . l. 7.   jer. 7.29 . & 12.7 .  jer. 3.8 .  Ezek. 13.36 , 45 , 47.   Hoshea 10.1 .  Deut. 32 32.   Esai . 5.2 .  Deut. 32.33 .  Esai . 5.5 . Psal. 80.12 .  Esai . 5.6 . jer. 12.11 .  jer. 9.11 , 12.   Matth. 3.10 . & 7.19 Luk. 13.7 .  Ezek. 15.4 , 6.   Numb . 11.5 . & 14.3 , 4.   Deut. 28.68 .  Levit. 1.24 , 25.  Deut. 18.12 .  Levit. 18.28 .  Ezek. 5.6 . & 16.47 , 48.   Ezek. 7.24 .  Ezek. 16.51 , 52.   Ezek. 7.21 .  jer. 25.28 , 29.  Rom. 11.  ●● , 21.   Deut. 32.9 . Exod. 19.5 , 6.   Deut. 26.17 , 18.  jer. 7.23 . & 31.33 .  Semen sanctum statumen terra . Esai . 6.13 .  1 Sam. 1● . 24 , 25.  