Rodomontadoes . OR , Bravadoes and Bragardismes . 

¶ Collected out of the Commentaries of the most Dreadful , Terrible , and Invincible Capitaine ; Mattamores' , Crocodillo , Raiabroquelos . 

Arma virumque cano . 


Printed by W. jaggard , 1610.  

To my Lord Vieillart , Councillor to the King , Treasurer of France , and General of the Revenues belonging to Soisson . 

My Lord , 

I Stood a long while in doubt , whether I should deliver to public view or no , this slender impression , and under your favour : because the matter appeared to me too small , in regard of your great merit . But when I considered , that generous minds do always receive with grateful acceptance , whatsoever is offered them in honest affection ; I was excited to proceed on boldly . wherefore , I present unto your honour ( with such respect as becometh me ) these pleasant Castillian Rodomontadoes , or braving boasts of an humorous Spaniard : wherein you you shall find nothing else , but some harmless jests & merriment , without injury or wrong to any one offered . Specially not unto Spaniards , whose name is no otherwise here used or borrowed , then was that bragging Soldier Thraso by Terence : under which might be understood , an Englishman , Scottishman , Frenchman , or some man of any other Nation . And indeed I am verily persuaded , that many men in reading this Book , and falling into laughter : may happen to laugh and smile at themselves , because they may chance to find their own follies recorded , under the fable alluded to another . 

Well do I know , my Lord , that you are no such censurer as Cato , nor yes so severe as Aristarchus , but after you have employed your spirits in great and grave affairs ; you may find some content in reading this trifle , as a pleasing relaxation from former perturbances , as myself have often made the like use of them . 

If the Bow stand always bend , it will at length become too slack , and fit for no service when it is needed . After storms and Tempests , the heavens do afford us fair weather ; and such as are stocked in Prison , or chained to the Oar in a Galley , will sometimes consolate their afflictions , by the help of Songs , or pleasant discourses . 

These jests and Braggadochio mirths , may serve in the like Nature to such men , who , after they have travailed and spent their spirits in great and serious matters ; desire some other honest and sportive recreation . And if I may perceive , that your wont sweet and gentle inclination , shall receive this my poor unworthy gift ( which I offer you with my most humble service ) with good looks , and kind acceptance ; It will excite me to more painful labour hereafter , and to remain for ever 

Your most humble Servant , jacques Gaultier . 

To the Reader . 

Sir , understanding what curious desire you have to attain unto the lofty elegancy of the Spanish language : I have dared as the most hardy and courageous , that I could hear off , since the world was a World , to adventure on this small Summary of Spanish Rodomontadoes . And yet not without some dread in my boldest resolve , representing unto me this conceit , that effects are oftentimes more miraculous , and suller of Divinity , then of common sense or humanity . 

Nevertheless , the invincible courage that I have had , and yet do contain for your eternal service , hath armed me at all points : not with Armour only of Musket proof , but those sillye and light Arms beside , for the taste of Codlings or sodden Apples , to resist against the threatenings of that Sun-shaddow , which never yet appeared in our France , without being many times eclipsed , by the sight and presence of him , who lately reigned most happily over the true French.  

Rodomontadoes . OR , SPANISH Bravadoes , and Bragardismes . 

I  

When I came into the World , Mars entered into my shoulders ; Hercules into my right arm ; Samson into my left ; Atlas into my legs ; Mercury into my head ; Venus into mine eyes ; Cupid into my countenance ; Nero into my heart , and jupiter into all my body . So that by the very abundance of my power : when I walk I make the earth to tremble , heaven to look fearful , the winds to cease , the Sea to become calm , women great with child to deliver abortives , men to fly amazedly here and there . And men of greatest valour , and highest courage , beholding but my presence , say all with one voice , Libera nos Domine . 

II  

I Swear by my Sword ( Villain ) if I can but see thee , I will give thee such a blow with my Bastinado , as by the very strength thereof , I will strike thee six foot down into the earth . And there shall remain nothing of thee out of the ground , but only thy right arm and thy head , reserved for this especial occasion : to take off thy hat , and do me reverence , as I shall pass or walk along by thee . 

III  

Assuredly when I consider how highly Fortune hath endued me with graces , I find that I want time to put all those considerations in effectual employment . For first , she hath heaped such strength upon me , given me an immeasurable mass of courage , & builded such a fabric of extraordinary valour in me : that I am as a Colony in France , a Bastillion in Spain , a Fortress in Italy , a Castle in England , a Citadel in Germany , a Tower in Poland , a rock in Armenia , a wall in Denmark , & generally the hath adorned me above all the men of this world . For I am of a most purified & refined kind of mettle , form from the choicest grace of the earth's entrailss , and merely engendered of Generosity . 

FOUR  

I Make a Vow to jupiter , that I am as a Man without sense , & even half desperate , because I cannot instantly meet with any man that is desirous to entreat peace , or take truce with me . Albina my glory therefore shall be , to find out some one , upon whom I may discharge this choler , & revenge my spleen , since I cannot prevail to deal with them that have occasioned this passion in me , by reason of their cowardly & speedy flight . For this is infallible , I can never express the height of my manhood , against poverty in power , or silly resistance . 

XIII . 

I Swear by the bones of the Sun , that it is not possible for me to restrain my right arm , from striking one stroke with my Bastinado , but it is death to the endurer : except the Sun will stay his course in the firmament , and entreat me to be more merciful . 

VI  

I am undoubtedly persuaded , that there is not any thing in the world , which is able to equal the horrible , dreadful , and furious terribility of my courage . For what created creature is there in the world , but yieldeth me honour & obeisance ? Such is my awful and commanding power , that I make the earth to tremble , the Skies to look affrighted , the Planets to stand at gaze , and the rudest winds to be whist . The Sea shrinks in her head , and dare not be seen , or stir : the Beasts that haunt the highest Mountains , and those that live among the lesser hills , are glad to run , and hide themselves in their wombs , as in Dens or caves : nay , that which is more , the Birds which fly in the air , the fishes that swim in the Sea , and men that are most valiant and courageous , at one very wink or turn of mine eye , they sink , and so I send them into their Graves or Sepulchers . 

VII . 

GO , run to my Cook , command him from me , that forthwith he spit and lay down to the fire , a dozen & a half of my great Cannons or Ordinance , and to lord them with infinite Truncheons of Spears , Pikes , and Halberds , broken by mine own arm , in so many several fights , when none in the world ( except myself ) was able to depart thence conqueror . Bid him also to dress some two or three Dozen of Muskets , and make me a Salad or two , of Petronilles or Pistols , strewed about with Bullets , instead of Olives and Capers . then , let whosoever dare , come sup with me : for these are the Viands , whereon I am usually accustomed to feed . 

VIII . 

I am King of all the Paladines , the terror of the World , the Flower of Nobility , among all the Rodomants , Rowlands , and Reynards' ; endued with infinite special graces : Goodly , like an Angel : I have the heart and courage of Lucifer : I am Servant to the choicest Ladies of Beauty , and Prince or Sovereign of the company of Amaracoes . 

IX . 

Upon a certain day , it was my hap to meet in Battle the Queen of the Amazons , who advancing her arm , was in good hope to have slain me with her warlike Sword. But I ( never admitting the least loss of time ) at one blow smote her down to the ground , and then catching her by the hair , I threw her with such violent fury up into the air , that she never stayed , but went on so faxre as the fifth heaven : where she fell upon Mars ( who was playing at the Saunt with Venus ) and shrewdly broke his head . Venus' being there at not a little affrighted , cried out for help and succour , and at her cry , all the Gods ran immediately to her : where they were extraordinarily amazed , to see Mars lie along in such ghastly manner . But jupiter putting his head out at the Window , and seeing me say such strokes still on mine Enemies , my courage and choler holding on so furiously , that the Fire sparkled about the Field , as if it had been another Mount Gibell or Aetna : he forthwith said to all the other Gods : See that you stir not , neither make any noise , for he that hath already slain Mars ; is able and sufficient of himself , to kill as many Gods as remain alive , or dare use any resistance against him . 

X.  

I Know not what kind of death I should devose or make choice of , for the punishment of two villains , that eyed me this day in the street after a base & scurvy manner . I desire to look over mine Index or Repertory , where I have set down with mine own hand , seven hundred , sixty , and five several kinds of slaughter , to see which of them may be by me best liked and allowed . For indeed , those which now adays I would customarily use , and have as an extraordinary exercise in my hand : I could wish , that they might be blows without blood , slashes of the sword , yielding no purple sluices , but as if my weapon's edge were Led , or the reverses only industrious ▪ agile , and subtle . For my other kind of fight , I find and confess it to be too dreadful and fatal : because I never stab , but it is quite through , the very fall of my Sword makes an huge wide wound ; my Estoccado is over dangerous , and the least stroke mortal . Therefore I am oftentimes ( in mere mercy ) compelled to bestow some few blows with my Bastinado ; to the end , that I may give rest to my weapon , and let it rejoice a little in the Scabbard . 

XI . 

Look to yourselves , my Lords , retire or withdraw a little out of the way , until I have put on my Cape or Cloak : because the very wind thereof , is sufficient , to send you suddenly above fifty leagues hence , beyond the Pyrenean Mountains . 

XII . 

IF my Sword could speak , and tell what it daily doth , time were not able to allow it discourse . Who could else , more people all the Churchyards in the world , than he hath done ? who hath made richer Surgeons every where , than he hath done ? Who could , or can make the Armourers to have more toil and continual trouble , than he hath done , and daily so endureth ? What can cut through more armours of proof , than it doth ? Who more scoffs or scorns the Bucklers of Barcelona , or carves through the curious Helmets of Calataynd , than it doth ? As for the Casks of Almazen , it cuts through as easily , as if they were all made of Muske-mellons . 

XIII . 

IT is now full twenty years , since this sword hath been my feeder and maintainer : For , thereby am I feared of men , and beloved of women . 

XIIII . 

IT hath been told me , that the great Turk commits many murders , and that he cuts off men's arms and legs . But by the life of my dead Father's bones , if I go to him , that courage will be cold , and quickly forsake him . For I shall no sooner appear in his presence , but he must presently strike himself dead with his own hand , for fear lest he should fall into mine . 

xv.  

With one word only , I can penetrate and strike down to hell , and with my very presence , I am able to subdue the whole world , even from the East unto the West , spoiling , defacing , and tearing all men & other matters in pieces , that shall dare to oppose themselves in my way . For it is universally known what I am : That my Bedstead is built with the ribs of Giants ; the Tick or Bed itself , is stuff with the Monstachios of the chief Commanders in the great Turk's Camp , and the Bolsters with the brains , which by very boxes on the ears , I have beaten out of his best Captains heads . My Sheets are woven of the fairest locks of the Amazons ; my coverings , of the Swissers beards , and my Curtains of the soft down of the Eyebrows of the Hungarians and Germans : The Walls of my lodging is constructed of diverse parts , not only of Casks or Helms , but of whole of whole heads enclosed in them , carrying plumes and pendents of the Queen of England , who ( being dead ) I have frighted in her Grave with my formidable Bilbo , for terrifieng me in the terrible year of eighty eight . The Floor of my house ( instead of Plaster of Paris ) is artificially compounded of janissaries Teeth : The Tapestry or hangings , are Skins of Arabes and Sorcerers , flayed off with the very point of my Dagger : And the Tiles or Slates which cover my House , are the Nails of monarchs and Kings , whose bodies I have long since ( in despite both of them and their Corpse du Guardiano ) sent in Slices of a foot long , into their Graves . 

XVI . 

Scorning ( in mine Person ) to draw my dreaded Sword , against a single brave English Captain : I gave him such a kick with my foot , that he mounted , and smote his head against the Sun , with such violent strength , that it continued eclipsed for the space of fifteen days together . And then , within a while after , the Captain went and fell upon his knees before jupiter , entreating him to pardon me my Sins , in recompense of the good deed that I had done , that with a spurn of my foot , I had placed him among the Stars , whereas ( contrariwise ) I might have cast him down into Hell , among the Wicked and Damned Souls . 

XVII . 

With one hair of this Moustachio , which I carelessly cast away , I will make such a wide ouverture or breach through thy Body , as all the Spanish Infantry , and the French Cavalaery , shall pass along easily through , without any touch , either of the one side or other . 

XVIII . 

What matter were it , if Asia , Europe , Africa , the Pyrenian Mountains , and the Alps were all whelmed one upon another : seven Dragons , eight Elephants , ten Tigers , two and twenty Lions , and sixty five Bulls in fierce opposition ? All these for me to couquer and make peaceable , were a matter of nothing . 

XIX . 

Mistress of my heart , command me some service becoming my vocation ; for I swear by the greatest Tooth of Cerberus , to give desiance ( for your sake ) to ten men together : and though there should come twice as many more , yet I stand resolved , not to fly , but to resist them all . Command me to kill one , two , three , four , fifty or sixty persons , to hew off legs , arms , noses , or the faces of any whosoever , as dare presume to equal themselves with you . For such offices are easier to be by me performed , then at any time by you they can be commanded . 

xx.  

With this most re-doubted and terrifying Sword , I ruinated , I destroy , and set all things on fire : Overthrowing whole Armies , breaking down cities , racing castles , levelling Trenches , battering walls , and shaking in shivers inexpugnable Fortresses . For , at my very sight or presence , I make jupiter to run and hide his head ; Mercury flies like a Schoolboy ; Cupid quakes and trembles ; and Mars he stands in amaze , as if he were transformed , rendering over his tribute from Venus to me , because she affects me , as her much more amorous Servant . 

XXI . 

IN what place soever I am , Death is always with me , because he gets more profit by me , them if he were in the midst of the most furious and bloodiest battles in the whole world . He hath been my continual companion and follower , in conquest of the kingdoms of the Grimeans , Diceans , Dinameans , Alopitians , Pitunians and Espinomeans . For to speak nothing but the naked truth , without him . I had walked alone night & day : because I can find no other more familiar resemblance to myself , or one that can be so pleasing to me . 

XXII . 

I Find in myself the Nature of the Basilisk , and ( indeed ) something of greater power . For if he with his sight can kill one after one , when I look upon men in my spleen and choler , I make them to fall down by ten and ten , even as if mine eyes were the Balls of your greatest Artillery . 

XXIII . 

I am too old to induce any Travail , and yet but young to all valiant and adventurous sufferance : For from the time that I was in my Cradle , Venus made it her daily custom , in stead of Milk to feed me with fire , and for fruit and sweet meats , I swallowed leaden Bullets , and Balls of Brass . 

XXIIII . 

Like as the World is divided into four parts , whereof three are Asia , Africa , and Europe , and these three are circkled or round engirt with the Sea : Even so is my heart divided into three other parts , which do contain three several Natures , to wit ; affable , terrible , and cruel . Now these three parts are round environed , yet not with Water , but with living flames of hot cousuming fire . And as this fire ( in Love's behalf ) is so sweet , as much better for me were it , if it were sour or bitter , because I cannot captivate the poison which is in my heart , enen so in the same manner is my heart itself . And yet with three strokes of this bright brandished blade , the one delivered slycing , the second reversing , and the thirde meerelie pointing : I could kill and over-quell all mankind , making Rivers of blood longer than Ganges , larger than Po , and more terrible than Nilus . But let the World be thankful for it , that at this instant I am become amorous , or fallen in Love , for in my former fiery and over-fierce humour : I used to kill daily ( at the least ) three or four dozen of Men , Women , and Children . But now , in this more mild and temperate alteration , I use not to kill past a dozen in a day . And what do you think may be the reason thereof ? Let me tell ye for an infallibletrueth , it is nothing else , but the mere love or Cupidicall affection , wherewith I have changed my furious humour , and prostrated it in demure Devotion , to the eternal service of my dainty and most Divine Mistress . 

XXV . 

MY Shoo-makec one Morning pulling on my shoes , I found one of them somewhat too straight in the insteppe , I gave him such a kick with my foot against the ground , that the earth immediately opened , and he fell in as far as Hell. Belzebub , Satan , Pluto , and Barrabas , Lords and Princes of those Tenebrous obscurities , were thereat driven all into no mean amazement . Great Cerberus cried and howled most pitifully : Proserpina rend and tore her hair , shrieking and weeping very bitterly , because she saw her dark kingdom receive a glimpse of light . The little Diabolotinos or lesser Spirits , hid themselves in corners here and there . Some leapt out of hell , and fled fearfully thence , & since that time , many of them have hovered aloft in the Air , and others in nooks and crannies of the earth , tormenting diverse people , as in many places of the world it is daily noted . 

XXVI . 

What woman dare be so bold or audacious , as not to confess herself most highly enamoured of this strong thigh , this puissant arm , this breast full of all force and valour ; this visage , more goodly than that of Ganymede , or that of Dido , or the looks of Absalon ? Let me but see that blushless huswife , and then bid her abide the fury of my indignation , if she can or dare . 

XXVII . 

Lady , you may ( by good right ) forsake the Name of Madam Beatrix , and entitle your selfhence forward , Imperatrix or Empress , Queen , Princess , Marquesse , Countess , Dame , and Damosil : Seeing these two great Colombs or Pillars of Hercules , which do support and sustain the whole world , are solely obliged to your service . I could tell ye , that this Castillian body , is filled with the abounding courage of infinite Armies ; that this breast and this arm is stronger than the Tower of Babylon : Especially , when it is assisted by this redoubted Sword , for the fires sparkling from it , do penetrate , & surmount in bright splendour , the luminous beams of the Sun.  

XXVIII . 

IF mine infinite courageous valour , could possibly be bought with the price of Gold or Silver , there needed no other traffic either by Sea or Land , nor should you hear any more speech of Merchants or Merchandise , or of any man that would labour or addict himself to follow such a fruitless vocation . Because all men would procure to employ their industry , to get the strength but of one of mine arms , of a leg , of a finger , of my nails pairing , of an hair from mine eie-brow , or the very smallest from my head or beard , which only might suffice to make them valiant , & ( than valour ) what can be of greater price or estimation ? But it is my joy and comfort , that it cannot be compassed , and I am the rather therewith contented , in regard of the peace and quiet of all those Kings , Monarches , and Princes , that hold friendship with me ▪ 

XXIX . 

MY Maquerella , that old bawd Fortune gave me her word , that I should enjoy the Lady , of whom I am so highly amorous . But if she keep not promise with me , I swear by the horns of Pluto , by the Beard of Mars , by the laws of Samson , and by the Koran of Mahomet , that I will take from her all her tricks , and bereave her of her inconstant and variable wheel . As for her body , with one Estoccado , I will hurl her to Valladolid , bruised and broken into so many pieces or small fragments , that she shall no sooner be fallen down there , but she shall be squandered into dust & power , which I will make use of , to cast upon those letters , that by me shall be daily sent to my sweet Mistress . 

XXX . 

I Have more augmented & increased in the compass of two poor days only , the Stygian Kingdom of grim-faced Pluto , & peopled his dark & smoky Hal with subjects , then either Rodomont , Orlando , Reynard of Moutauban , Mandricard , or Radamanth , with all their powers could do , and I have dreadfully subjected , & humbled upon their knees , in a thousand thousand other places , hearts that were dauntless , most valiant , & of unmatchable courage . If you require any witness or testimony hereof , send to all the inhabited Countries of the East , West , North and South , and perusing their Chronicles , do but note w●at you find written in them all , of my virtue and valour . 

XXXI . 

The great Turk is more afraid of my valiant resolution , which this unconquereable Arm hath dearly made known unto him , then of ten armies or main battalions joined together . Because I being one day in the war of the Venetians , against the forenamed great Turk , I gave such a box on the ear to Abenhamet , great master of his Camp , that I smote his head quite from his shoulders : & presently , with another spurn , I kicked it into Constantinople , where it delivered the tidings of the foil and loss of all the army . But when the Grand Signior himself , & all the rest there present with him , beheld the head without a body , they fled forthwith into their houses , making their doors very fast upon them , & continued in such fear , as in 6. years after they durst not peep abroad , through the bread they stood in of me : till at length , I putting on an humour of more mild temper , and falling into my wonted magnificence , gave them free leave to enjoy their liberty , and to walk about the streets , as in former times they had done . 

XXXII . 

When I walk along through the streets of the City , a thousand Ladies present themselves before me . One pulls me by the Cloak , another winks with her eye at me , another prays me to sup with her , another offers me presents , another kisses my hand , and blesseth the Mother that bore me , accounting herself to be most happy if she could compass but one Night's lodging with me : To no other end , but only to have a child sprung from the race of so great and valiant a personage , as the world well knoweth me to be . 

XXXIII . 

IF the strength of my members could be imparted among disordered persons , and mutinous spirits ; the world would be in an uproar , revolt , and confusion , and nothing else were to be seen therein , but only battles and conquests . The bells would ring night and day , as delivering the interment of slaughtered bodies : Surgeons could never come forth of their houses , for stitching up slashes of swords , healing Estoccadoes , setting in right shape broken arms and legs . Women would weep for the death of their Husbands , young children for the loss of their Fathers , and Maids for great wrong done to their Maidenheads , having lost their Lovers , and in danger to die Virgins . 

XXXIIII . 

IT is I only that never felt fear , but have menaced the Skies , the Air , Earth , and Water , yea jupiter and Hel. I could wish to war with all the Elements : for I fear no tempests , storms , thunder or lightning . And I doubt not , but in very short time , to make myself Lord of the Sea , Earth , and Hell : I will do it , and I can do it , for my forces are sufficient to perform it . 

XXXV . 

IF I come to thee , I will give thee such a spurn with my foot , that it shall raise and mount thee so high , as if thou wert provided with ten Cart load of Bread , yet shouldst thou stand more in fear of famishing , then of bruising or death , when thou fallest down again . 

XXXVI . 

O , how I smile to myself , when I call to mind the ignorance of the Gods , in deyfying Hercules , and giving him a name of equal excellency with them , calling him a God : only because he killed the Hydra , took the Bull by the horns , rend the Dragon in pieces , vanquished the Lion , surmounted the Centaur , and the wild Bear : because he made the Harpies fearfully fly away , slew Cethes and Achelous , foiled Diomedes King of Thrace , and overcame Gereonea Qu. of the Amazons : fiinally , because he erected Columns or pillars in many places . In effect , all these things are nothing else but a mere fable , and actions of a young womanish spirit , being compared with my unparaleld strength , fortitude , and courage . For neither the puissance of Daryus , King of the Persians , nor yet of that Alexander , entitled , styled , or epittethized , the Great ; nor the strong Samson , nor mighty Hector the Trojan , nor the valiant Achilles , nor the mad and furious Rowland , cleped ( by some ) Orlando Furioso , nor the adventurous Gridasso , nor the gallant Sacrepant , nor the terrible Mexican Mandricarde , nor the famous Rugiero , or French Roger , nor the horrible Agricano , or the robust Rodomont : no , not any one of them , or all assembled together , could or are able to equal my terrible , horrible , formidable , fury-bond , and dreadful force , if I please to let it appear in my thundering humour . 

XXXVII . 

Mine arm quakes & trembles , at that which I am determined to do for my Lady & Mistress : For continually I ponder how and which way to compass her contentment , and yet I never attain unto it . All the night long I dream that I am performing deeds of Arms ( for her sake against ten men , six whereof , I slew outright , and of them which fled away , he that escaped with best safety and security , was glad to leave his left arm at my feet . But then ( OH you Sacred powers ) how much more am I able to do in the day time , when I am awake , and at my martial exercise ? Twenty men together dare not touch the string of my Shoo.  

XXXVIII . 

One day as I was playing at the Balloune , I smote it with such force , that it flew up into the third heaven , where it mounted and leapt up before the Gods , who were then assembled in a very serious Counsel . They looking earnestly one upon another , became so confounded , that they sat wide gaping , and had not the power to speak one word , until at length their senses being restored , they thought it necessary that jupiter should descend to earth , and falling on his knees before me , forsaking both his Crown and Sceptre , should humbly offer himself to my service , Venus to be my Shee-seruant , Mars my Lackey , and Mercury mine Apple-squire . 

THIRTY-NINE . 

AS I was one day playing with the destinies , in the presence of Time , Fortune , and Nature , upon a difficult happening between us , I was suddenly enforced to draw my sword : Time , Fortune , and Nature , being dear friends to the Destinies , stepped between us to take up the matter , and make peace . But I being a Spaniard , set my right foot foremost , and gave therewith such a spurn to Time , that I cast him between heaven and earth , and there he hangs still hover to this instant . Fortune , I sliced her in twain just at her girdle , and threw the one half of her there where the Sun riseth , and the other part where he takes up his lodging . As for Nature , with my punto reversso , I gave her such a deep & incurable wound , as neither Physician , Chirurgeon , Barber , nor Apothecary , could ever since undertake to heal it , but every month in the year that wound breaks forth a bleeding . 

XL.  

I Had upon a time a quarrel with a French Gentleman , who with despiteful words , bade me draw my sword : which I refused to do , because I perceived the Frenchman to look pale , and to be of a very chil-cold complerion . wherefore , in mere pity to warm his blood , and set him in an heat , I suffered him to have some fifty Estoccadoes at me , and as many other violent blows : yet could he not draw blood , or had the power to hurt me . But for myself , I knew my choler and courage to be such , as with the very lest sillip of my finger , I could have beaten out his brains , and made him sink to hell . 

XLI . 

Being desirous , that Pluto should pay me such ordinary tribute , as other Kings daily did and do : I took my journey to hell , where I found Pluto walking at his pleasure , accompanied with five hundred and forty five Million , & thirteen hundred ninety and six thousand Legions of Devils , that usually attended upon him . So soon as he beheld me a far off , coming towards him , he came directly to meet me and yield himself as my prisoner . But I laid hand upon my Sword , and Pluto perceiving me to be offended , & in choler , knowing ( withal ) that I was a Spaniard , fled back into the deepest parts of hell , with all his train frightfully following him , & there made fast the gates against me . But I being come thither for better obedience , marched on gallantly step by step , as those of my nation are wont to do : and with a very sneezing of my nose , I made the gates fly open , and I entered . In a moment , I took there for my prisoners , great Satan himself , the Prince Pluto , and the fair Proserpina ; all whose hands I bound fast together with a hair of my Moustachios or beard . Nevertheless , beholding their incessant tears and lamentations , made with such out-cries and wring of hands : I used the mercy and magnificencie of a Spaniard , delivered them out of their servile bands ▪ and so suffered them to enjoy their former liberty . 

XLVII . 

I Will kill this Villain , his Wife , his Children , his Servants , his Dogs , his Cats , his Pullen , his very Lice , Nits & Fleas , or any living creature belonging to his house , which also I will ruinyte from the top to the foundation : though Pluto himself , and all the Devils that are in hell , had solemnly vowed to save them from my fury : And what is my chiefest purpose herein ? Only to constitute such a dread and terror of me , in the hearts of men , as no one ( be he never so bold or courageous ) shall at any time hereafter dare to offend me . 

XLIII . 

IT was my chance ( one day ) to be walking abroad , somewhat necre to the Trenches which were made at Oastend ; when suddenly a Bullet , being sent from a piece of great Ordinance , fell into my mouth , shaken two of my foremost teeth , without any injury or offence unto me . At the instant hour , I grew to be somewhat incensed with choler , and the Bullet I took into my hand , & casting or returning it against the enemy , it happened to hit against a Tower in the wall , which immediately in an instant was driven into smail dust , and slew with the very fall thereof , about 1555. gallant Soldiers , who ( by especial appointment ) were placed there as a Corpse du Guard , & had the charge both of the Tower and wall . 

XLIIII . 

Upon a time , I would take a walk into Hell , where I found Pluto , Proserpina , & Death , all fitting at a Table . They were in such a fearful astonishment , beholding me in their darksome dwelling , that I ( well knowing their weakness of courage ) without any further delay , leaping up with a Caper after the French fashion , with the very crown of my Hat or Beaver , broke the roof of hell ; and mounting forth at that breach , the mere noise of my departure thence , was such , that it made the great City of Lisbon to tremble , and overturned 88● . houses , in the street of Boanistre . 

XLV . 

BE not you offended , Mistress and Lady of my life , neither let it seem displeasing to you , that I am sought after , and beloved by so many Brincesses & Paragons ; who but wrong themselves therein , and merely lose their labour in vain . For I bear affection to no other , but only to yourself my sweetest mistress : because you are endued with beauty far beyond Diana , with good graces and behaviour , excelling Pallas , and with sweet affability more supreme , then Venus . All these three Sovereign Goddesses equal not you , to whom I have freely given my hart , & properly chosen you as mine own . Consider then that I love you , and forsake not me for any other , in regard that I am more than a Gentleman . wherefore , if you marry with me , A swear by the faith of a Captain , and by the life of the King my Father ( for I never heard him called by any other name ) to beget ye the first night such a regiment of Soldiers , as shall conquer all the world in a moment . 

XLVI . 

Myself , Hercules , Death , & Love , met all by chance on a day together , in a place which was appointed for Archery , and each of us had his Bow and Arrows there ready . We fell to this accord among ourselves , that he who with his Arrow could make the greatest slaughter or execution , should bear away the amplest recompense of Honor. Hercules began first , and with his Arrow , he slew all the Panthers , Lion's Tigers , Bears , Wolves : all savage Beasts , Dear , Elephants , Camels , and Bulls . Next , Love took his shaft , and drawing it to the head , he caused all the Gods , Giants , Amazons , Men and Devils ; to fall and submit themselves under his amorous yoke ( my self only excepted , on whom Love could not attain to any power . ) Death being resolved to let loose his Areow , he killed therewith all the creatures that were upon the earth . Whereupon , I grew into some displeasure against them , & being moved in a moiety of choler , to be revenged on them ; I crossed mine Arrow in my Bow , determining to let it be my very last shoot , to avoid all further quarrel and contention , but no sooner flew mine Arrow from me ( being let loose indeed with extraordinary spirit and courage ) but in the very instant , I slew therewith , Hercules , Love , and Death , and so remained the sole Conqueror . 

XLVII . 

I Kiss the shoe-sole of your Ladyship , sole Mistress of my heart ; Princess of this breasts power , Duchess of this arms dexterity , Marquesse of my matchless courage , Countess of my valour's capricious conceits , Queen of my forces Quintessence , and absolute Governess of me and my person . 

I am constrained to spit daily on the point of my sword , for fear it should pass fatally on any person in your presence , or where your virtue may command my demonorance . This Epitaph is engraven upon his Tomb , whom I last slew , for not being bare before you . 

The Epitaph . 

Heerelyeth Martino Alphonso , Galeone , as dead as a Mouse , who fearing to offend the only gallant man of the World , desired to be blown away with his breath , because his love was out of date , and he durst no longer live in this world . 

XLVIII . 

HE that dares but look on me , 
From fear he never can be free ; 
Knowing my puissance of such might , 
That Death himself , I kill outright . 
Alone I am , without compare , 
To prove my manhood , no man dare . 
When I hold my Sword in hand , 
Renown and Honour I command : 
From the Goddess is my descent , 
And with them must my time be spent . 
My Sword and Buckler doth suffice , 
Against a thousand enemies : 
They are as nothing in my sight , 
I make the Earth and Gods affright . 
What ere he be that dare resist , 
He dies , then tarry if he list . 
FINIS . 

