THE KING'S Prophecy : OR Weeping joy.  

Expressed in a Poem , to the Honour of England's too great Solemnities . 

jos . Hall.  

LONDON Printed by T. C. for Simon Waterson . 

1603.  

THE KING'S PROPHECY or weeping joy.  

1.  

What Stoic could his steely breast contain 
( If Zeno self , or who were made beside 
Of tougher mould ) from being torn in twain 
With the cross Passions of this wondrous tide ? 
Grief at ELIZA'S toomb , orecomne anon 
With greater joy at her succeeded throne ? 
2.  

Me seems the world at once doth weep & smile , 
Washing his smiling cheeks with weeping dew , 
Yet cheering still his watered cheeks the while 
With merry wrinkles that do laughter show ; 
amongst the rest , I can but smile and weep , 
Nor can my passions in close prison keep . 
3.  

Yet now , when Grief and joy at once conspire 
To vex my feeble mind with adverse might , 
Reason suggests not words to my desire , 
Nor deigns no Muse to help me to indite ; 
So doth this civil strife of Passions strong , 
Both move and mar the measures of my song . 
4.  

For long agone , when as my weaker thought 
Was but assaylde with change of joy & pain : 
I wont to find the willing Muse unsought , 
And vent my numbers in a plenteous vain , 
Whether I wished to write some lofty verse , 
Or with sad lines would straw some sable hearse . 
5.  

So , when but single Passions in the field 
Meet Reason sage ; soon as she list advance 
Her awful head ; they needs must stoop , & yield 
Their rebel arms to her wise governance : 
Whence , as their mutin'drage did rashly rise 
Ylike by Reason's power it cowardly dies . 
6.  

But when that Passions rank arrays beset 
Reason alone , without or friend , or Fere , 
Who wonders if they can the conquest get 
And reave the crown her royal head did wear ? 
Go yet tumultuous lines , and tidings bring 
What Passion 〈◊〉 in Reason's silence sing . 
7.  

oft did I wish the closure of my light , 
Before the dawning of that fearful day 
Which should succeed Eliza's latest night , 
Sending her glorious soul from this sad clay , 
Up to a better crown than erst she bore 
Upon her weary brows , and Temples whore : 
8.  

For than I feared to find the frowning sky 
Clothed in dismal black , and dreadful red , 
then did I fear this earth should drenched lie 
With purple streams in civil tumults shed : 
Like when of yore in th' old Pharsalian downs , 
The two cross Eagles grappled for the crown . 
9  

Or when the riper English Roses grew 
On sundry stalks , from oneself root ysprung , 
And strove so long for praise of fairer hue , 
That million of our Sires to death were stung 
With those sharp thorns that grew their sweets beside 
Or such , or worse I weened should now betid . 
10.  

Nor were lewd hopes ought lesser them my dread , 
Nor less their Triumphs then my plained woe , 
Triumphs , and Plaints for great Eliza dead ; 
My dread , their hope for England's overthrow : 
I feared their hopes , & wailed their pleasant cheer , 
They triumphed in my griefs , & hoped my fear . 
II  

Waiting for flames of cruel Martyrdom , 
Already might I see the stakes addressed , 
And that stale strumpet of imperious Rome , 
High mounted on her seven-headed beast , 
Quaffing the blood of Saints in bowls of gold , 
whiles all the surplus stains the guiltless mould . 
12.  

Now might I see those swarms of Locusts sent , 
Hell's cursed offspring , hired slaves of Spain , 
Till the world saw , and scorned their intent , 
Of a sworn foe to make a Sovereign ; 
How could but terror with his cold affright 
Strike my weak breast upon so sad foresight ? 
13.  

Thomas on that day before the world began 
Eliza died , and with the closing year 
Her days upclosde ; when I the light did ban , 
And chide the Heavens that they left not there : 
And thought it wrong ( yet God that thought forefended ) 
That the world's course with her course was not ended . 
14.  

Now , not more worlds could hire my closed light 
E'er but the setting of that Euen-sun , 
Which late her breathing saw with beams so bright , 
And early rising found her life for done ; 
Ah most unhappy wights that went before , 
That died ere this , or that are yet unborn ! 
15.  

O turned times beyond all mortal fear , 
Beyond all mortal hopes ! Not till this day 
began the fullness of our bliss appear ; 
Which dangers dimmed erst with fresh dismay : 
Still ever checking joy with servile care , 
Still charging us for Tragic times prepare . 
16.  

False stars , and falser wizards that foresaine 
By their aspects the state of earthly things : 
How been your bold predictions proved vain , 
That here broke off the race of British Kings ? 
Which now alone began ; when first we see 
Fair Britain form to a Monarchy . 
17.  

How did I better long agone presage , 
( That joys me still I did presage so right ) 
When in the wardship of my weaker age 
My puis-ne Muse presumed to recite 
The vatick lines of that Cumean Dame , 
( Which Maro falsely sung to Pollios' name ) 
18.  

To the dear Natals of thy princely son , 
OH dreadest Sovereign ; in whose timely birth 
Me seemed I saw this golden age begun , 
I saw this weary load of Heaven and Earth 
Freshly revived , rouse up his fainting head , 
To see the sweet hopes this day promised . 
19  

And now I live ( I wished to live so long 
Till I might see these golden days succeed , 
And solemn vowed that mine eternal song 
Should sound thy name unto the future seed ) 
I live to see my hopes ; o let me live 
Till but my vowed verse might me survive . 
20.  

So may thy worth my lowly Muse upraise , 
So may mine hie-up-raised thoughts aspire 
That not thy Bartas self , whose sacred lays 
The yielding world doth with thyself admire , 
Shall pass my song , which naught can rear so hie , 
Save the sweet influence of thy gracious eye . 
21.  

Mean while , amongst those throngs of Poesies 
Which now each trivial Muse dares harshly sing 
This vulgar verse shall feed plebeian eyes , 
Nor press into the presence of my King ; 
So may it safely praise his absent name ; 
That never present tongue did void of blame . 
22.  

Well did the wise Creator , when he laid 
Earth's deep foundations , charge the watery main , 
This Northern world should by his waves be made 
Cut from the rest , and yet not cut in twain 
Divided , that it might be blessed alone , 
Not sundered , for this fore-set union . 
23.  

For here he meant in late succeeding time , 
To seat a second Paradise below ; 
Or for composed temper of the Clime , 
Or those sound blasts the cleansing North doth blow . 
Or , for he saw the sinfill continent 
Should with contagious vice be overwent . 
24.  

For great Euphrates and the swelling Nile , 
With Tigris swift ; he bade the Ocean whore 
Serve for the great moat of the greatest Isle , 
And wash the snowy rocks of her steep shore 
As for that tree of life fair Eden's pride , 
He set it in our mids , and every side . 
25.  

From oft attempted , oft repulsed spite 
more than one Angel guards our safer gate ; 
Naught wants of highest bliss , & sweetest delight 
That ever was attained by mortal state . 
But that gives life to all , and all exceeds 
He sets his princely Image in his steed . 
26.  

His lively Image , in whose awful face 
Appear deep stamps of dreadful majesty , 
Whose glorious beams from his diviner grace 
Dazzle the weak , and dim the bolder eye . 
Mercy sits on his brow ; and in his breast 
Under his Lion's paw , doth courage rest . 
27.  

Deep wisdom doth adorn his princely head , 
justice his hand , his lips grave Eloquence , 
And that which seld in Prince's breast is bred , 
( The Prince's greatest praise , and best defence ) 
Purest religion hath his heart possessed . 
OH Island more than fortunate and blessed . 
28.  

Heaven's chiefest care , Earth's second Paradise , 
Wonder of Times , chief boast of Nature's stile , 
Envy of Nations , precedent of bliss , 
Mistress of Kingdoms , Monarch of all Isles ; 
World of this world , & heaven of earth ; no less 
Can serve to shadow out thine happiness . 
29.  

thou art the world's sole glory , he is thine ; 
Fron him thy praise is fetched , the worlds from thee , 
His from above ; So the more famous been 
His rarest graces , more thy fame shall be . 
The more thy fame grows on , the fairer show 
His heavenly worth shall make to foreign view . 
30.  

Like when by night , amids the cleansed sky , 
The Sun's fair sister by her lovely rays 
Gathers a circled Halo up on high , 
Of kindly vapours that her spouse did raise : 
She thus enclosed in her clear oval round , 
Doubles her light unto the gazing ground . 
31.  

But for the only bane of blessed state 
Is ignorance of bliss ; let me dear Dread 
For thy diviner Oracles relate 
The sum of those sweet hopes that long have fed 
Thy liegest Nation ; Pardon thou the while 
Mine high attempt , harsh verse , and ruder stile . 
32.  

And yet thrice happy mates , whom that great king 
Endowes with equal peace : so more his reign 
Above your hopes , eternal comfort bring 
To your late Nephew's race ; as ye may deign 
Credulous ears to my Prophetic lines , 
Truer them those were fetched from Delphic shrines . 
33.  

He that gives crowns ( as crowns from heaven are sent 
Not since the day that Ishay's youngest son 
Rose from the fold ; hath ever yet besprent 
With the sweet oil of sacred unction 
An holier head : then that this present day 
The weight of England's royal crown doth sway . 
34.  

Nor can his subjects more him fear or love , 
( Loyal their love , and lowly is their fear ) 
then he shall love and fear his King above , 
Whose name , place , Image , Sceptre he doth bear , 
Religion's spring , Autumn of Heresy , 
Winter of Atheism his reign shall be . 
35.  

And thou great Rome , that to the Martian plain 
Long since didst lowly stoop ; and leave for lore 
Thy lofty seat of Hills : shalt once again 
Creep lower to the shade of Tiber's shore : 
Yet lower shall his Arm thy ruins fell , 
Down from thy Tiber into lowest Hell.  
36.  

Not number shall , but weight his laws commend ; 
Which wisely made , shall justly be maintained , 
His gentle brows shall first severely bend 
And lower at vice : whose course eftsoons restrained 
They smooth shall wax again ; mixing by measure 
Ounces of grace , with drams of just displeasure . 
37.  

So have I seen a Morn of cheerful May 
O'ercast with clouds to threaten sormfull stoures , 
Which yet ere Noon , hath proved the clearest day : 
whiles brighter morns have brought us evening showers ; 
His frowns shall fright the ill ; his mercious cic 
Shall raise the humble soul of Modesty . 
38.  

The treble mischief that was wont infested 
Our holy state ( ah me what state can miss 
Some stain of native ill ) shall be redressed 
By timely care : and now shall fairly rise 
The noble name of our diviner trade , 
From out the dust wherein it long hath laid . 
39  

Longlay it in the dust of wrong disdain ; 
Exposed to every rascal Peasants spite : 
OH times ! but now , were best my rage contain 
Until I might a second Satire write . 
But ah fond threat , as if these mended days 
Would once deserve the brand of my dispraise ? 
40.  

Nor shall the Lordly Peers once overlook 
Their humble vassals dwelling all below : 
Like as we see some large out-spreading Oak 
Ore-drop the silly shrubs that under grow . 
Nor noble blood shall want true honour's fee , 
whiles it shall light on Grooms of low degree 
41.  

Nor now the greedy Merchant that for gain 
Sails to both Poles , & sounds both Indian seas 
When his long beaten bark from forth the main 
Vnlades her weary freight ; shall as he please 
Raise by excessive rate his private store , 
And to enrich himself make thousands poor . 
42.  

Under the safer shadow of his wing 
Shall exiled Aliens shrowded their restless head ; 
And here alone shall forced exile bring 
Better contentment to the banished 
then home-smelt smoke ; OH I land kind & free 
In favouring those that once befrended thee . 
43.  

And for the Prince's eye doth life inspire 
To loyal breasts ( like as the vernal sun 
Cheers the revived earth with friendly fires 
That lustles lies when those hot rays are gone ) 
oft shall his presence bless our hungry eyes , 
To our Horizon oft this sun shall rise . 
44.  

For ere the world's great lamp shall thrice decline 
Into his Southern spherc , and thrice retire 
Up to the turning of his Northern line , 
Our second Sun shall in his earthly gyre 
Turn once to all the realms his light doth guide ; 
And yet observe his yearly race beside . 
45.  

then shall my Suffolk ( England's Eden height 
As England is the worlds ) be over blessed 
And surfeit of the joy of that dear sight 
Whose pleasing hope their hearts so long possessed 
Which his great Name did with such triumph greet 
When erst it loudly echoed in our street . 
46.  

And thou , renowned Drury amongst the rest , 
Above the rest ; whether thee still detain , 
The snowy Alps , or if thou thoughtest it best 
To trust thy speed unto the watery plain , 
Shalt him receive ; he thee , with such sweet grace 
As may beseem thy worth and noble race . 
47.  

The iron doors of janus by his hand 
Shall fast be barred ; unless some hostile might 
( If any hostile might dares him withstand ) 
Shall break those bars ; and boldly shall excite 
Our sleeping Lion ; who but once awoke 
Woe to the wight that did his wrath provoke . 
48.  

Wise and not wrongful Stratagems shall speed 
His justest war , and straighter discipline 
Shall guide the war like troops himself shall lead 
To doubtful field ; OH let the shield divine 
Protect my Liege's head ; and from on high 
Let it be gird with crowns of victory . 
49.  

His frequent Court ( yet fear I to foresaine 
Too much of Prince's courts , which ages past 
Have long since noted with the secret stain 
Of wanton dalliance and luxurious waist ) 
His Court shall be a church of Saints : quite free 
From silth , excess and servile flattery . 
50.  

Hence ye false Parasites , whose only guise 
Is feeding Princes ears with wrongful praises , 
And ever who might hope to honour rise , 
By what large bribes their leuder brocage raises . 
The Courtiers only grace shall henceforth lie 
In learning , wisdom , valour , honesty . 
51.  

OH Court fit for thy King ; and like to none 
But heaven's Court , where naught impure may bide ; 
Like as thy King resembles God alone , 
For such on earth were vain to seek beside . 
Well might I here his virtue's roll rehearse , 
But them his life speaks better than my verse . 
52.  

Yet let me not thy learned Muse omit , 
The only credit of our scorned skill , 
Redoubted Liege ; whose rarely polished writ 
Savours of long sleep in that sacred hill ; 
Look that the Muses all shall once agree , 
As thou hast honoured them , to honour thee . 




Caesar & Pompey . Lanc. & York . 〈◊〉  March. 25.  Virgil's fourth Egloge translated and applied to the birth of Hen. the prince . Britain compared with the old Paradise   1 Rivers of Paradise .  2 Word and Sacram : The sum of Bazil . Doron drawn in form of prophecy into verse . 