The tragicomical history of Alexto and Angelica . 

Containing the progress of a zealous candid , and masculine love . 

With a various mutability of a feminine affection . 

Together with loves justice thereupon . 

Written by Alex : Hart esq. 

London : printed by b. a. and t. f. for nich : Vavasour , and are to be sold at his shop in the inner temple near the church . 1640.  

To the readers 

In precedent times when elocution with poesy joying their rival , Juned , jnvention bedicious wits , with their works were patronised ; and historical fictions received favour in the royal palace of greatest Princes : so hereditarily descending from the poets are in these our times applauded , and delightful to the considerate and true apprehensive reader , they cherrishing a young and studious muse , in future hope of nobler issue , not cropping her by untimely censures ere she display her autumn progenies : for nobleness with virtue mixed , gives the true lustre of a studious work , when clouded ignorance malings the best inscription . Therefore presuming on this maxim , i am bold to present unto the world's eye this book , which hath served a prenticeship unseen , since it was penned ; and now at my coming into England it desires to depart from his fellows and to be set up in print , craving pardon for all his faults , and to be made free by your kind acceptance . 

Which shall oblige me yours , Alex : Hart . 

To his respected friend Alex : Hart : esquire . 

Fetch me that quill , that first writ Homer's stile , 
Dipped in the standish of poetic oil , 
With which I 'll fix on gold thy ample praise , 
Whose lustre there from death , thy fame Might raise , 
Had i mercurial eloquence ( Oh then ) 
I 'd figure thee , the mirror now of men ! 
Hadst thou caroused from Helicon a draught , 
Or from wits spiced cup with muses quaffed ; 
Or hadst thou sipped of Aganippe's fount , 
And after walked upon Parnassus' mount , 
Or had thy ears ere heard brave Arcas voice 
Philamelon like peculiar thee his choice , 
Or had there been presented to thine eye 
The bubbling brook where gold-plumed peacocks lie , 
Whence sweet himelon and harmonious sound 
Skales azure skies with echoes from the ground , 
Hadst thou been blessed so far as to have seen 
Jove's daughters trace in the Pierian green , 
Whose comely tresses of dishevelled hair 
In dangling down , each one rich gems doth bear , 
Or hadst thou ever viewed the Delphic rock 
The laurel bore , and worn Apollo's sock , 
Hadst thou i say such favours but received 
I deem thou hadst wits of all wit bereaved , 
Besides what more performed had thy brave brain 
That thus hath wrote in such unequal strain , 
Which cherish still that thy immortal fame , 
May live augmenting honour to thy name , 
when thou art dead , that after age May see 
The ample worth , that first did spring in thee . 
thine to command a. h.  

In laudem hujus libri carmen encomisticon . 

Come hither Homer , where 's thy sacred quill ? 
Learned Minerva now declare thy skill ; 
Come thrice three daughters of immortal Jove , 
now sound your glorious trumpet from above 
Of never dying fame , blazon these lines 
With golden characters , lest envy's shrines 
Detract the splendour of their noble fame , 
And carping Momus verify the same ; 
But why doth my unlearned muse dare sing 
Thy noble works , with her unpolisht string ? 
So long as learning and the learned live , 
Thy works to thee immortal praise shall give . 
Ad authorem . 

Oh cor dulce viris ! certè tibi fama perennis , 
nomen ab ornatu , convenienter habes . 
Ad lectorem . 

Candid , si cupias insignia gesta porentum 
Praelia seu technas cognoscere quaeris amoris 
Gest si ducum quaeris monumentaque regum ; 
Omnia sunt isto plenè contenta libello : 
Perlege tunc istum librum ; via plana petenti , 
Cujus finis honor , quia fine reportat honorem . 
Ja: Netley . 

To the blossom of poetry Alex : Hart , esquire . 

Be studious still , thy worth i will admire , 
In spite of foe thy fame must still aspire 
Unto immortal glory , and renown . 
For thou must wear brave Clios laurel crown , 
Oh paradox that fifteen years so young , 
Should lay such plots as from thy muse hath sprung ! 
Acute you genius poets of our time , 
Ye ' And lost your wits , before they come in prime , 
Leave of your Bacchus rhymes and rouse for shame , 
What shall a child bereave you of your fame : 
Yet do not stain with imputations quill 
This tender youth that 's innocent of ill , 
He needs not care , Apollo's armour he 
Bears on his breast from pen-shot keeps him free 
thine what his own , b. w.  

To his learned friend , Alex : Hart esquire . 

Who e'er thou art , kind reader , viewest this book , 
a wonder rare dropped from a youths first quill , 
Whence gravest wits for patterns fair May look , 
And with 's inventions quaint whole volumes fill . 
what 's riper age is likely to bring forth , 
Let them be judges who Parnassus haunt : 
Sure such will cherish early budding worth , 
And praises a•e ne'er let his virtue's want . 
the admirer of your virtues w.m.  

The history of Alexto and Angelica , or loves metaphor . 

In Grece there dwelled many noble men , amongst the which there was one named alexto , a Lord of great account and eminency , who was reverenced and honoured of all strangers aswell as of his domestic persons , and those which did inhabit about him , not for the largeness of his patrimony , or the greatness of his possessions ( Though they were such as his neighbouring peers could not equalise ) but the foundation and original of his extolments sprung from his grave , judicious and matchless counsels , which so liberally he would extend on all sorts : and also for his charitable alms and benevolences , with which he plentifully would store , succour and cherish those , which were in adversity . 

But to our intended discourse . This grave senator had a son who bearing his name , disagreed not from his properties , but punctually had his father's heroic inclinations , which made him as happy as meritorious , and was no less honoured of all men , than the limits of his deserts did reach unto : whose daily practices were to excel each man in courtesy : but as he was not too much self-conceited , nor too lofty minded : so were not his thoughts fixed on any base or unworthy object , for they were as magnanimous as he nobly born , which always did aspire unto the height of virtue , and no sooner sought but attained unto . For the comeliness of his portraiture it was unparalleled , yet had Venus lived in those days , she would have said that her Adonis did exceed him far : who , in my judgement , was not worthy to bear the title of this young Grecians name . 

But now as touching his feature and physiognomy the colours of this my rural pencil is to sable to him and figure him in so liberal , lively , and ample sort , as the genius of the judicious reader May conceive : and also fearing that in herauldring forth his worth , some Demosthenes interrupt me as did aesehines the orator : who being sent from Athens to King Philip of Macedon at his return from the court to Athens , he much commended and extolled the exquisite beauty of Philip , with his admirable elocution and excessive bearing of drink . The which being related in the audience of Demosthenes , he presently checked aesehines , saying , that he made a woman of Philip for his beauty , a babbling sophister for his eloquence , and a sponge for his retaining of liquor . 

But now this young Alexto , was the only joy and comfort of his aged sire , who having a desire to have his son experienced in martial discipline , and also not ignorant for the courting of amorous damosels , he sent him to Athens to be educated in both , and also for his comrade he sent one Sandrico , a man's son of great worth , and no less valiant , than his own son , for Sandrico's courage was apparently manifested , and also proved most eminent . 

But in short space these two undaunted spirits were landed at Athens , where not altogether so joyful for their safe arrival , as for the good society of each other , to whom they linked their fidelity in a fraternal vow , and bound their friendship with such a Gordian knot , as the ass was fastened to the temple of Apollo with . 

But after they had spent some few years in Athens , the Thracian Emperor began to overrun Greece , which stood in need of the aid , power , and assistance of these two champions a•lexto and sandrîco . 

And speedily they were sent for home , for the succour of their aged sires . In which wars they performed exceeding rare deeds of chivalry , whereby they became the only blossoms and mirrors of those times : for still the honour of each day did adorn their crests . But the acting of their exquisite feats , to the no small amazement of each spectator , in which behold how retrograde fortune proved , that these two uncontrolled Greeks , became captivated by the arrival and verbal report , which the shrill trumpet of fame triumphed through all the army . 

Which was of the exquisite feature of the Roman Lady Angelica , of whom 't was said , that if all the goddesses were composed in an union , they could not equalise her , the citation here of each particular of her unparallelized worth• , would appear too tedious . Only conceive this , that the report which flying fame did demonstrate , did still solicit the ears of young alexto : insomuch , that it was deeply rooted in his heart , and the fruit which sprung from thence , was his daily squared sighs , whereby he was altogether disabled to negociate his martial affairs . And thus was he enamoured of her whom his eyes were never blessed with the prospect of ; yet daily did he surfeit by the excessive quaffing of the nomination of her name , and did as much adore the same , as Pygmalion did the senseless portraiture that he carved , on which he so much doted , that he made it his bedfellow . 

But all this while , we have not treated of the vexation and perplexity which Sandrico sustained : not that he was entangled or captivated , by the amorous report of the terrestrial goddess . But his grief and disability proceeded from the pensiveness , which he perceived his friend alexto to be in . 

And as he could not conceive the original from whence it sprung , so would not Alexto relate unto him , and divulge the cause of his internal grief , which was apparently descried by his external hew , and melancholy gestures , yet poor Sandrico was not so well read in that loving philosophy as to conceive the nature of his unusual passion , for he was more fit for the tents of boisterous Mars , than the temples of amorous Ladies . 

So likewise was Alexto before he was entrapped with the snare of affection : but alas ! there is no heart so sovereign good , but love can make simple . And so it fell out that one time above the rest , Sandrîco came into the tent of his noble friend Alexto , and falling into a deep discourse : at the Catastroph & period of each sentence , alexto would still close them up with such a sigh , that it would seem to rent and cleave in sunder the rafters of his tent . 

At which Sandrîco laying fast hold upon that occasion , began to importune and request him by all the permanent and unfeigned friendship , that so liberally he had and did show on him , that he would not conceal any longer that in obstinacy , which Might prove his utter ruin , but reveal it unto him , whereby it Might be a mitigation of his distress , vowing to participate of the same , and also to lend him the propagation of all his future and faithful endeavours . 

Have you beheld how Iris struts when as her mantel's spread ? Or have you marked when as sol riseth with his radiant beams , he doth disperse the misty fogs and unsavoury vapours , which were obscured in the concavious places of the earth ? Even so the true pattern of perfect friendship , which Sandrico spread upon Alexto partly dispersed the sable clouds of that his present calamity . For when birds sing early , it doth betoken a fair day , but when the sunshine garnishes it , it prognosticates a shower ▪ but after a storm comes a calm : so after Alexto had turned over the volumes of numberless sighs , he unfolded his mind unto Sandrico in these words . 

Oh unhappy i ! Wars have their ends either hour , or death , the Scilian pools by sufficient help , May be drawn dry , the Talitian tree in time did wither , the stoiticall flood did drown the usurping tyrant . 

But love , oh love ! Thou hast no period , neither can i bring thee to a compromise delay to thee , is the unhappy headsman , that holding me , neither saves nor kills , but leaves me to languish in a burning frozen zone . 

Sandrico being attentive , by this understood , that an amorous passion had creeped into him , and thus began modestly to chide him . 

Oh quench these smothering sparks , lest suffered they grow to a perpetual flame , and like the Amazonian cell , scorch all that doth approach it nigh , and at last with mount Aetna consume itself ; but ( Oh my friend ) let the buckets of thy undaunted courage , draw forth of the noble well of thy understanding so much reason ; as to quench this unmartial agony . 

Let not thy brave , heroic mind , stoop unto so base and ascivious a lure fit for none but panicall rustics , that never were trained in the Trojan wars , whose whips & prongs are spears and lances ; haycocks , shields , and targets , and blue bonnets , crests and helmets , i blush at thy thoughts , and could take pleasure to deridefancie : were it not in thee , but now i see the poets did well , when as they first feigned Cupid , that disloyal sycophant to be blind . For had he seen thy worth , he never durst attempt a shaft , as thus rovingly hath light upon thee , the which repulse , and send backe again in as many pieces about his corpses , as there be sands in the Lydian shores : for what 's his bolt only headed with a voluntary desire , and feathered with a quick consent , which is shot from a bow of idleness . Then rouse up thy disordered senses , and remember the soldiers phrase ; dulcior est mors quam amor . 

Aristotle , Socrates , nay , hadst thou taken lectures from Mercury , and studied all thy life time for poems , to feed the variable incredulity of these insatiable Dames , either they would banish thee , as Caesar did Ovid , or condemn thee to die in the height of their displeasure . 

As for beauty ( Their chiefest pride ) it is but time's flower which as it is delicate , so it soon withers ; for it is like the colours which Phidias drew , which seemed admirable , and to the view most excellent , but did vanish and impair at every aerial breath . You know that Venus the matron of them all was fair , the sooner to make a wanton , also Helen the mirror of our Grecian land , but ask Troy of her qualities . 

Therefore when as you have run through the alphabet of praising fictions , as in saying worthiest Mistress , my service lies prostrated unto your acceptance , the which if you please to command , i shall think of none other happiness , but in the accomplishment of the same . 

Or shouldst thou figure thy Mistress , as the poets did Venus to ride in a golden chariot , drawn with silver breasted doves , or as Juno with golden plumed peacocks : at the last , when as they are satisfied by drawing the day of extolments , they will seek to place thee amongst the stars , as Venus did pythagentes , for a flatterer , a very lofty seat but low in reward , and this is the common course now a days of our Grecian , and Roman damosels . Therefore use no physic but the consideration of these , which forth of the seriousness of my love to thee , i have been enboldned to relate . 

After Sandrico had made an end of this discourse , alexto began to answer him , as followeth , my dearest Sandrico , had Dionysius but ten Plato's to tell him truth , he had not erred , Agamemnon wished but ten such as Nestor , to vanquish all his enemies at Phrygia , and to set our Greeks at liberty : but thou art both a Plato and a Nestor , unto me , thy counsels are both true and good : but alas ! my heart is filled with such an amorous passion , that it admits no attentiveness unto thy friendly advertisements . Yet i must confess , i have heard that a woman's love is like the river Tedocheus , which being tasted unto some , it proves venomous and baneful , but unto others as their daily nutriment : or as the Macedonian image , which unto some champions at the triumph there , it would cast amorous glances , and on others disdainful looks and frowns . And also as on the Saxtenion mount there was a castle enchanted by the necromancer bastellotus , wherein he caused to be tortured his fair Polidarca , for her cruelty towards him , at the entry of which he had placed a brazen bull , a fierce dragon and hellish furies : these were guardians whereby none could vanquish nor unloose , but only he , which was the mirror of Rome , for all perfection . Alcontiodes and he finished the enchantment . 

Then oh Sandrico , suffer me to try my fortune , which peradventure May prove as these have , and why May not i with Calapassus take a turn in dancing with ióves daughters in the Pierian Greene ? 

Tush , tush , said Sandrico , remember thy own speeches , wherefore did bastelotus cause pilodorea to be tortured , but for her cruelty towards him , and May not thy Mistress prove as marble hearted ? 

Also , remember how long Lodovicus was enamoured of the Lady Dantrissea , and how unfaithful she prooed unto him ; as also when he died , he desired that his heart should be showed unto her , wherein she perceived her own similitude , as transparent as an object is by the sun's reflection in a crystal mirror , yet she regarded it not , but esteemed it ridiculous : but should thy Mistress prove so marble-hearted , i would become santeticus , causing her to be enchanted in that sort , as he did Dantrissia , for being the death of his friend Lodovicus . 

First , he caused her to be placed in a boiling cauldron amongst furies , with the portraiture of his friend Lodovicus in her view , holding his bleeding heart in his hand , whereby she should also gaze on her own dissembling physiognomy , and on Lodovicus front was engraven in capital letters this motto . 

Thy base dissembling face , did cause my death , 
thy flattering tongue , makes this to bleed on earth ; 
Torments i did sustain in life for thee : 
And now in death thus tortured shalt thou be . 


Secondly , her nutriment was the excrement of toads , adders and serpents , which was dished in the natural scull of Lodovicus , served her by satyrs which were her attendants , with strange deformed beasts . 

In this sort she still remained which is too good for all such disloyal sycophants . But my alexto , if this amorous conceit do but once creep into thee , i do much dread the success , for thou , that art for beauty like the fair Romans paramour , for wisdom like Ulysses , whom Circe could not enchant , for courage like a second Hector . 

Then seeing thou art adorned with all these graces , bequeathe not thyself , and it , unto so foolish a passion , which allows nothing excellent , but what it likes , for it shadoweth beggary , in Crates , whom hisparata thought , and esteemed rich for his love , but contrariwise , Palperea accounted Croesus a poor fellow , because she disliked him . Then yield not thyself to this fancy which is altogether in extremes , and admits no reason , for thou a•t he from whose mouth flows melody , more enchanting than the Sirens ▪ and in thy lips the muses make a new Parnassus , and thy head contains the subtlety of Aristotle . 

Remember also thou art a warrior , whose undaunted courage , was never yet quailed by any , neither foreign foe , nor home bredenemy . For the name of noble Alexto is sufficient to vanquish troops of armed men . 

After Sandrico had used all the skill he could to persuade his friend Alexto from the entertaining of his new fancy alexto began thus to answer him . 

My dear Sandrico , as the wounded deer wringeth forth tears , and as the myrtle depressed yieldeth gum , so by the deep impression , which i have conceived of fair Angelica's beauty , my sighs lead me captive to pick up a mourner in the time of my own tears : besides , my Sandrico , the gods should do nature too much wrong , if they should place an adamant heart in a crystal face , therefore twit me no more with Vesta , for Venus is she who can chastise Angelica though she did glory in beauty , as Narcissus , who stooping to kiss his own shadow in a brook was immediately drowned therein ; besides Lucina is a goddess which must be employed , for marriage is honourable , and to live unmatched it were a wrong to nature . The phoenix when she is nigh her end , builds her nest with all sweet spices , and odoriferous perfumes , as close unto the sun's reflection as she can , whereby at her decease his splendidious and radiant beams should revive a young phoenix forth of the ashes of the old deceased one . 

But Sandrico should either man or woman die without the propagation of issue , their characters and resemblances , could not be left behind , but by a dead substance as dostitetius was , whose portraiture was carved ere he died by the cunning artist ; therefore i say love is divine , and marriage honourable , especially to those that are the paragons of this terrestrial paradise . 

Also when as the demetriall King esteemed of love , as the barbarian King did of gold which he sent as presents to his enemies , Venus cursed him out of her temple , wherefore he was hated of all , and thus hatefully died . 

And when rossilius would taste no fruit but such as grew in the gardens of Hesperides , neither then any colour content his eyes but such as was stained by the maureticall fish ; that is , he could affect no damozell but she , which was accounted the terrestrial goddess of the thration land , named Dionela ; and because he was loyally affected to her , Venus suffered him to marry her , and when as she lacked the assistance of Lucina , Diana also came unto her , and at the birth of Dionella's son the goddesses rained pearl , Jupiter gold ▪ Mars trained his warlike legions in the air . This was to signify that where loyal affection is , the gods rejoice triumphantly , also when as doves are matched young they never sever but by death , so vines grafted being sprigs they seldom part , but they decay . 

Sandrico perceiving that alexto would still cross him , he thus begun again ; i perceive that thy head is not barren of sophistry to prove this thy argument of loving philosophy : but suppose ( My friend ) that thy autumn showers come too late , and cause not thy crop to prove . 

Besides , a woman will say , she hath but one heart , as the heavens have but one sun , but none can find how many tricks and false imaginations are observed and shrouded in that one heart of theirs . Then look before you leap , and walk not where no footing can be found , seek not to climb Olympus before you consider the altitude thereof neither bark with the wolves of Cirea against Endymion . 

Settle not too much affection before you know how to be requited , but i perceive that is true which one relates of a certain person which was so ravished in his amorous and fond contemplations , that he had the image of his Mistress so imprinted in his thoughts that he seemed always to converse with her , and perform with her all those actions which lovers use to commit in embracing of their loves , so you alexto grow almost desperate for her , whom you have not seen : alexto perceiving Sandrico spoke unto the purpose , he speedily thus answered him . Prithee Sandrico honour me so much as to bear me company unto Rome ; where i will try my fortune with Angelica , and if she prove not so amorous as i am loyal , i will more exclaim of her then doronus did of our Grecian army , to which request Sandrico consented , perceiving there was no repulsion but ▪ alexto would try his fortune with the Roman Lady Angelica he gave his consent to travail with alexto . in which journey alexto began thus to pass away the time . 

Worthiest Sandrico , beauties arrows are so sharp , and the darts that fly from woman's eyes so piercing that the choicest armour cannot repulse either of them , no not the corslet which Vulcan made for the Didonian champion , for it pierceth deeper within the tender breast of an amorous lover than canon shot in plank , for shot , either it passeth through or sticks , but when love makes battery , if it enters not the defendant it tears the plaintiff in a thousand pieces . it 's also like the Amazonian armour which being shot at the King of Phrygia it was repulsed in such sort by magic art , that it broke about the ears of stonatus , who shot it , that it killed him and five hundred of his resolute warriors ; or , it hath resemblance unto the fire-balls and thunderbolts which Jove sent at Mars , the one lighting on his helmet , and the other glancing on his shield , were returned with such fury , that the bolts struck xantusissius ( loves kinsman ) dead , and the balls had well nigh fired Jove himself out of his throne . So nothing could extinguish the wildfire which well nigh burned the castle of silotus , but the milk and juice of the Stabolian tree . 

So neither will nor can any thing assuage the fervent anguish of a loyal lover , but the true acceptance of the beloved ; for what spoke Apollo , he whose skill in compounds and simples exceeded all men's ( For Galen and Hippocrates , were not worthy to carry his drugs , when as an amorous passion crept into him ) he said , hei mihi quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbis ; besides , love , that divine passion , if it be over rash dealt with , it burns dim , and dies like the forge of Dedalus . but if it be moderately treated on , it will quickly flame with consent like Arnalian sparkles which smothering lay , but being leisurely blown were soon fired . 

But my Sandrico if my fair Angelica would look upon me as the affectionated mother on her smiling infant , or with such an amiable countenance as Doranelia did on Stol•tius her constant lover , who rushed into the battle at Phrygia , resolutely resolving there to die , or to set at liberty his fair Mistress , who after a tedious conflict with expense of blood and the close pursuing of his enemies , was almost brought unto the period of life , but casting his decaying eyes about , speedily received such strength and fresh courage from the feature of his beauteous love which did so replenish his empty veins , that in short time he subdued his haughty foes , and brought them to submission ▪ even so an amorous glance from Angelica , would revive my drooping heart , which is in a fierce conflict for her sake , and is almost vanquished by death , his deadly enemy . 

But o Sandrico , do but consider what love is ; for as there is no cut to unkindness ; so there is no haughty spirit , but that the quintessence of love , can chastise with celerity . 

For great Alexander stood affrighted at the Amazonian beauties , Hector in the midst of his battle against Alezanto when as he saw the Empress Claria he instantly was amazed , and sustained the agony of a Tartian ague , letting his lance drop from his martial hand , suffering himself to be disarmed , unhelmed , and captivated by his foes . 

I fear , quoth Sandrico , that this fiction of praising love will not last long , for the nightingale hath but one May in twelve months , and whereas thou hast surfeited by quaffing the poisoned cup of bitter love , thou shalt find the reward in the bottom thereof , to be but the dregss of thy counterfeiting Mistresses hate ; yield not too much to the impotency thereof , for you know not with how much gall and bitterness the honey of love is tempered with . est melle & felle foecundissimus : besides , a woman hath as many minds as the alphabet hath letters , for the distinction of their fancies are like the difference of their faces , for aristes said , that his Alderia had two kinds of faces , the one dissembling to please him , the other lasciviously to entertain a friend ; also they are merely composed and made of vanity which makes them prove so light . 

For Phylistis weighing his Mistress in the balance of equity ; found the longer he kept her the lighter she was , and as the marble drops tears against every storm , so a woman will fain weeweeping upon every slight and light occasion ; but that is , because they would be thought of as tender nature and constitution as their skins be extolled for whiteness . 

All this while alexto was very attentive , and was almost persuaded in the same form to rail against his Mistress ere he was arrived at Rome to try her , but by this time you must conceive they are somewhat nigh , and to make short , alexto thus began to answer him . I suppose ( Said he ) that you Sandrico was brought forth minerva-like and not by a woman ; for if a woman had been thy mother , thou couldst not thus fervently have railed against their sex . Tush said Sandrica , Auicenna said . hominem posse produci naturaliter ex terra , if you will not believe a woman was my mother , imagine me to be brought forth of the earth ; besides , i am no scholar unto King Lewis the sixt , as in learning that sentence which he taught his son ; saying , he needs no more Latin but this : qui nesci• dissimulare nescit vivere ; and though truth gets foes , and flattery friendship , yet i will not soothe thee up in that which i know is baneful , also i point at no one particular Dame , neither include all in general , but i speak of the disloyal and inconstant ones : therefore no virtuous Dame will be outrageous but only in reading what i have said , and viewing the picture which is here drawn find it to bear resemblance unto themselves , such May dart venom at me that are stung by the worm of conscience . 

But let me say ▪ what i will , thou provest regardless thereof , and with Rocardus King of Phrisland being by Wolfranius persuaded to be baptised , having one foot in the font , the other out , asked Wolfranius where went the most part of his predecessors that were not baptised , to hell , said Wolfranius ▪ instantly Rocardus drew his foot forth of the font , saying . rectius est plures quam pauciores sequi . extremities and dangers which i relate unto thee of love , and what wrong men have sustained yet thou art the more enamoured thereof ; by that time Sandrico had made an end of his discourse they were arrived at Rome at a port named , porta Venetia ; the which port was adjoining to the palace of the beauteous Lady Angelica : in which they having arrived , Sandrico for the better satisfaction of his friend and himself , begun to inquire and demand of the inhabitants what they could inform him concerning the heroical inclination of this Roman goddess , and whether that her feature was transparent unto that which the shrill trumpet of fame had blazed in such an unparallelized sort , whose worth by all relations they found rather to be undervalved then exceeded , at which Alexto's itching ears were still seduced to soft attention , which rapt him in such an ecstasy of pleasure that he could remain silent no longer , but pulling Sandrico by the arm , burst forth into this paradoxical speech ; o my Sandrico , he that by the change of fortune mounteth higher than he should , must arm himself with patience to descend lower than he would , as they are not happy which are poor and deformed , so are they not fortunate that are over happily endued with the ornaments of nature , and largeness of temporal possessions and patrimonies . Sandrico seeing him so passionate could no longer refrain , but interrupts him in his intended discourse . 

My dear Alexto over the greatest beauties hangs the greatest ruin , i could wish thee to be wise , for the study of wisdom is the readiest ruin of grief and vexations , the counsel of friends doth assuage and mitigate present perturbations , and also prevents the future ignominy of perilous dangers , but i confess counsel in trouble gives small comfort when help is past cure ; besides , where fortunes beams shine not propitious , diligence doth little avail nor doth it mitigate instant calamities , but methinks the cause being your own , do but remove that and of necessity the effect must follow , then medici cura teipsum , tu bene cognoscis morbis artemque medendi , then seek a speedy remedy lest thy contagious wounds fester thy whole body ; but alas , of all creatures man is the most apt to fall , because being strooken with love , he undertakes the greatest actions ; for as i have told thee , do but consider what this fancy is , a map of misery , a world of torments seducing man into a labyrinth of irrevocable tortures ; but alexto interrupting his friend Sandrico , made reply . When the heart is environed with oppression than the ears are shut up against all good counsel : for perplexed hearts live with tears in their eyes ; yet oft die with mirth in their looks ; security banisheth dolours , but fear hinders gladness ; for grief is a friend to solitariness , foe to sobriety and heir to desperation . But , oh Sandrico , what doth it avail if the mind be generous , the body warlike , the joints pliable , and active , all the dispositions inclined to heroical and magnanimous actions ; if he that taketh arms be unfortunate ; but indeed , assidual prosperity is more hurtful and obnoxious than adversity , in that the one May be more easily born then the other forgotten . 

Curtius' reports , that Darius in his flight drank puddle water polluted with the dead carcases , he at the drinking thereof reported , that he in all his precident jollity never drunk liquid substance , that was more pleasant , and delightful unto his palate : the reason was , because when he was at the height of fortune , he used to drink before he was a thirst . So also Artaxerxes who in a pitched battle was forced to surrender the honour of the day to his enemies , whereby he betook himself to flight , in which he being destitute of corporal sustenance & nutriment , could purchase naught to sustain nature but dry figs and brown bread , at the receipt thereof he made a long narration : in which he vowed that such pleasant food did his lips never touch till that instant : then my Sandrico , those be but false joys which are not intermixed with tears , perils and disturbances , for necessity and tribulation are the first steps to honour , thereby a man comes to know himself ; therefore let us derelinguish this discourse , and consult how we May become spectators of that superexcellent creature . 

Sandrico perceiving that it was to no purpose any longer to discourse with him , until he had glutted his longing eyes with the resplendent rariety of Angelica's peerless feature : wherefore he counselled alexto for to walk into the palace to behold the Lady of his affections , unto this proposition Alexto consented , so both together went there , where no sooner entered but they found this beauteous creature sitting in state adorned with unparallellized habiliments , the splendour of which being accompanied with a saintlike feature gave such a glorious lustre , as that it seems unto alexto that some comet had been beneath the roof , the superexcellent Lady was accompanied with divers heroic peers and nobility , which resorted thither because of the jousts and turneyes , which were to be performed at a speedy solemnization . But as i said , Alexto's senses being captivated at the sudden unequalized object , he being in this trance begun somewhat to rave , breaking forth into extreme passion , crying with a loud voice ( In yonder throne is fixed Ariadne's glittering star , for 't is no terrestrial Dame , no mortal wight , but an immortal creature , and supreme goddess ) but ere he could proceed any further Sandrico clapped unto him and pacified his outrages , advising him to lay hold on that occasion , and to prostrate himself unto the Lady's acceptance ; the which he willingly embraced , and approaching unto the Lady Angelica , doing her much homage and reverence , as he supposed befitted so high a person , framed his speech unto her in this ensuing form . 

Renowned paragon , you whose illustrious feature needs no silver sockets to adorn and beautify the golden pillars of your unvalued worth ; then why should i with metaphorical phrase adorn the feature of your authentic self . Which nature cannot parallel ? I 'll therefore leave the propagation of such praising fictions unto the trifling tymers of our age , whose courtship doth in flattery consist ; for should i herald your divine presence in such obscure sentence to be illuminated by the lustre of your all-conceiving genius , it would not only make my imbecility the apparenter but conduct me to a labyrinth of fond contemplations ; for as an eye in beholding of the sun's reflection twinkleth with the lids : so the rays which shines from the ebon arches of your brows , hath not only caused mine eyes to be beauty blasted , but leads me captive unto your royal person , where like the salamander i request my assidual abode . Alexto still running on in this sort of rhetoric the audience of which did not only drive the noble spectators to a nonplus , but each one seemed to be an orator and to sympathize his comely gestures and courtlike behaviours : and as for Sandrico , he through the ecstasy of joy that he received thereat ; supposed himself to be elevated into the Oriental region Palpasus . 

But as for Angelica in her fair face , a comely blush with an ashy pale did strive for superiority . But have you beheld when as the silver fingered morning doth appear , shaking her plumes from whence pearly drops do fall ? Or have you seen the blushing of the East , when glittering Phoebus doth begin his course , who lifting up his globall front , from Cinthiaes' glittering palm doth wash his face in thoetis crystal lap . Even so this goddess did descend her throne , taking Alexto by his warlike palm , bespoke after this manner . Heroic knight , for your gesture speaks your own , had but your oratory the a•t of persuasion aswell as of captivating , i by a thought of fond conceit , should imagine myself , that which your fiction hath strove to figure me , through the which i with Paulinia should adore the shadow of my own feature , if i were as you would make me , your rhetoric had abused my meaning ; then worthy Sir , seek not to praise beauty , when desert cannot equal the limit of reason . 

But since fortune hath conducted you unto our palace , i shall request your stay until our triumphs be ended , and that you depart not without the acknowledgement of your further service , and also with my liberty . 

Alexto hearing this comfortable speech , thus replied , fairest of creatures ; he were unworthy to climb the height of prosperity , that should voluntarily fall into desperation , and let me be anatomised to less than nothing , if i deceive your good opinion . 

With these and such like discourses they spent the time until supper was ready to be served , at which she caused alexto to be placed as her opposite , whereby amorous glances past on both sides : and as for Sandrico he was as joyful thereof , as if he were a sharer in his friends present happiness : but while supper time lasted , there began a demand amongst the nobility , which should first enter the lists in the morning , but being they could not decide this controversy between themselves it was proffered to the Lady Angelica to define the same , she having the disposing did command Alexto the first entrance : he no little glad thereof seemed loath , yet willing to accept so great a favour , but he soon perceived a murmuring amongst the nobility , and not without just cause , that a stranger and foreigner should dispossess them of their right , and honour which did appertain unto them , by reason thereof he requested of the Lady to be excused , and to surrender that favour which she had employed upon him unto some nobler person , whose deserts Might exceed his . 

The Lady entering into consideration with herself , did place it , though unwillingly , of the Lord of Montulus , unto the which all the rest willingly did agree , and as for the next places they did accord amongst themselves : by that time they had brought this unto a compromise supper was ended , where after some pastimes , bed time did approach , where each one was conducted , but alexto and Sandrico were most sumptuously lodged next unto the Lady's chamber , to which they were some part of the way conducted by her own person , then leave being taken , and sweet rest bequeathed on both sides , the Lady departed , and they entered their chamber , the which they found so garnished with unestimable gems , and adorned with such gorgeous hangings , that it seemed rather to entertain some monarch than their persons : but the door being closed and none resident but themselves , Alexto began to burst forth as thus . 

Oh fortunate star that thus propitiously hath smiled on me , and adorned me with the beams of unestimable favour , in suffering this correspondent amity betwixt Lady Angelica and myself ! 

She now have i beheld which is the only phoenix of this terrestrial paradise , and sole mirror for nature's ornaments , Sandrico was strucken dumb , and was loath to answer in some space , being in an outrage with himself for his precedent abusing the feminine sex before he had known any just cause thereof , and here , judicious Ladies , humbly craves your forgiveness , and so do i being much perplexed with myself , that my pen should be enforced to cite his outrageous blasphemies . 

And thus he turns unto alexto in Angelica's presence , thou didst seem to exceed Cicero the most eloquent of all orators , canst thou now in as ample sort figure her comeliness ? Alexto replied , that nothing was so easy , or performed with such facility ; and thus he began . 

Now do i love that never loved before , 
And for requital largely will implore ; 
engaged i am , but to so fair a Dame 
Since the creation nature could not frame : 
First , in her growth she 's like the cedar tall , 
Slender as Ewe , or flourishing laurall : 
Her blush to Phoebus May be equalised ; 
This is the Dame that hath my heart surprised : 
Her front is like unto the new fallen snow , 
Not made for frowns , and wrinkles scorns to show , 
Her eyes exceed rich Caesar's Western Jem's , 
Shining like pearls on the Angelica's stems , 
For from those eyes shines such resplendent grace , 
as if some sovereign had been in place . 
Her lips are like fair rubies , and within 
Her teeth , they seemed as if they pearls had been : 
Her neck in view like polished ivory , 
She seems like Venus , or a star in sky ; 
There ebbs , and flows forth from her silver breasts 
Sacred perfumes , as 't were the phoenix nests 
This diadem is not worth less but more 
Than Caesar found beneath the Western shore . 


Now my Sandrico how likest thou this description ? Is it not punctually ? It is most exquisite answered Sandrico ; and after these and such like speeches sleep did begin to fasten on them both , whereby they resigned the rest of their discourse until the morning that they did awake , unto which rest we 'll leave them being loathe to disturb them any further , and return unto the Lady Angelica , who being in her bed could take no rest , but still her genius conceived an apparition , which seemed to be the portraiture of Alextos' countenance , thus was she still perplexed , being greedy to be satisfied of his parentage , then did she conceive him to be noble , by reason of the rare perfections that she had conceived in him : these things being considered by her , she resolved to conceit nothing of him , until she had viewed his feats of arms , which were to be performed on the morn , and with this resolution she betook herself to slumber , but all in vain , because she could not shake off her new conceived fancy : but being she is desirous of rest , we will leave her to enjoy it , wishing her her hearts content , and all other Ladies that are in her case , and because silence possessed them all for this present we will request your patience to the morning . 

Which being come , the Lady ▪ Angelica was the first that was awake , for she was most perplexed in mind ; alexto and Sandrîco were still secure in a sweet slumber , for Alexto had received so much pleasure over night at those unestimable favours , with the which the Lady did adorn him , that he had turned all his precedent despair into hope of a good success . But by this time Angelica had beautified her corpses with her sumptuous and gorgeous vestments , accompanied with her amiable looks , she went forth of her chamber and descending into the hall , where the nobility did attend and expect her approach , in which she was no sooner entered , but salutations being given on both sides , she ascended her chair of state , where we leave her in discourse with the nobility , and return unto alexto , who by this time had a vision , the which gave him to understand , that they all were in readiness to enter the lists , only expecting his coming . At the departure of this vision he leaps out of his bed awaking his friend sand. telling him that they had overslipped their time . By the which you must conceive they could have no great discourse , but the time they had for ye clothing of them , in which Sandrico thus began ; noble alexto , you last night undertook to enter into the lists , as one of the knts of Angelica , in which my prayers shall be that you May return victorious , gaining the honour of the day & that triumphant glory May adorn thy crest , for by the achieving of this heroic action in the sight of the virtuous Lady , it will either procure ▪ thee thy hearts content , or make thee loves vassal for ever , if once condemned to die in the hate of her displeasure , and at thy return if prosperous , we will conclude in what sort to reveal the nature of thy apparent passion unto her soft attention . 

By this time they both were ready , and coming down into the hall , the time was at hand of their departure into the lists , each one ( Doing his duty unto the Lady ) took their places after the Lord mon. who over night was assigned the first that should enter . So the Lady with the rest of her attendants of exquisite beauty descending from their seats , and being ready to take places , Angelica requested alexto to conduct her ▪ the which he was not unwilling to embrace , in the mean time Sandrîco went to prepare his horse and martial accoutrements , which were prepared for that exploit , Alexto having placed the Lady for her prospect , and doing her reverence , taking his leave , she took a scarf , that was most sumptuous to behold , embroidered with pearl and gold , the which she caused to be tied about his arm , wishing his happy success and assidual prosperity ; for she seemed much enamoured of him , but cautious lest he should conceive any thing thereof . 

But how much joy alexto conceived of this unestimable favour , i want the power of expression , therefore resign that to the learned judgements , to conceive of . But in this ecstasy alexto came unto his friend sand. relating to him in brief what had happened between the pierlesse Lady and himself , at the audience whereof Sandrico conceived no small content : but because Alexto would not be accounted prolixious , he mounted his fiery steed , being accompanied with his friend , and by that time , the rest were placed , and after reverence done unto the Lady , he entered the lists , causing his horse to corvet in that ample sort that he astonished each spectator . 

And you must conceive if the Lady was enamoured of him before , how much more was she now surprised by his matchless actions . But the trumpets warning unto the first encounter Lord Montulus and Sasetus a Persian knight met in such a full career , that Sasetus struck Montulus out of his saddle upon the crupper of his horse , but Montulus loath to pass by without claiming quittance with him , struck so outrageously on the breast of Sasetus , that his lance shattered in pieces , and nimbly clapping into the saddle again , meeting so furiously together , dismounted Sasetus tumbling him and his horse unto the earth , so Montulus passed by not being further endamaged , but Sasetus seeing himself foiled , especially in the presence of the Lady Angelica , unto whose acceptance his assidual devotions were bent , imagining that it would have been his perpetual disgrace courageously drew forth his own sword , being on his feet , sheathed it again in his own bowels , uttering these words , thus nobly will i die , rather than live dishonourably ▪ this unexpected stratagem proved an astonishment unto each spectator , but especially miraculous unto the Ladies : but after some pacification , and the cause of this outrage being fully related , it was very well approved of both by the Ladies and nobility , whereby the jousts did still proceed which otherwise had dissolved . But had not Montulus been animated and recomforted by alexto & others , he had surely endangered himself for very anguish and grief that so noble a spirit should fall by his feeble arm . 

But having recollected himself , he was ready to encounter with the next that made against him . 

Alexto as yet was loath to encounter with Montulus until he had overthrown most part of those knights there present , imagining thereby that Montulus should be exceedingly extolled of each spectator , and that the Ladies would affirm that he was the choicest of all Europe , for kingly knighthood , and when as Montulus should be adorned with these favours , he would instantly entertain to just with him , being fully assured that having received one amorous glance of favour from his Mistress eye , he should be able to dismount and captivate Montulus , and so regain all honour unto himself . 

But as he was hammering , and contemplating of this matter , his friend sand. perceiving no knight prepared for the next encounter , doing reverence unto the Ladies sped towards Montulus , and encountered with him so furiously , that he broke his lance upon the helmet of Montulus in such outrageous sort , that fire flew forth of his beaver , at which Montulus being much amazed , supposed that Jove had sent a thunderbolt upon his crest , that did so startle him . But meeting both again , Montulus being in the height of his fury , and holding himself perpetually dishonoured , gave Sandrico such a recombendibus upon his breast , that beat him of one side of his horse , but he speedily recovered himself , Alexto meeting of him embraced him in his arms vowed to be revenged . 

But by this time Montulus had recovered himself , & was fitted for the next encounter , the which was entertained by alexto , who doing reverence unto the Ladies , making his pampered courser fly , as if he scorned to be controlled , and meeting with Montulus in a full career bore him unto the earth with his saddle betwixt his legs , causing his horse to tumble on the other side , but Montulus broke his lance upon the breast of alexto who passed on his course still so upright , as if that none had encountered with him , the which caused such a general applause , as if he had been some demi god . 

But because alexto should not vaunt long of his prosperous success , some of these •tss . which were there present , & much enenraged at his actions set forth together against alexto being 8 in number , all which he received very nobly , but to their small comforts ▪ for the first two he run through with his lance , tumbling them from their horses to measure their length on the ground , the third being with him ere he could unsheathe his furious sword , he lifted up his martial fist , and struck such a ponderous blow upon his crest , that he laid him breathless upon the earth , making his brains fly about his horse heels . 

Then drawing his bloody weapon , with which ere any rescue was made , he had bereaved three of the other five of life , and left the other two sore wounded the which spectacle caused no little admiration to the beholders . 

But the Ladies being sore affrighted , forsook their seats , and Angelica being accompanied with her train entered the lists as Juno among the gods , to nip this early quarrel in the bud , as also fearing further outrage . But alexto no sooner perceiving her but leapt from his horse , & falling on his knees presenting unto her acceptance his weapon , and uttered these speeches . 

Judicious Lady , i have here committed a heinous fact , unbeseeming your presence , and indeed beyond the limits of expression , that speedily requires a just punishment , except your partial censure quit my imbecility in the perpetrating thereof , for like a malefactor , i expect a commiserating sentence from your blessed lips . 

Angelica seemed to sympathize this his passion , & to participate of his grief , and taking him by the hand raised him from the ground , and refusing his sword , said unto him , most valiant knight , your actions merit fame , deserving to be recorded in Hector's register for a perpetual memory , which May survive after ages : i grieve to behold the outrage and uncivil affront that you have sustained in my presence , but every of them have sustained their just deserts from your martial hands for their presumptuous fact , with these and such like words she freed alexto , requesting that the corpses of the deceased knights should be honourably interred , but especially hesetus to be entombed in her own chapel with a sumptuous monument over him , the charge of which being committed to certain nobles there extant , she with Alexto and the rest departed into the palace where she entertained them very royally with music and pastimes for the space of three or four days . But Alexto was not content therewith , but still did watch opportunity for a private discourse , but still his intent was frustrate , the Lady Angelica , on the other side was as much perplexed for the same opportunity . 

But still Alexto's heart did consume , yet was he fixed and constant in the determination , which is the Nepenthe which who so drinketh of , forgetteth all care and grief , for Agrippa reports that nothing in the world sooner remedieth sorrows then constancy . Thus Alexto continues though much perplexed , who was counselled by Sandrico to write a letter unto Angelica , he promising to be the bearer thereof himself , to which alexto condescended : for Sandrico thus animated Alexto ; thou knowest , said he , that Lady's delight in praising fictions , as hearing their beauties extolled though undeserved ; and again poetry , is a second nature to make things seem more exquisite than they were first framed by nature ; for as the seal leaveth the impression of his form in wax ; so the learned poet• engraveth his passion so lively in woman's hearts , that the hearer also is almost transformed into the author . But should i practise in poesy unto her , quoth Alexto , i dread of an ill success . 

Tush , said Sandrico , faint-hearted lawyers are not admitted to put in plea at the bar of love . A cowardly lover without hope shall never gain fair love with good fortune , besides sadness is the punishment of the heart , but hope the medicine of distress ; for , it is a pleasant passion of the mind which doth not only promise us those things which we most desire , but those things also which we utterly despair of . 

But for all poetry , quoth Alexto , give me oratory , for it is the spur to arms : for the eloquent oration of Isocrates was the first trumpet that gave Philip an alarm to the Asian wars , which Alexander his son without intermission ended . 

But i must confess unprofitable eloquence is like cypres-trees which are comely in altitude but bare no fruit , and babbling orators are the thieves of time compared to empty vessels , which give a greater sound than those which are full , but a dry thirsty ear must be therewith watered . Eloquence grounded upon reason is able to content and satisfy the hearing . 

In this discourse we will leave them & return to speak somewhat of the Lady Angelica , who though she was so superbious , ye like a falcon she could stoop to a goodly lure , for she much admired their prolixity from her , which drew her to contemplate with herself what gesture she Might have to surprise Alexto , who was her vowed vassal , though unbeknowne unto her . But at last she calling unto mind his speech unto her at his first approach , which did somewhat mitigate her passion , imagining thereby that he was enamoured of her , and also hoping that he would make the first assault , of which she was desirous , though modesty was her hindrance . In these contemplations we leave her and return to alexto , who had penned poetical verses for his Lady and Mistress delivering them unto Sandrico for to present unto her , and these are they Worthiest of all could i thee equilize , 
to any she that Might thee paralize 
In rustic sort than should my rural quill 
Herald thy fame , resounding forth it still . 
Yet fairest Dame i deem you 'll not disdain 
To 〈◊〉 these rough hewed lines whose meaning 's plain . 
Then by your favour Lady , i presume ; 
To cast myself beneath your sacred plume . 
I homage must if you a goddess were 
But now a frown from your blessed brow i fear , 
To figure you like Venus 't were unfit , 
She was disloyal , beauty blasted it ; 
or say , that you resemble Helen's face 
Compared with which 't would but impart disgrace , 
For Troy doth know her qualities so well , 
That pens can't write , nor tongues have power to tell : 
Yet thus , I 'll say , Arabian odours sweet , 
Distil from your fair cheeks , dear love to greet ; 
Lady know this , by knowing which know all , 
Your servant proves obedient to your call . 




Now after Sandrico had perused them , he very well esteemed thereof , promising to deliver them , which he performed some two days after , finding a fit opportunity both for time and place at the receipt whereof , the Lady knowing from whence they came conceived an inward and unspeakable joy but dreading to be perceived by Sandrico shrouded this ecstasy beneath the veil of discontent framing her gesture correspondent unto the stern aspect of her visage , made this answer . 

Dares he presume a goddess to behold , 
Or spot that breast , that 's beautified with gold ? 
Dares he the gods in battle to provoke ▪ 
Or from dark hell , the furies to invoke ? 
But what dares he , or dares not for to do 
That thus doth dare send lines unto our view . 


She willing to proceed but fearing that her sharp answer would utterly repulse his forwardness , & yet loath to seem captivated at first ; thus went on . 

Sir , i know not how to accept these lines , because i deem them to proceed from presumption and arrogancy ; and because i favoured his person in the lists , he imagines me enamoured of him , but his hopes fool him , if so he deems ; or have i shown him some other extraordinary favors that he should thus abuse my virtue's meaning ? But i perceive he reacheth me to be cautions , and circumspect in all my actions , confining my looks upon imoveable objects , lest others with himself misdeem them . 

Sandrico perceiving her still to proceed , emboldened himself to interrupt her thus . 

Thrice illustrious Lady , his perpetual service is offered to your divine person ; for at your feet he casts the hope of his world's happiness , uniting the remainder of his life therewith : for he , and that little , all nature endowed him with , lies sole at your disposing . 

Then seeing you are the first star that ever seduced him to study astronomy , let him not perish by the reflection of your ingratitude , seeing he is loyally affected towards you . 

The Lady Angelica fearing to be entrapped , requested his unwelcome absence , adding that by his lines she perceived no forcing effects ; besides , that she had vowed chastity , and that a monarch should not cause her infringe her former passed vows to Vasta . but turning aside , she said , she must give her conscious tongue that lie ; for though a monarch should not , yet alexto could . 

So pulling a gem from her Ivery neck , freely presented it to Sandrico requesting him to pacify his friend , and so away she past & Sandrico returned unto his friend alexto . but Angelica seeing she had alexto at a bay , vowed to keep him off to try his constancy and a while to triumph over him while he was in captivity . 

But by this time Sandrico had met with Alexto and relating unto him what answer he received from the beauteous Lady , which caused Alexto to fall into a second desperation . But Sandrico showing him her favour recomforted him to send a second epistle . 

My Alexto , said , he it is natural for women a while to despise that which is offered , but death to them if they be denied of their demands . And he that looketh to have the purest crystal water must dig deep ; and he that delighteth in sweet music , and madrigals must strain art unto the highest : so he that seeketh to win his love , must not spare labour nor fear hazarding his life ; for birds are trained with sweet calls , but caught with long nets , so lovers are ensnared with fair looks , but entangled with disdainful eyes . Then let me be the bearer of another epistle , for he that gathereth roses must be content to prick his fingers , and he that would conquer a woman's affection , must not be repulsed by sharp words , and the wisest sort of them are commonly tickled with self love . 

Come then , lay hold of my advise , for it is better to prefer the steadfast counsel of advised policy , than the rash enterprise of malapert boldness ; for as a chameleon hath all colours save white ; so a flatterer hath all points save honesty . I wish thee to proceed as if the subject was my own . 

I never found thee otherwise , answered alexto , but it is an easy thing for a man being in health , to give good counsel to another that is sick , but with such facility the sick man cannot follow it ; but I 'll write once more ere other exploits I 'll try . 

The letter . 

Illustrious Mistress , i never desired to be so good a scholar as to learn to love in Cupid's school , whereby i should attain the courting of beauty with flattering phrases or hypocritical compliments , whose oiled tongued metaphors so lavish in themselves , do warble . But could the dumb speech of silence reveal the nature of my apparent passion , or were it engraven in capital letters in my front , whereby the vulgar view of jealous eyes Might peruse the secrets of my love , than were this inscription needless , but since not ▪ then equal your inward perfection with your outward excellence , for your apparent beauty hath robbed me of my heart , and either i must accuse you of the theft , or be accessary to my utter ruin , and for your sake Cupid hath taught me what restless passions are in love , but fearing my laborious pen , should prove too sad an orator . I restless rest , until i fully rest . 

Yours , or not his own Alexto . 

This he having sealed , enclosed a rich jewel therein , gave it to ▪ Sandrico to present unto the Lady , the which he most willingly embraced and at a convenient time delivered it her , from whose hands she joyfully kissed the contents ere she had perused the inscription , and well noting each particular , with a modest blush returned this answer , presenting Sandrico an unestimable pearl wherein was carved her portraiture ; deliver this unto thy friend whereby ingratitude May not be objected against me ; i had rather have a personal appearance than this dumb apparition . 

Sandrico understanding her meaning prolonged not time , but with much celerity posted unto Alexto , who expected the sentence of discontent , but perceiving his friend with such a smiling countenance as the affectionated sire on his studious child ; demanded what news . 

Sandrico answered , he had brought him the loadstone of perfection , and so delivered to him the i em , telling him , that he should not omit that occasion , but diligently prosecute that proffered opportunity , which was thrown him from the lap of fortune , which certifying him also where he should find the Lady in her bower . 

Alexto not having liberty to gratify Sandrico's diligence , departed with much expedition unto the private walks where he found the Lady alone , melodiously playing upon a lute , warbling there unto an amorous ode , but she no sooner perceiving him come , but laid aside her instrument , and descending from her bower took him by the hand , being hardly able to dissemble her passion without appearance thereof , for it is their imbecility not to retain their affection long without demonstration unto the affectionated , but she thus begun to excuse herself . 

Worthy knight , i little supposed that your ears should have been auditors of my uncivil ode , but let us mount up yonder •owen & contemplate a while for i received two epistles from you , the which being examined ; i conceive thereby that an amorous passion hath possessed you , the mitigation of which you affirmed to be resident within the centre of my bre•• , but i know not how to impose the assurance of my affection on any knight , because lovers oaths are like fetters made of glass that glister fair , but couple no constraint ; besides love maketh a man that is naturally addicted unto vice to be endued unto virtue , forcing himself to be applied unto all laudable exercises , that thereby he May obtain his loves favour ; as also coveting to be skilful in elocution that thereby he May allure her , and to excel in music that by his melody he May entice her , to frame his speech in a perfect phrase ▪ that by his learning he May persuade her . So that which is defective in nature ▪ nurture perfecteth and the only original of this virtuous inclination ; is love . 

Beauteous Lady , answered alexto , a roling-stone contains no moss , and a fickle headed lover wants no cause of mourning . There are wanton lovers , Lady , i must confess , whose lascivious eyes are like the darts of Shafalus that where it hits , there it deeply wounds ; but my meaning is loyal , affection permanent and both prostrated unto your divine acceptance . But noble knight , answered the Lady , young years make their account only , of the glittering show of beauty , the mind of a young man is momentany , his affections sick , his love uncertain , and his fancy is fired with every new face , and as young willows bend easily , so green wits are entangled by every new fangle . 

But by your favour madam , replied Alexto , Cupid alloweth none in his court , but young that can serve fresh , and wise that can talk , faithful to gratify , and valiant to revenge their Mistress' proffered injuries . And as they that cannot suffer the light of a candle , can much worse abide the brightness of the sun : so they that are troubled and damnified by each small trifle would be much amazed to bear the weighty matters which are contained in love . 

For the passionate , lover if he sail love , is his pilot , if he walk , love is his companion , if he sleep , love his pillow : pure love never saw the face of fear , pure loves eyes pierce the darkest corners , and pure love attaineth the greatest dangers . Otherwise , fair Lady , had i not presumed in this abrupt sort to present unto your soft attention the true copy of my perplexed heart , for as mountains that have too much hear of the sun are burned and valleys having scarcity thereof are barren , but such places as continue in a mean , are most fruitful ; even so gracious Lady ▪ pity your distressed servants , who hath no happiness , but in the beams of your favour . 

Now the Lady Angelica weighing Alexto's grief : by the perplexity of her own heart , embraced him in her arms , uttering these words . 

Where the knot is loose the string slippeth , and where the water is shallow there no vessel will ride , than here dear knight , take heart and hand with as true a zeal and perfect love , as thy amorous heart can desire to be requited with . 

Now was alexto satisfied being confirmed thereof by several embracements , in which they spent their time , using the toying sport that lovers commonly commit , but time being at hand of that their present departure , whereby they requested each other that that Might be the place of their daily meetings , which was defined to be morning and evening . And so she dep•rted into her chamber , and alexto to find forth Sandrico being big with joy ; until he had revealed his proceedings unto his friend , who at the hearing thereof was on a sudden so surprised , that he presently burst out as thus . 

Now by the greatest of my name i am possessed with an ecstasy of joy to see the pernament affections of the loyal Lady so well concur & sympathize as rivals to thy best wishes , for now could i bless myself to think that fancy should be so extravagantly predomiminant over me as to lead me into a labyrinth of fond contemplations , that i should urge thy goodness to believe their sex to be implacable , hard hearted monster that i was ; fair Angelica thou sole possessor of Europe's choicest rarities , i have uttered blasphemy against thy goodness , and the member with which 't was perpetrated May never accent drop from thence ; nay , May it cease to stir within his roof , unless it be dipped in oil of war by loves right hand , whereby with polished phrase as 't were from some mercurial wit , and by your goodness lycenced then let it warble , and with Philomelian notes drown the groves sweet harmony , May it pierce the skies and make the gods attentive , nay force their echoes to th' applause of feminine loyalty , that the lower world May stand affrighted to the rapture , and if i cannot attain unto this ample manner of blazing virtue , heavenly Angelica metamorphose me to less than nothing , and May your more than saintlike sex conspire to afflict me as you please . Then replied alexto , where 's wit and policy , where are the documents you would indoctrinate me with ? I cannot choose but smile to think that my tutor is captivated . 

Not captivated , nor in love , said Sandrico , but my rash abuses unto the sex so undeservedly committed , for which I 'll conjure up my wits , and raise my genius within the circle of this globall head of mine , to limb Angelica with poesy as thus . 

To his genius . 

Mount up my genius , aptly seek to raise 
a Roman Dame unto a goddess praise . 
Limb forth her feature , and display her race , 
Figure her amply in her active grace . 
Call not to aid the dryads or satyrs , 
High topped nymphs , or Jove's time measuring daughters : 
These are too common , and so hacknesed they 
To poets , abortive brats , therefore not May 
be here corrival in this scene of thine , 
Which must be guided by a hand divine , 
Invoke the gods , and call the heavens for aid , 
Vesta shall homage , Diana be dismayed , 
When imitable art shall here make known 
This magazine , whose merits enrich her own , 
Flame blazon , and reciprocally touch 
Each lineament of nature , and think much 
Heavens should not echo unto each shrill voice , 
That heralds virtue , and makes her thy choice . 


Now by my honour , said alexto , thou hast invoked thy genius in more than common phrase . 

Tush , replied Sandrico , this is but a flourish , commanding my genius servile to my will , while thus i herald forth her fame . 

Vncloud the ebon arches of thy brows 
Wherein two suns are throned , which heaven allows : 
The curious Spinstry of thy tresses dangle 
With radiant pride , thy lovers to entangle , 
And from the superficies of thy face 
There flow Arabian odours which do grace , 
The gods which they embrace , as ch•ice perfumes 
and silver pride , do fan it through their rooms : 
Two rows of pointed pearl , thy teeth resemble , 
From thy blessed paps , the nutriment of heaven . 
Because such twins and pretty hilloeks round 
With azure veins on goddess are not found ; 
The straight proportion of thy slender waste 
Invites the gods to be by them embraced , 
And thy fair hands Might i presume to kiss 
No more I 'd ask , 't is too too heavenly a bliss , 
'Cause my o'er greedy lip i fear would leave 
Some deep impression , or itself bereave . 
Of happiness : i dare no further run , 
My unexperienced muse commands me shun . 
To flatter any but keep time , and place 
For she is timorous i should disgrace 
Her modesty : if from the wast i fall , 
To treat of lower parts i hear her call , 
Plead then Angelica thou art the cause 
Makes me thus rude , and to forget her laws . 


On my life , thy pardon is gained , said alexto , and thy genius hath nobly seconded thy will . Whilst they were thus discoursing , and walking towards the palace , alexto perceiving Angelica coming from the walks , cried out to Sandrico , o unexpected happiness ! From yonder heavenly bower my comet shoots towards me , 't is my Angelica , let us haste with active willingness to prevent her nimble steps , lest the earth grows too superbious and plains her furrowed front by her saintlike footing on it , propitious morn betide my heavenly love , their glorious canopies protect thee still . 

I congratulate thy love , answered Angelica , and no less do my best wishes return to thee , and thy noble associate , and with my lips i seal my vow on thine , but prithee tell me , what giddy humour drew you here so soon , i would have stolen on you as unawares to both , but your too curious eyes prevented my intent ; i kiss thy bounty , love , and May it ever flow with such sweet goodness towards me , said Alexto , then said Sandrico it was this pleasant morn , but more especially to gaze upon your place of residence , alexto being desirous to participate of your odorous breath , lest the gods should surfeit by the gentle winds dispersing of it , and so bereave him of his happiness , Angelica vowed that some poetical fury had possessed Sandrîcoes' breast , which Alexto verified , desiring her to witness how well his morning muse had clothed her excellency , so soon as Angelica had perused the precedent lines of sandricos , she merrily answered , that if she were not linked in affection to Alexto , she could become amorous of him , but love , said she , opportunity will not smile upon us with conveniency of longer time , lest my present miss should prove the unhappy hindrance of our quotidial meetings , but here before thy friend , i vow myself as real thine as thy chaste thoughts could wish me , and ere one mouths sun should through the zodiac run Hymen shall celebrate what our plighted faiths engage us to , me et te sola mors separabit . with that Alexto embracing her in his arms , thus answered . hic est verus amor ; qui nos conjungit in unum , et ligat aeternâ mutua corda fide ; and as our laws require , for the ampler gordianizing of the vow , give me an amblet of thy hair , to tie , a true loves knot , Angelica answered , he that was owner of her and hers should not be denied in his request : and so soon as she had presented him a trace of her hair , she proffered to depart ; but Alexto requested her longer stay until he had gratified her bounty . 

So tying her hair between them in a true lover's knot , she put it on his wrist , and alexto sung unto her as followeth . 

Though that my wrist doth wear 
An amblet of thy hair ; 
yet my heart doth bear 
Such correspondency , 
That of force , 
No remorse , 
But thou still must lie 
Incloseted by me , 
Thy portraiture must be 
The hourly bliss i see , 
So amply is it placed , 
That my eye , 
May descry , 
By what my heart is graced . 
a salamander's urn , 
Within whose flames i burn , 
The ashes i return 
To thee a sacrifice : 
'Cause my heart , 
Thy nobler part 
Much highly doth it praise . 
Here May you see the breast 
Of him that cannot rest 
That is with love possessed 
By sighs anatomised 
Yet must be 
Subject to thee 
Thou hast him so surprised . 
Commiserate my zeal , 
In which i do reveal , 
( Ere it further steal ) 
A love recipocrall , 
Which i owe 
And bestow 
At thy command and call . 
Be not marble-hearted , 
Ere i am departed 
Let my boon be granted : 
Repentance comes too late 
At the door 
I implore 
Since 't is the will of fate . 
If all this cannot move 
Thee to grant him love , 
When as he doth remove 
Thy tears cannot prevail , 
In thy prime 
Use thy time 
And fond passion quail . 
Were thy love a fleeter 
And a common greeter 
Of affections meeter , 
Than thou Might'st disdain . 
Since not so , 
As you know , 
Ease his tortured pain . 
Inconstancy to thee 
As chief of his degree 
he 's vowed for to be 
Be not implacable 
For of none 
But thee one 
Is he now pregnable . 
If badness by his visit 
He did ere solicit , 
May he always miss it ; 
His chaster thoughts doth scorn 
To undo 
Him , or you , 
So in hell's flames to burn . 
For all that he requires , 
And by his hopes desires , 
For to allay his fires 
Is a chaste embracing : 
For you know , 
You do owe , 
Affections interlacing . 
Yet had Hymen but once done , 
Those rites we will not shun , 
Till than i mourn , i burn , 
And am afflicted still , 
But o no , 
't is not so . 
Cause i shall have my will . 
Peace war , where e'er i be , 
The last i am sure to see : 
Because i war in peace for thee , 
Than prayers still be made 
For us both , 
That were loathe , 
Virtue to have betrayed . 
When death shall close mine eye , 
Thy bracelet then shall lie 
As deep enclosed as i , 
Let writers vent their wit 
For thy sake , 
Which i take , 
Death parts not me and it . 


After alexto had thus ended , it pleased Angelica's fancy very much , she making a reiteration of all her precedent protestation : unto him , vowing what ere she perpetrated ; sprung from that which was enacted in her breast , so with much amorous dalliance as befits lovers to disport time with , they with a very willing unwillingness , for that time parted , where we will leave her entering of her palace , and Alexto and sandrico to their accustomed chamber . 

You have heard of this their several meetings , and how lovingly they accorded together , but fortune proved herself envious , as to mix his present joys with perpetual sorrows , for ere the time was totally expired , the Duke of Aragon arrived at the palace , who was very nobly entertained by the Lady and her attendants , but to cut off prolixity , he became her suitor , and so fervently , that nothing could repulse his forwardness . 

The Lady being mightily perplexed thereat , knew not how to demean herself , for fain she would , yet loath she was to condescend , because her vows were passed to alexto , and the worm of conscience turning round , did solicit her •aress with the sting of memento , thus betwixt fear and hope or rather falsehood and dissembling , she remained the most part of a day , but at last considering with herself , Alexto was but a Lord , the other a Duke , who was esteemed a potent monarch , she concluded utterly to renounce Alexto , and to entertain the Duke into her favour , and studied with herself how to accomplish it , without the impeachment of her honour : at last she resolved not to make a perfect semblance of rejecting him at first , but by degrees requiting his amorous glances with coy and disdainful frowns , and to repute his modest embraces lascivious clasps . 

With this resolution she went to meet the affectionate Alexto , who expected her presence in the garden , musing at her long delay , but when he perceived her coming , he arose from the bank to meet her proferring embracement , she refusing it , answered that , that was childish play , and fit for rurals , than these of their degrees , at which Alexto much marvelled , little conceiving her drift and policy therein , yet had he no great cause to admire , because Plato reports that the ferventest mind May be changed between evening and morning : besides how could truth be expected to lie in falsehood ? 

But Alexto rousing his decaying spirits , thus answered . Lady is your love like your beauty , both fading like a rose in June ? you said a sliding knot was soon loose , and that lovers vows couple no constraint , but like fetters made of glass , that glister much but speedily break ; your gestures make your words apparent , yet in your vowing you gave me heart and hand . I mean no otherwise ( Quoth she ) unto you , if ever i marry yourself shall be him that shall crown my brows with a laurel wreath , why said alexto , the time of our marriage is limited , and is almost expired . 

With this discourse they spent their time ▪ alexto urging her still to remember her promise , in so much that Angelica flung forth of the arbour very much discontented , alexto after her requesting her stay and further conference , she neither returned , answered nor looked , but shrouding subtlety beneath the mask of anger , went her way , leaving alexto solitary to himself , who stayed not long but went to Sandrico , who was the mitigator of his distress : and no sooner did he meet with him , but he thus began . 

To a man in misery , life seemeth too long , but to a worldly minded man living in pleasure life seemeth too short . 

Pliny reports , a detestable life removeth all merit of honourable burial , for it is a pilgrimage , a shadow of joy , a glass of inflrmity , and the perfect pathway to death : for Philip King Alexander's father falling upon the sands , and seeing there the mark and print of his body , said , how little a plot of ground is nature content with ! And the life of man fadeth like a shadow , yet do we covet the whole world . 

Sandrico all this while remained astonished , little deeming his Lady was the original of this his distemperature , but thus interrupted him ? 

What unexpected stratagem hath thus perplexed thy mind , condensed your understanding exiled your judgement , betrayed your spirits to disquiet passions , and leading yourself captive to fond contemplation ! Oh my Sandrico , answered alexto , the pinnace of my affection is like to sustain ship wrack on the waves of her inconstancy : she begins to disdain me , whom formerly she loved , the world seduceth the eye with variety of objects , the scent with sweet confections , the taste with all delicious dainties , the touch with soft flesh , the body with precious clothings , and all is but the inventions of vanity . 

Tush , said Sandrico , admit she doth forsake thee , as 't is impossible , never grieve therefore , for that grief is best digested , that brings not open shame , but now you have no such cause of mourning , then cease these brinish tears . 

't is true , said alexto , Homer so spoke , but what answered Seneca , we shall sooner want tears , than cause of mourning in this life , and Gregory said tears crave compassion , and submission deserveth forgiveness : but i answer thee as Solon , who , burying his son , wept bitterly , being requested to the contrary , cause his tears were in vain , for that cause i weep the more ( Quoth he ) because i cannot prevail by weeping . Come , come , said Sandrico , to weep for toyish love thou dost impair thy worth ; cease then this , which is the very common emblem of dissimulation . 

For its common in the eye of a strumpet & like heat-drops in a bright sunshine , and as much to be pitied as the weeping of a crocodile , and peradventure thy Mrs. dropped angry words to try thy constancy , and Might act this with the counterfeit tragedians of Smyrna , who lifting up their bloody hands to the skies , and their eyes steadfastly fixed on the earth , cries coelum , meaning the heavens ; come , come , thy Lady is loyally affectionated towards thee to my knowledge ; then answered Alexto , she did disdain me that i should touch her lips and at her departure she gave me not a word , but went away in silence , i like not this muta eloquentia . Sandrico then mistrusted the worst ; but to hearten on his friend ; thus replied , perhaps more eyes were present then your own , and that she Might fear , or she gave you some private sign by which you Might understand her meaning , and peradventure you did not conceive thereof ; for Caesar writ unto his captains per notas by marks and notes , lest his letters should be understood by his soldiers , and Tarquin the proud was sent unto by his son Sextus , to know what he should do by the Gabians , he brought the messenger into a garden and with his staff , altissima papaperum capita decussit , the messenger wondered at the strategem , but Sextus understood his father's mind . So he Might give some private note and pass away silent . 

Then answered Alexto , i like not such notes to write as Demetrius did on sand , or as Pythagoras did on glass , nor as Damaratus on wood ; therefore what wilt thou advise me to do , to answer her dumb gesture ? Sandrico requested him to write some amorous lines unto her in courting sort , and he would present them . Alexto condescended thereunto and writ as ensuing : Thy coral lips and rosy cheeks , my dear , 
They were the flame that fired me so near ; 
In troth they were , nay more , they are indeed 
The glowing coals that first this fire did breed . 
Thy eyes also doth wound me in such sort 
I feign them not , my sighs May well report 
Worthiest of all , that seemest so lovely fair , 
Reject me not , nor cause me to despair . 
You are the only motive of my pain , 
Then let me not of cruelty complain ; 
But give relief , for little dost thou know 
How much for thee , i fettered am in woe : 
Pen's cannot write , nor rightly tongues declare 
That fervent love , which to thyself i bare . 
Whereof , alas ! my young spirit quaffed so deep , 
That drunk with love my reason falls asleep ; 
For i whom fortune now hath blinded so 
Did ne'er till now the art of wooing know : 
Then pity me , for it lies in thy will 
my loathed life either to save or kill ; 
Let this suffice , for all the world May see ; 
The fault 's not mine 'cause thou hast wounded me . 




This being done , he delivered unto Sandrico , who willingly embraced it promising to present it , and while he is a seeking of the Lady , we meeting with her first , will treat with her a while , who remains not much discontented though for a while she seemed so , for she was sorry that she had been so rash with Alexto , yet glad that she had so quickly repulsed his forwardness , and in stead of being in the arms of alexto , she was embraced by the Duke of Aragon , from whose lap she had no sooner arose but she met with Sandrico , who presented her the letter , the which she received , but not so friendly as she was wont , and breaking it up perceiving it somewhat large , tore it in pieces saying ; she scorned to peruse such tedious epistles , and in rage she flung away ere Sandrico could answer her a word , who was amazed to see such a sudden alteration , then assuring himself , she had forsook Alexto for ever , and very sorrowful bearing the Dolefull tidings in his front , returned unto him , declaring what had happened . 

At which Alexto fell into a grievous transe , but being somewhat recovered bursts into this lunatic speech . 

Contorted locks of furies i could tear , 
Kick Hercules from damned Acheron , 
And make the triple-headed bandog roar , 
Pluto confront within his letty throne , 
And sink cursed Charon in his ferry boat , 
Teach me narcissus-like who in a brook , 
To kiss himself , himself there hath forsook . 
Teach me with Dicas still in blood to weep ▪ 
And with Philistus waking always sleep : 
Let me with dropsy thirsting astus drink , 
the poisoned stuff that run from Nero's sink , 
Or quaff that potion which Aga•ta made 
When he supposed Alphonso was betrayed : 
If neither drink nor quaff , then let me sup 
My fatal draught from Alexander's cup ; 
〈◊〉 with Philotus to a dungeon high , 
Where I 'll remain still in obscurity ; 
And with Bassacus never more behold 
sol's radiant beams , transparent to the gold 
O! that i were a basilisk , that i 
Might venom her , or else unvenomed die : 
let me work spite on her , as antoes did 
Conjuring her still in her tortured bed 
Put my on a robe that May consume to bone , 
This flesh of mine , in tomb me in that stone 
Where petius lies in the Elysian green , 
Who died for love , and lives there to be seen ; 
It is a woman that hath wronged me this , 
And cursed me now when i expect a bliss . 


Then Sandrico answered , fly not with Apollo after Daphne ; Diana hath more nymphs as fair , and yet not so coy , use love , yet wrestle with Cupid and hold him as a boy , consider as she is fair , so she is cruel , and as she is well featured so she is perjured , the curious herbalists measure not their plants by their colours but by their properties , the lapidaries value their stones not by their outward hew , but by their secret virtues ; for a diamond with a cloud is cast into the goldsmith's dust , then let lillies wither on the stems , and wear violets both in heart , and hand , the one is fair but unsavoury ; the other black but sweet and virtuous , but have a care lest the impression engender some exorbitant passion in thee . I could repeat many that have been perplexed by the heroical passion of love , but these one or two shall suffice to prevent the enormities that May ensue , if you proceed in these frantic fits : for there was one locustus that had been served in the like manner , as the Lady serves you , on which he grew frantic , and meeting a friend of his , requested him to be his second : his friend condiscending . locustus carried him to the church of St.  Mark , at which time the Duke of Venice was resident , who assoon as this dotard saw him , he cried out to his companion , see there is he with whom i have the quarrel , let us set upon him , pointing to the Duke , and if he had not been resisted by the guard , he had committed the outrage ; and the distemperature of Ajax first sprung from love , of whom we read in our Grecian fables ; by this and the like discourse he had so well quailed Alexto's passion that he fell into a fine slumber , but presently starts and being again awaked , he begun to call to mind the fantasy that had possessed his brain in that his slumber , and thus cried out , oh Sandrico , i have dreamt that Angelica is married . 

Tush , answered Sandrico , that i cannot believe , and credit no dreams ; for they be fables , and commonly fall out by contraries , as they appear ; for Hamilcar general for the Carthagenians , laying siege at Ciracusa , an image came to him in his sleep , telling him , that he should the next night sup as conqueror in Siracusa , and sup there he did , but as a prisoner and captive by the Siracusians , and not as a captain by his Carthagenians ; the like did Julius Caesar , the night before he was slain , he dreamt that he was sitting by Jupiter's seat , but suddenly he fell flat with his face on the ground ; therefore we must not cocker our genius and flatter ourselves with what we conceive in such illusions . 

But , said Alexto , me thought there was great triumphs at the solemnization thereof , and that he and divers other nobles were presenting of a masque and dancing . 

Be it so or not , how shall we come to speech with Angelica ? 

Why , said Sandrico , pen another epistle , and i vow to thee she shall read it , or I 'll engrave it on her breast , and at the back side of the walks thou shalt be placed , and while we are in parley , hasten to us whereby we shall decide it , and not letting of it hang in suspense any longer . Alexto condescended , and went to study , whereat we leave him to speak with the Duke of Aragon , who was with the Lady Angelica , and after divers of his courtings , she thus beg•n to answer him ; renowned Duke , shame and infamy waits at the heels of unbridled desire , for as lust , is an enemy to the purse , a foe to the person , a canker to the mind , a corrosive to the conscience , a weakener of the wit , a besotter of the senses , and finally a mortal ba•e to all the body . So you shall find pleasure in the pathway to perdition , and lusting love , the loadstone to ruth , and ruin . 

The Duke protested he meant verily to make her sole owner & governor to him and his , if she would but requite him with her lasting affection : she promised him , so he would utterly renounce all suspicion , and as having no cause given by her so he would not lay hold on every frivolous occasion whereby jealousy Might proceed ; for i will relate a jealous humour , and the ill conveniency thereof , said she , and thus she begun . 

A jealous man is suspicious ever more , judging the worst ; for if his wife be merry , he thinketh her immodest ; if sober , sullen ; if pleasant , inconstant ; if she laugh , it is lewdly ; if she look , it is lightly ; so he is still casting beyond the moon , and watcheth as the crafty cat over the silly mouse ; for if the heart be once infected herewith , his sleeps are broken and dreams prove unquiet , the whole night is consumed in slumber , thoughts and cares , the day in woe , vexation , and misery : besides , my Lord , the jealous man living dies , and dying prolongs out his life in passion worse than death , none looketh on his love but ( Suspicious ) says , this is he that would be corrival in my favours ; none knocketh at the door , but starting up , he imagines them to be the messengers , of fancy ; none talks but they whisper of affection ; if she frown she hates him , and loves others ; if she smile it is because she hath had success in her love , looks she frowardly on any man , she dissembles , if she favours him with a gracious eye ; then , as a man possessed with a frenzy , he cryeth out , that neither fire in straw , nor love in a woman's looks can be concealed ; thus doth he live restless , and maketh love , that is sweet in itself , more bitter than gall : consider this my Lord ; for should you perpetrate the like , it would make a woman wanton , if she were born to chastity . 

But by this time Alexto had penned his epistle , therefore we will leave her subtlety proceeding in her rhetoric , thereby yoking the Duke unto her servitude , and return unto him , who was reading what he had writ unto Sandrico ; and this was it . 

Shall i be stabbed with poniards of disdain , 
Or languish still in my obscurest pain ? 
For in my heart thy worth is firmly fixed , 
my groaning sighs with tears are intermixed ; 
As spider's webs hold fast the silly fly : 
Entangled so , by thy fair self am i : 
Why planted i hearts-ease , and rue must gather , 
As i did sow , i should have reaped rather : 
This is a paradox beyond relief , 
That i in anguish should prolong my grief . 


After Sandrico had perused these lines , without intermission he prosecuted the delivery , knowing the Lady frequented the walks in the cool of the day , and thither being both come , though unseen , yet they saw the Lady Angelica embraced by the Duke of Aragon , to whom she had newly contracted herself . 

Alexto being conveniently placed , Sandrico undaunted proceeded towards her , where she starting up from the Duke's lap demanded the original of his abrupt intrusion , Sandrico said , Lady you must and shall peruse each syllable enclosed here , delivering her the letter , at which the Duke begun to storm , but she having her tricks briefer than her pater noster , soon pacified the Duke , telling him , he was a gentleman sewer to a kinsman of hers , from whom she did not much desire to be solicited , so craving pardon , and his patience , descended the mount and read what was enclosed . 

Sandrico demanded her answer , why that i am otherwise provided , quoth she . With that Alexto did approach , vowing not to be so satisfied , at whose coming she did sustain an agony which more tortured her , then if grim death had seized each part ; then said Alexto , Lady will you falsify your vows , she replied , that she never made any , and demanded his witness , i have none said alexto , but Sandrico and your own conscience ; otherwise , wherefore did you use me so respectively , retaining me into your favour , why , as my servant she replied , for that was your first request at your entering of my palace , and so i have Counted of you and ever will , if you be resident with me . 

Lady answered Sandrico , you are false and disloyal , you are like the mandrake apple , comely in show , but baneful in taste , and for your ingratitude , you are worse than the serpent , who hath venom to annoy others , but not himself . And then Alexto begun , Lady is this equity and justice ? Oh no ; for justice consists of eight parts , friendship , concord , godliness , humanity , gratefulness , faithfulness , and virtuousness , but you have neither ; for it is the badge of virtue , the staff of peace , and the maintenance of honour . Oh that i were but some sorcerer as cyrce , who altered the shapes of men and women , to bears , wolves , lions , asses , apes and the like ; whereby i Might make some metamorphose of thee , if your sex were not worse than ours ! Wherefore doth serpents engender in your reins , and toads in dead men's skulls ; and so fare you well , said Angelica . 

Alexto seeing himself utterly cast off , was desperate , but Sandrico persuaded him as followeth : 

He that bruiseth the olive tree with hard iron fetcheth out no oil but water , and he that pricketh a proud heart with persuasions draweth out nothing but hate and envy ; therefore let her go , as better lost then found ; for Aristotle reporteth , that a virgin's heart is like a cotton tree , whose fruit is so hard in the bud , that it soundeth like steel , and being ripe putteth forth nothing but wool . 

Oh , said Alexto , that i could with Aristotle throw myself into the Euripus , saying . quia te non capio tu me capies . 

Be not wilful said Sandrico , to destroy thyself ; for many happen to die by chance , whose causes are unknown and obscured ; many by infirmity , whose causes are apparent , many by age , whose causes are present , but some die neither by chance , infirmity nor age , but die for want of grace to live longer . 

Shall i kill her then , said Alexto , oh no , quoth Sandrico : how frequent is it , that such men have been frequented with horrible fantasies and imaginations , which come into their heads both sleeping and waking . 

So thierie King of Italy being a Goeth by nation , after he had slain Symmachus and Bo•tius his sons , as Procopius reports , it seemed to him that he saw in the head of a fish served on his table the face of Symmachus in a horrible shape and fashion , knitting of his brows gogling of his eyes , biting his lip for very anger ; the conceit thereof so perplexed the King , that he fell sick and died ; this is the usual course of murderers than replied alexto , thou art a Plato unto me , and i like Dionysius abstain from much tyranny by thy good counsel , then let her live like the Dame in the triumphs of Olympus , for every owl to spend a whoop at . And I 'll be warned never to fall into such folly again , and learn that lesson which Socrates taught his scholars , which was reminiscere . 

And nothing sinketh deeper nor cleaveth faster in the mind of a man , than those counsels which he learned in his childhood , which i will with Augustine say , Antide me semen juvenes , and well note what i have sustained by a trothless woman . But had i took thy advice , Sandrico , this had not happened ; but as cypress trees , the more they be watered , the more they wither , and the oftener they be lopped , the sooner they die , so unbridled youth , the more it is by grave advise counselled , the sooner it falleth to confusion . But if youth blush nor at beauty , and carry not antidotes of wisdom against flattery , folly will be the next haven ▪ he shall harbour in . Experience lets me know so much ; for as the strong bitterness of aloe takes away the sweetness of honey , so evil works destroy and take away the praise of good deeds . 

As wine in Plato's opinion is the daughter of verity : so love , in Jamlicus censure , is the fruit of idleness : for Sophocles being demanded what harm he would wish to his enemy ; he answered , that he Might love where he were not fancied ; I 'll therefore describe what love is . 

For Love's indeed a fury fetch 't from hell , 
Making thoughts metaphors where it doth dwell ; 
With Morpheus dreams such always are possessed , 
Hunting with sighs to keep themselves at rest : 
love 's a madness , a restless agony , 
which makes the eyes two fountains never dry : 
It is a harsh , and uncontrolled desire 
Which makes men burn , and live in Cupid's fire , 
Then why , say i to burn in Cupid's fire , 
When none that 's wise need 's care for Cupid's ire ? 
He is a child and fears Diana's rod , 
At which he stands as Mars to Venus stood ▪ 
But Venus unto love was ne'er a nurse , 
Alas , Love's kept by fancy , which proves worse , 
Fancy breeds love , love then breeds doubts and fears , 
Engendering thus , till it 's expressed with tears : 
doubts are as perilous as the quick sand , 
And fear makes lovers in amazemet stand ; 
These are the rocks where loves boat 's cast away , 
Making men live , to die with their delay : 
But what is fancy , when it is defined , 
Why love , and fancy , brings men to be shrined ; 
Her chariot is of a silkworms head , 
The silk-worms silk within serves for her bed : 
The wheels whereon , this chariot doth run 
Are of the motes discovered by the sun : 
Her nimble whips the fore-rib of a spider , 
two gnats do draw and one is the out-rider : 
This buzzing runs within a lover's brain , 
Making their vitals stupefied with pain . 


Cleobulus meeting with his son ireon solemnising the ceremony of marriage , gave him in his hand a branch of henbane , meaning thereby that the virtuous disposition of a wife is never so perfect , but it is interlaced with some froward fancies , but I 'll only define what Angelica is , my Sandrico , and so leave her with frantic love . 

Catch me a star that falleth from the sky 
cause an immortal creature for to die , 
Drive with a wand back Neptun's flowing seas , 
Sail through this centre to antipodes ; 
Call time again , and hasten future things ; 
•ay nutriment the Eastern bird us brings ; 
Say that Phoebus is fixed in his course , 
And from the skies we have but small remorse ; 
Infuse long life into a breathless creature . 
Say that we are made but not by nature ▪ 
The winged messenger stop his career , 
And bring a satire unto human fear ▪ 
say Acheron is light , and hell 's not hell , 
But a vast chaos for savages to dwell ; 
Say Jove ne'er thundered Mars his sword ne'er drew , 
Venus no wanton , these are all as true , 
As to find faith in fair Angelica's mind , 
Apparent 't is that such proves never kind ; 
But them I 'll leave unto their own designs , 
Desiring fates , to turn men's amorous minds . 


No sooner had Alexto ended , but on a sudden he was all surprised ; each limb was disjointed and sought to separate themselves as strangers to their fellows ; but Sandrico cheering him up , desired him to be frolic still , this sudden agony ( Said he ) prognosticaters , be it bad or ill , welcome the will of fates , we are both armed to stand the hazard , and with each other participate what fortune shall allot us : but whilst they were thus discoursing , they perceiving Angelica's squire coming from the palace posted to meet them , for so Angelica had cunningly contrived , the time being expired of her appointed marriage to the Duke of Aragon , and to give a full period to Alexto's further solicitation of her love , sent him a letter to this effect . 

Noble Alexto 

What antipathy nature could produce , in an affectionate way was still thy own , and not to make thee proud thine then , is mine now , i relent and crave pardon for my arrogancy , for love hath made a changeling of me now , and lent me wings to top the highest plume of amorous conceits thou soarest withal within this hour , meet me at the temple where Hymen shall marry us , forget , forgive , and believe what thou seest . 

Angelica . 

Alexto at the reading of the letter was very much surprised with an ecstasy of joy , and presently sent his picture unto Angelica , returning this answer ; i send myself , because myself will not be absent , and presently after himself with his friend , went towards the temple , and coming somewhat nigh they beheld Angelica with all her train , and Hymen leading them towards the temple , but supposing them to be goddesses ; look , quoth Sandrico , if my thoughts prove not strangers to my wish , you gods , are come on purpose with masques and revelling to celebrate thy nuptials . 

I had thought , quoth Alexto ; our marriage should have been privately solemnised , but since it is their wills to have it publicly kept , I 'll not contradict it , but coming nearer into the temple , they beheld Angelica coming towards them arm in arm with the Duke of Aragon as from the marriage ; with that , Alexto burst out into a great fury , cried out . Were my eyes invited witnesses to testify against themselves their Master's ruin ? What shall i do , Sandrico ? Shall i with a poniard give a period to their days of joy , and make their grave serve for their wedding bed ? Restrain thy fury , aid Sandrico , put off this discontent and let a masque of pleasure veil thy face until they are over past us . 

But Angelica coming near them , gave them kind salutation , and thus begun : Lords you are both welcome to revel with us , i doubt not but you wish us joy ; your goodness towards us was never less , but for you alexto , i present this favour , wear it for our sake ; giving him backe his own picture with a wreath of willows about his neck , and so Angelica past away towards her palace , leaving Alexto in his raging fit , but being somewhat comforted by the good persuasions of Sandrico , Alexto was persuaded to go into the temple desiring Sandrico to accompany him , where he Might devoutly offer at fair Venus' altar the best of his devotions , and there exasperate his grief in hope her goodness would revenge his wrongs , the which being done , he desired Sandrico to accompany him to the palace , and being resolved not to be any way dismayed , but fortune frustrated their determination : for before they had gone half the way , they met with an aged palmer of whom they demanded what news at the palace , to whom he bitterly lamenting , informed them that the fair Angelica who was made this morn a happy bride , when in her palace she was throned , a buzzing horror did possess her ears , and nothing else was warbled by her tongue , but her Alexto , which she so often reiterated , that it caused a present astonishment to the honourable assembly , and in this frantic fit away she run , and the Duke after her , but getting up into the battlements of the palace , then casting herself from the walls , crying out , into thy arms , i come Alexto , and so with the fall was battered all in pieces . Then with protestation loud , the Duke vowed to be revenged on Alexto , and is at present in pursuit of him , but no sooner had the pilgrim ended his story , but the Duke presented himself in person , and after divers defiances between Alexto and himself , they encountered each other , in which the Duke receiving his mortal wound , speedily resigned his breath , at which Alexto crying out , the gods were just , and have at full revenged my injuries ; and now , Sandrico , let us haste away , there be certain Jews in the West part of India called Espi , who will eat no flesh , drink no wine , nor use the company of any woman , and thither let us go . 

Sandrico condescended and so they took their journey , in which we wish them happiness . 

Finis . 


































































