THE ARCHES OF TRIUMPH Erected in honour of the High and mighty prince . james. the first of that name . King , of England . and the sixth of Scotland . at his Majesty's Entrance and passage through his Honourable City & chamber of London . upon the 15th . day of march 1603 

Invented and published by Stephen Harrison . joiner and Architect : and graved by William Kip.  

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE SIR THOMAS BENNET KNIGHT , LORD MAYOR OF THIS CITY , THE RIGHT Worsipfull the Aldermen his brethren , and to those Worshipful Commoners , elected Committees , for the Managing of this Business . 

THE love which I bear to your Honour and Worships : and the duty wherewith I am bound to this honourable City , makes me appear in this boldness to you ; To whom I humbly consecrate these fruits of my invention , which Time hath now at length brought forth , and ripened to this perfection . That Magnificent Royalty , and glorious Entertainment , which you yourselves for your part , out of a free , a clear , and very bounteous disposition , and so many thousands of worthy Citizens , out of a sincere affection and loyalty of his Majesty , did with the sparing of no cost , bestow but upon one day , is here new wrought up again , and shall endure for ever . For albeit those Monuments of your Loves were erected up to the Clouds , and were built never so strongly , yet now their lastningnes should live but in the tongues and memories of men : But that the hand of Art gives them here a second more perfect being , advaunceth them higher than they were before , and warrants them that they shall do honour to this City , so long as the City shall bear a name . Sorry I am that they come into the world no sooner : but let the hardness of the labour ; and the small number of hands , that were busied about them , make the fault ( if it be a fault ) excusable . I would not care if these unpainted Pictures were more Costly to me , so that they might appear curious enough to your Lordship and Worships ; yet in regard , that this present Age can lay before you no Precedent that ever any in this land performed the like , I presume these my endeavours shall receive the more worthy liking of you . And thus Dedicating my Labours and Love to your honourable and kind Acceptations , I most humbly take my leave , this 16 of june 1604.  

Most affectionately devoted to your Lordship and Worships , Stephen Harrision . 

Ode . 

Babel that strove to wear 
A Crown of Clotheses , and up did rear 
her foreheadhye , 
With an ambitious lust to kiss the sky , 
Is n●w or dust , or not at all , 
proud Nymrod's wall , 
And all his Antique monuments , 
Left to the world as precedents , 
Cannot now show ( to tell where they did stand , ) 
So much in length as half the Bvilder's hand . 
The Mansolaean tomb ; 
The sixteen curious gates in Rome , 
which times prefer , 
Both past and present : Nero's Theatre , 
That in one day was all gilt o'er : 
Add to these more , 
Those Columns , and those Pyramids , that wone 
Wonder by height : the Coloss of the Sun : 
th' Egyptian Obelisks : are all forgotten : 
Only their names grow great : themselves be rotten . 
Dear friend ! what honour then 
Bestowest tho● on thy Country men ? 
Crowning with praise , 
By these thy labours , ( as with wreathes of bays ) 
this royal City : where now stand , 
( built by thy hand ) 
Her Arches in new state ; so made , 
That their fresh beauties ne'er shall fade : 
Tho● of our English Triumphs rearest the Fame , 
Bo●e those of old ; But above all , thy nam● . 
Tho. Dekker . 

Ode . 

Tri●mpheses were wont with sweat and blood be crowned : 
To e●ery brow 
They did allow . 
The li●ing Laurer which begirted round 
Their rusty Helmets , and had power to m●ke 
The Soldier smile , while mortal wound did ache . 
But our more civil passages of state 
( like happy feast 
of Enured rest 
Which bells and woundless Canons did relate , ) 
Stood high in joy : since warlike Triumphs bring , 
Remembrance of our former sorrowing . 
The memory of these should quickly fade , 
( for pleasures stream 
is like a dream . 
Passant and fleet as is a shade , ) 
Unless thyself which these fair Models bred , 
Had given them a new life when they were dead . 
Take then ( good Country man and friend ) that merit , 
which folly lends . 
( not i●dgement sends , ) 
To foreign sh●reses for stranger to inherit : 
Perfection must be bold with front upright , 
Though En●y g●ash her teeth whilst she would bite . 
joh. Webster . 

The Device called Londinium . 

These five Triumphal Arches were first taken in hand in the beginning of April 1603. presently after his Majesty was proclaimed . It being expected ●hat his passage would have been through his honourable City and Chamber to his Coronation upon Saint james his day ●ollowing : But by reason of the sickness , it pleased his Majesty to be solemnly Crowned at Westminster , without sight of these Triumphs : Notwithstanding the business being set on foot , went on with all expedition ; till Bartholomew-tide and then ceased because of the great mortality , 40. days more was given for the preparing of this Triumphal Arch. In which time , the str●eteses for that purpose were diligently surveyed , heighths , breadts and distances taken , as it were to make Fortifications for the ●lemnitiess : Seven pieces of ground like so many fields for a battle ) were plotted forth , upon which these Triumphs should be erected : The gladsome and long desired Morning at length is come , In which the Streets seem to be paved with people , that in heaps flock together , to behold their proud heads that were advanced in this manner . 

THE first ●egme was erected in Fanchurch-street , the back of it so learning on the East end of the Church , that it overspread the whole street . And thus we describe it . 

It was a Flat-square , builed upright ; the Perpendicular-line of the whole Frame , ( that is to ●ay , the distance from the bottom to the top , ) as the Ground-line , is ( also in this , so in all the rest ) to be found out and tried by the Scale , divided by 1. 2. 3. 4. and 5. and set at the lower end of the Piece : By which figures feet are represented : So that in all the descriptions , where mention is to be made of Heights , Breadths , or any other Commensurable proportions , you shall find them left thus — with a blank , because we wish you rather to apply them to the Scale yourself , then by setting them down , to call either your skill or judgement in question . 

And note withal , that the Ground-plot hath not the same Scale which the upright hath , for of the two Scales , which you see annexed , the Lesser is of the Ground , and standeth in the Ground-plot , the Greater , for the Edisice or Building itself . 

This Gate of Passage , than ( into which his Majesty made his first entrance ) was derived from the Tuscana ( being the principal pillar of those 5. upon which the Noble Frame of Architecture doth stand , ) for the Tuscan Column is the strongest & most worthy to support so famous a Work , as this Fabric was , considering that upon his Rustic Pillars , the goodliest Houses , Turrets , Steeples , etc. within this City , were to be born : And those Models , stood as a Coronet on the forehead or Battlements of this Great and Magnificent Edisice . 

The cheeks or sides of the Gate , were ( as it were ) doubly guarded with the Portraitures of Atlas' King of Mauritania , who ( according to his own shortness and thickness ) from the Symmetry of his foot , caused a pillar to be made , whose height with Base and Capital was 6. times the thickness in height . And so is this of ours , bearing the name of Tuscana , as we said before , and reaching to the very point of the Arch , from whence we did derive Dorica which bore up the Architive , Freeze , and Coronix , and was garnished with Corbels or Croxtels sitting such work , besides the beauty of Pyramids , Beasts , Water , Tables , and many other enrichments , which you may find expressed in the Piece itself . 

From a Gallery directly over the gate , the sound of loud Music ( being the Waits and Oboes of the City ) was sent forth . 

At the foot of the Battlements was in Capital letters inscribed this word Londinium , & beneath that , these words Camera Regia . 

In this Pegma or Arch Triumphal , were placed 12. personages , of which she that had the preeminence to sit highest , was called Monarchia Britannica . 

At her feet sat Divine Wisdom . On her right hand sat three of the daughters of Genius Vrbis , whose names were 

Veneration , 
Promptitude , 
Vigilance : 
On her left , the other three , viz.  

Gladness , 
Loving Affection , 
Vnanimit●se . 


Beneath all these stood the Genius of the City , richly attired , being supported on the right hand by a person figuring The Council of the City ; and on the left by a person figuring the Warlike force of the City . 

Directly under these , in an Aback thrust out before the rest , lay Thamesis the River , leaning his Arm upon a ●●●rde , out of which , water with live fishes were seen to run forth , and play about him . 

The speakers were only Thamesis and Genius , who uttered these speeches following on the other side . 

The speeches of Gratulation . 

GENIUS .  Time , Fate , and Fortune have at length conspired , 
To give our Age the day so much desired . 
What all the minutes , hours , weeks , months , and years , 
That hang in file upon these silver hairs , 
could not produce , beneath the Britain stroke , 
The Ro●an , Sax●n , Dane , and Norman yoke , 
This ●oint of Time bathe done ▪ Now London rear● 
Thy forehead high , and on it strive to we●re 
Thy 〈◊〉 Gems● Teach thy step Towe●s to rise 
Higher with people : S●t with sparkling eyes 
Thy spacious windows : and in eu●ry street , 
Let thronging ●oy , Love , and Amazement meet . 
Cleave all the air with shouts , and let the cry 
Strike through as long , and universally 
As thunder ; For , thou now art blessed to see 
That sight , for which thou didst begin to be . 
When Brutus plough first gave thee infant bounds , 
And ● , thy GENIUS walks auspicious rounds 
In every furrow ; then did I forelook , 
And saw this day marked white in Clotho's book . 
The several Circles , both of change and sway , 
Within this Isle , there also figured lay : 
Of which the greatest , perfectest , and last 
Was this , whose present happiness we taste . 
Why keep yo● silence Daughters ? What dull peace 
Is this inhabits you ? Shall office cease 
Upon th●aspect of him , to whom you owe 
〈…〉 Shall TIME know , 
That 〈◊〉 , wherein your flame stood still , 
An 〈…〉 Now heaven avert an I 'd 
Of that black look . E'er pause possess your breasts 
I w●sh you more of Plagues : " Zeal when it rests , 
Leaves to be zeal . Up thou tame RIVER , wake , 
And from thy liquid limbs this slumber shake : 
thou drownest thyself in inofficious s●eepe ; 
An● these thy sluggish waters seem to creep , 
Rather them flow . Uprise , and swell with pride 
Above thy banks . " Now is not every Tide . 


THAMESIS .  TO what vain end should I contend to show 
〈…〉 powers , when Seas of pomp o'erflow 
The Cities' ●ace : and cover all the shore 
W●th sand is more rich than Tagus' wealth ore ? 
When in the stood of I●y , that comes with him , 
He drowns the world ; yet makes it live and swim , 
And spring with gladness : Not my fishes here , 
Though they be dumb , but do express the cheer 
o● these bright streams . no less may These , and I 
Boast our delights , albeed we silent lie . 


GENIUS .  Indeed , true Gladness doth not always speak : 
" joy bred and born but in the tongue , is weak . 
Ye● ( lest the fervour of so pure a flame , 
As this my City bears , might lose the name , 
Without the apt eventing of her heat ) 
Know greatest JAMES ( and no less good , than great . ) 
In the behalf of a●l my virtuous Sons , 
Whereof my elder there , thy pomp foreruns , 
( A Man without my flattering , or his Pride , 
As worthy , as he 's blessed ●o be thy guide ) 
In his grave name , and all his brethren's right , 
( Who thirst to drink the Nectar of thy sight ) 
The Council , Commoners , and Multitude ; 
( Glad , that this day so long denied , is viewed ) 
I tender thee the heartiest welcome , yet 
That ever King had to his Empire's seat : 
Ne●er came man , more longed for , more desired 
And being come , more reverenced , loved , admired : 
Hear , and record it : " In a Prince it is 
" no little virtue , to know who are ●is . 
With like devotions , do I stoopet'embrace 
This springing glory of thy Godlike race ; 
His Country's wonder , Hope , Love , joy and Pride : 
How well doth he become the royal side 
Of this erected , and broad spreading Tree , 
Under whose shade may Britain ever be . 
And from this branch , may thousand branches more 
Shoot o'er the Main , and knit with every shore 
In bonds of Marriage , Kindred , and Increase ; 
And style this Land , the Na●ill of their peace . 
This is your Servants wish , your City's vow , 
Which still shall propagate itself , with you ; 
And free from spurs of Hope , that slow minds 〈◊〉 : 
" He seeks no hire , that owes his life to Love. 
And here she comes that is no less a part 
In this day's greatness , then in my glad heart . 
Glory of Queens , and Glory of your Name , 
Whose Graces do as far outspeak your Fame , 
As Fame doth silence , when her Trumpet ring's 
You Daughter , Sister , Wife of several Kings : 
Besides Alliance , and the stile of Mother , 
In which one title you drown all your other . 
Instance , be that fair shoot , is gone before 
●our elder joy , and top of all your store , 
With those , whose sight to us is yet denied , 
But not our zeal to them , or aught beside 
This City can to you : For whose estate 
She hope's you will be still good Advocate 
To her best Lord So , whilst you mortal are , 
no taste of sour mortality once dare 
Approach your house ; nor Fortune greet your Gra●● 
But coming on , and with a forward face . 




The Italians Pegma stood in Gracious-street . 

THE second Triumphal Arch was erected by the Italians : the cost theirs : the Invention their own : It took up the whole breadth of Gracious-street ( on which it stood ) being — foot : the height of it was — foot . The lower part of this Building , was a large square , garnished with four great Corinthia Columns : In the midst of which square , was cut out a fair and a Spacious high gate , Arched , being — foot in the Perpendicular-line , and — in the Ground-line : directly over the gate were advanced the Arms of the Kingdom , the Supporters whereof were fairly cut out to the life . 

On the top of this first square ( being flat ) was erected another Square which bore in the fore side four more lesser Columns , on which were all the garnishments belonging to those pillars : as namely , the architrive freeze and Cornish , on which Square was placed a great Canted Pedestal , which with his mouldings did diminish upwards to smaller Cants , on which top was fixed a Personage carved or moulded out to the life , her left hand leaning on a sword , with the point downward , and her right hand reaching forth a Diadem , which , she seemed by bowing of her knee and head , to bestow upon his Majesty . 

On the four Corners of this upper part , stood four naked Portraitures ( in great ) with artificial trumpets in their hands . 

All which Shape's that were erected in most lively colours , together with Pyramids , long Streamers , Galleries , and all other enrichments belonging to this Archtriumphant : I refer you to the Model or Piece itself , for the Front of it , as the next leaf will show you , so likewise proportional was the back side to the fore - Front.  

The Italians , were placed within two little Galleries very richly and stately hung , under the Arch of the Passage : In whose behalf , thus much Latin was delivered . 

The Italians Speech . 

Salue , Rex magne , salve . Salutem Maiestati tuae Itali , foelicissimum Aduentum laeti , foelices sub te futuri , precamur . Eccè hic Omnes , Exigui Munere , pauculi Numero : sed magni erga Maiestatem animi , multi obsequij . At nec Atlas , qui Coelum sustinet , ne ; ipsa Coeli Conuexa , altitudinem attingant meritorum Regis optimi , Hoc est , eius quem de Teipso expressists doctissimo ( Deus ! ) & admirabili , penicillo , Beatissimos populos , ubi & Philosophus regnat , & Rex Philosophatur . Salue ; Vive Rex Potentissime , foeliciter . Regna , Rex sapientissime , foeliciter . Itali optamus Omnes , Itali clamamus Omnes , Omnes , Omnes . 

The same in English.  

ALL hail mighty Monarch ! we ( the Italians ) full of joy to behold thy most happy presence , and full of hopes to enjoy a felicity under thy Royal wing , do wish and pray for the health of thy Majesty . Behold , here we are all ; mean in merit : few in number : but towards thy Sovereign self , in our love's great , in our duties more . For neither Altas , who bears up heaven , no nor the Arched roof itself of heaven , can by many degrees reach to the top and glorious height of a good and virtuous King's deservings . And such a one is he , whom ( Good God ) most lively , most wisely , and in wonderful colours , thou didst then pencil down in thine own person , when thou saidst those people were blessed , where a Philosopher rules , and where the Ruler plays the Philosopher . All hail thou royalest of Kings ; live thou mightiest of Princes : Reign thou wisest of monarchs in all prosperity : these are the wishes of us Italians : the hearty wishes of us all : All , even All.  



The Pegma of the Dutchmen . 

THE third welcome that his Majesty received , was from the Belgians , who had builded●● stately Triumphal Arch , to entertain him in , and thus was it contrived . 

So wide did the body of it extend itself , that it swallowed up the breadth of the whole street , near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill . The Passage of state was a gate , comely , and large , ascending — foot in height , and — foot in the breadth , neatly Arched , and graced with two lesser Posterns on the sides , whose dimensions you may behold in the model . 

Sundry inscriptions were in golden Letters to be seen , both over the Gate , and in the Tables , filled with excellent Pictures ; as the King in his Imperial Robes : with other Portraitures of Princes , and Poetical Emblems of Peace , etc.  On the back part also were pieces , wherein were drawn the people of the Seventeen Provinces at their Husbandry ; their Exchange : their Mart : Also seventeen children on the fore side , representing the seventeen Provinces , sat in degrees , each of them having a Scutcheon in his hand , figuring his Province . 

On the shoulders of this Belgic body , stood rows of Balusters with Pedestals , that supported Lions rampant , bearing up Banners : And above them in the midst of another square about with Balusters likewise , was advanced a woman ( figuring Divine Providence , her feet fastened to a great Pedestal , whose top was curiously connexed and knit together with the tails of two Dolphin's . 

Other Garnishments there were that gave illustration and beauty to this building , as Columns , Pyramids , etc. whose proportions your eye may measure on the other side . The speech , wherein the love of these Strangers was testified , was delivered by a boy in Latin , and is thus much in English.  

The speech of the Dutchmen . 

GREAT King , those so many Sceptres , which even fill thy right hand , are all thine own , only by the Providence of heaven . Behold , heaven itself laughs to see thy Subjects smile , and thunder out l●●a Plaudities , to hear their Aves . This honour of Sovereignty being at the beginning of the world bestowed but upon few ; upon the heads of few were the cares of a Crown set , for to sway only but one Empire ( happily ) as it is a labour hard : So none can undergo the weight but such as are mighty : But ( with a beck as it were ) to control many Nations ( and those of different dispositions too ) O! the Arm of man can never do that , but the finger of God. God therefore ( that guide's the Chariot of the world ) holds the Reinss of thy Kingdom in his own hand : It is he whose beams lend a light to thine . It is he that teacheth thee the Art of Ruling , because none but he made thee a King. And therefore as thou growest in years , thou waxest old in Virtues : of all thy Virtues , Religion sitting highest . And most worthy ; for by Religion , the hearts of barbarous Nations are made soft : By Religion , Rebellion hath a yoke cast about her neck , and is brought to believe , that those Laws to which thou submittest even thy royal self , are most easy . With Religion justice keeps company , who once fled from this profane world , but hearing the name of King james she is again returned . By her side sits her sister Fortitude , whose life is ready ( in Heroic actions ) to be spent for the safety of thy people . Besides to make these Virtue's full , Apollo and the Muses , resign , the one his Golden lyre , the other their Laurel , to thy royal hands , whilst Plenty ( daughter to Industry ) lays the blessings both of Country and City in heaps at thy feet . These are the gifts of heaven : the fame then spreading itself so far , that ( to wonder at them ) both the Poles seem to come together . We ( the Belgians ) likewise come , to that intent : a Nation banished from our own Cradle's , yet nursed and brought up in the tender bosom of a Princely mother , Eliza. The love which we once dedicated to her ( as a Mother ) doubly do We vow it to thee , our Sovereign , and Father : Entreating we may be sheltered under thy wings now , as under hers : Our Prayers being , that he who through the loins of so many Kingdoms , may likewise multiply thy years , and lengthen them out to the age of a Phoenix : And that thy Queen ( who is one part of thyself ) with thy Progeny ( who are the second hopes of thy people , ) may both give too , and receive from , thy Kingdom Immortal glory . 



The Device called , Nova foelix Arabia , The new Arabia foelix . 

THIS Pegma presented itself above the great Conduit in Cheap : and carried the name of the New Arabia , under which title the whole Island of Britannia was figured . 

This was beautified with a large Gate in the midst : On each side was cut out a Postern , either of which was — foot wide , and — foot high : before which Posterns two Portals were built from the same , having their sides open four several ways , and serving as Pedestals ( of Rustic ) to support two great Pyramids , whose bases were held up with four great Balls , and four Lions . 

This Mechanic body had other dead limbs , ( which you may behold cut out on the other side . ) The lively and stirring parts were these . viz.  

In the most eminent place was advanced a person , representing Arabia Britannica , and within a Nesete ( beneath her ) stood Fame . 

Directly under her , in a wide hollow square , were exalted five green Mounts , the one swelling above the other ; upon which the five Senses , ( Hearing , Seeing , Feeling , Smelling and Taste , ) sat heavily drooping : before which Mounts , an Artificial Laver was erected , called the Fount of Virtue ; out of which ( from sundry pipes ) upon his Majesty's approach , ran wine very plenteously . 

At the foot of this Fount lay Detraction and Oblivion , Sleeping till his Majesty's approach ; but being arrived at the place , and the Trump of Fame , starting up the Senses , they two likewise awaked , doing their best , with clubs to beat down the Fount , but were hindered by the Senses , and a person representing Circumspection . 

Upon several Ascensions , ( and close adjoining to the Pyramids , ) were seated at one side , the three Graces , and on the other side the three Hours . 

The speakers were Fame , Hours , Euphrosyne ( one of the Graces ) and Circumspection , who was mounted on a Stage , railed round about with Pilasters , being drawn forth some thirty foot in length from the other Building . And thus sounded their voices . 

FAME .  Turn into ice mine eyeballs whilst the sound , 
Flying through this brazen tromp , may back rebound , 
To stop Fame's hundred tongues , leaning them mute , 
As is an untouched bell , or stringless Lute , 
For Virtue's Fount , which late ran deep and clear , 
Dries : and melts all her body to a tear : 
You Graces : and you Hours that each day run , 
On the quick errands of the Golden Sun , 


Hereupon Fame sounding her Trumpet , the Senses start up , Detraction and Oblivion , awaken , and vanish , whilst Circumspection appears , uttering thus much to the K●ng . Great● Monarch of the West , whose glorious Stem , 
Does new support a triple Diadem , 
〈◊〉 more than that of thy grand Grandsire , Brutus . ) 
thou that mayst make a King thy Substitute , 
And dost besides the Red-rose and the white , 
With the rich flower of France , thy garland dight , 
Wearing about kings now , or those of old , 
A double Crown , of Laurel and of Gold , 
OH let my voice pass through thy Royal care , 
And whisper thus much , that we figure here . 
A new Arabia , in whose spiced Nest , 
A Phoenix lived , and died in the Sun's breast , 
Her loss made Sight , in Tears to drown her eyes , 
OH say ? to Virtue's Fount what has befallen , 
That thus her Veins shrink up . 


GRACES — HOURS .  We cannot tell . 


EUPHROSYNE .  Behold the fivefold guard of Sense , which keeps 
the sacred stream , sits drooping : near them sleep , 
Two horrid monsters : Fame , summon each sense , 
To tell the cause of this strange Accidence . 
The Ear grew deaf , Taste like a Sick-man lies , 
Finding no relish : Every other Sense 
Forgot his office , Worth and excellence , 
Whereby this Fount of Virtue 'gan to frieze , 
Threatened to be drunk up by two enemies , 
Snaky Detraction , and Oblivion , 
But at thy glorious presence both are gone . 
thou being that sacred Phoenix , that doth rise , 
From th' ashes of the first ; Beams from thine eyes 
So virtually shining , that they bring 
To England's new Arabia , a new spring : 
For joy whereof , Nymphs , Senses , Hours and Fame , 
Echo-loud Hymns to his Imperial name . 


At the end of this speech , a song ( to an excellent Music ) was delivered , which being finished , his Majesty went on . 

The Device called , Hortus Euporiae , Garden of Plenty . 

THE fifth Pegma was a summer Arbor , and seemed to grow close to the little Condu●t in Cheap , which ●oyning to the back of it , served ( or might be supposed to have been ) as a Fountain to water the fruits of this Garden of Plenty . 

This green bower spread itself likewise ( as all the rest did ) over the whole breadth of the street● ; having two Gates arched and grated Arbor-wise , to the height of — feet , and breadth of — : the sides of which gates were born up with four great French terms , standing upon Pedestals , which contained in their full height — foot . Between these open Passages were a pair of stairss mounted , at the bottom of which ( on two pillars ) were fixed two Satyrs , carved out in wood . Both the roo●e and sides of these Gates , were Artificially hung with Pompions , Cucumbers , Grapes , Cherries , Pears , Apples , and all other fruits , which the land bringeth forth . The upper part also ( which was closed with three round tops , Fortune standing on the midst of the three ) was garnished with lesser fruits , and with all sorts of Flowers , made by Art  

The whole Frame of this summer house , stood ( at the Ground-line ) upon — ●oote , the Perpendicular , stretching itself to — . 

Peace and Plenty had the highest places in this Bower , and sat to gether : directly under them , sat two other persons , representing Gold and Silver , supporting the Globe of the world between them : On each side of them sat two other persons , the one Pomona , Goddess of Fruits , the other Ceres , Goddess of Corne.  

Upon two large Descents ( a little below these ) were placed at one end the nine Muses , at the other end the seven liberal Sciences . 

Syluanus , and his followers , ( who upon sight of his Majesty , played upon Cornets ) gave entertainment to his Maiesti● , in these speeches following . 

The speech . 

MOST happy Prince , pardon me , that being mean in habit , and wild in appearance ( for my richest livery is but leaves , and my stateliest dwelling but in the woods ) thus rudely with piping Syluancs , I presume to intercept your Royal passage . These are my walks , yet stand I not here to cut off your way , but to give it a full and a bounteous welcome , being a messenger sent from the La●y Eirene my mistress ; those that sleep under the warmth of her wings adore her by the Sacred and Celestial name of P●ace ; her daughter Euporia ( well known by the name of Plenty ) is at this present with her , ( being indeed never from her side : ) Under yonder Arbour they ●it ▪ which after the daughter's name is called Hortus Euporiae ( Plenties Bower . ) chaste are they both , and both maidens , in memory of a Virgin to whom they were Nu●se-childrens , for whose sake ( because they were bound to her for their life ) me have they charged to lay at your Imperial ●eetes , ( being your hereditary due ) the tribute of their love . And with it thus to say . That they have languished many heavy months for your presence , which to them would have been , ( and proud they are that it shall be now so ) of the same operation and influence , that the Sun is to the Spring , and the Spring to the Earth ; hearing therefore what treble preferment you have bestowed upon this day , wherein besides the beams of a glorious Sun , two other clear and gracious Stars shine cheerfully on these her homely buildings ; Into which ( because no du●● should be wanting ) she hath given leave even to Strangers , to be sharers in her happiness , by suffering them to bid you likewise welcome : By me ( once hers , now your vassal ) she entreats , and with a knee sinking lower than the ground on which you tread , do I humbly execute her pleasure , that ●re you pass further , you would deign to walk into yonder Garden . The Hesperideses live not there , but the Muses , and the Muses no longer than under your protection . Thus far am I sent to conduct you thither , prostrately begging this grace ( since I ●are not , as being unworthy , Lackey by your Royal side ) that yet these my green Followers and myself may be ●oyfull forerunners of your expected approach . Away Sylvans . 



The Device called , Cozmoz Neoz , New World.  

THE sixth Triumphal Arch , was ( in the shape which you see it caries on the other side ) erected above the Conduit in Fleetstreet ; extending itself over the whole street , to the length of — foot , and in height — foot : The Gate of it was — foot wide , and — foot high . The two Posterns were answerable to those of others set down before : and were cut out of the two round Towers which ris up in proportionable measures , from the ground on the foreside with battlements and Balisters round enclosing the tops , containing in all their heights — foot : over the Gate , and just in the midst of the Building , ( which was spacious and left open ) a Globe was seen to move being filled with all the estates that are in the land ; And this Engine was turned about by four persons , representing the four Elements , ( Earth , Water , Aire , and Fire ) who were placed so quaintly , that the Globe seemed to have his motion even on the Crowns of their heads . 

The lively garnishments to this Building were 23 persons , of which the principal and worthiest was Astraea ( justice ) who was advanced to the highest Seat : Beneath her in a Cant by herself , Arete ( Virtue ) was placed : and at her feet Fortune , who trod upon the Globe . 

In a dark and obscure place ( near Virtue ) sat Envy : beneath whom , on several Ascensions were placed the Cardinal Virtues , justice , Fortitude , Temperance and Prudence ; and in an opposite seat , the four kingdoms , England , Scotland , France and Ireland . 

Zeal was the Presenter of this Device , who spoke thus . 

ZEAL .  The populous Globe of this our English I 'll . 
Seemed to move backward at the funeral pile 
Of her dead female Majesty : All states 
From Nobles down to Spirits of meaner Fates , 
Moved opposite to Nature and to Peace , 
As if these men had been th' antipodes . 
But see , the virtue of a regal eye , 
th' attractive wonder of man's Majesty , 
Our Globe as drawn in a right line again , 
And now appear new faces and new men : 
The Elements , Earth , Water , Air and Fire , 
( Which ever c'ipt a natural desire , 
To combat each with other ) being at first 
Created enemies , to fight their worst , 
See : as the peaceful presence of their King , 
How quietly they move without their Sting . 
Earth not devouring : Fire not defacing , 
Water not drowning : and the Air not chase : 
But propping the quaint Fabric that here stands , 
Without the violence of their wrathful hands . 
Mirror of times , lo , where they Fortune sits 
Above the world , and all our human wits , 
But thy high Virtue above that : what pen 
Or Art , or Brain , can reach thy Virtues then ? 
At whose Immortal brightness and true light , 
Envy's infectious eyes have lost their sight : 
Her Snakes ( not daring to shoot forth their stings , 
'Gainst such a glorious Object ) down she flings 
Their forks of Venom into her own maw , 
Whilst her rank teeth the glittering poisons chew , 
For 't is the property of Envy's blood , 
To dry away at every Kingdom's good , 
Especially when she had eyes to view 
These four Main Virtues which here figure you , 
justice in causes : Fortitude 'gainst foes , 
Temperance in spleen ; and Prudence in all those : 
And then so rich an Empire , whose fair breast 
Contains four Kingdoms by your entrance blessed , 
By Brutus divided , but by you alone , 
All are again united , and made One : 
Whose fruitful glories shine so far and even , 
They touch not only earth , but they kiss heaven , 
From whence Astraea is descended hither , 
Who with our last Queen's Spirit fled up thither , 
Foreknowing on the earth she could not rest , 
Till you had locked her in your rightful breast , 
And therefore all estates , whose proper Arts 
Live by the breath of Majesty , had hearts , 
Burning in holy Zeals Immaculate sires , 
With quenchless Ardours and unstained desires . 
To see what they now see , your powerful Grace , 
Reflecting joys on every Subject's face . 
These painted flames and yellow-burning stripes , 
Upon this robe being but as shows and types , 
Of that great Zeal ; And therefore in the name , 
Of this glad City , whither no Prince ever came , 
more loved , more longed for , lowly I entreat 
you 'd be to her as gracious as y' are great : 
So with reverberate shouts our Globe shall ring , 
The Music's close being thus , God save our King.  


The Device called , Templum jani , Temple of janus . 

THE seventh and last Pegma ( within the City ) was erected at Temple-bar , being adjoined close to the Gate : The Building was in all points like a Temple , and ● dedicated to janus Quadrifrons . 

Beneath that Four-faced head of janus was advanced the Arms of the Kingdom , with the Supporters cut out to the life : from whence being removed they now are placed in the Guild Hall.  

The walls and gates of this Temple were brass ; the Pillars silver , their Capitals and Bases gold : All the Frontispiece ( downward from those Arms ) was beautified and supported by twelve rich Columns , of which the four lowermost , being great Corinthian pillars , stood upon two large Pedestals , with a fair V●●x over them in stead of Architrive , Frieze and Cornice : Above them , eight Columns more , were likewise set , two and two upon a large Pedestal ; for as our work began ( for his Majesty's entrance ) with Rustic , so did we think it fit , that this out Temple , should end with the most famous Column , whose beauty and goodliness is derived both from the Tuscan , Doric , jonicke and Corinthian , and received his full perfection from Titus Vespasi●n , who advanced it to the highest place of dignity 〈◊〉 his Arch Triumphal , and ( by reason that the beauties of it were a mixture taken from the rest ) he gave it the name of Composita or Italica : within the Temple stood an Altar , with burning Incense upon it , before which a Flamen appears , and to the Flamen comes the Genius of the City . The principal person in this Temple , was Peace . At her feet lay War grovelling . At her right hand stood Wealth . On the same hand likewise , but somewhat remote , and in a Cant by herself , Quiet was seated , the first hand maid of Peace , whose feet stood upon Tumult . On the left hand ( at the former distance ) Liberty the second handmaid of Peace had her place , at whose feet Servitude lay subjected . Beneath these ( on distinct degrees ) sat two other hand maids of Peace , Safe●y and Felicity , Safety trampling upon Danger and Fel●city upon Unhappiness . Genius and Flamen spoke thus much . 

GEN.   Stay , what art thou , that in this strange attire , 
Dar'st kindle stranger , and unhallowed fire 
Upon this Altar ? 


FL.   Rather what art thou 
That dar'st so r●dely interrupt my vow ? 
My habit speaks my name . 


GOE   A Flamen ? 


FL.   Yes , 
And Martialis called . 


G● .  I so did guess 
By my short view , but whence didst thou ascend 
Hither ? or how ? or to what mystic end ? 


FL.   The noise , and present tumult of this Day , 
Roused me from sleep , and silence , where I lay 
Obscured from light ; which when I wak● to see , 
I wondering thought what this ●reat pomp might be . 
When ( looking in my Calendar ) I found 
The ●dess of March were entered , and I bound 
With these , to celebrate the Genial feast 
Of Anna styled Perenna , Mars his guest ; 
Who , in this Month of his , is yearly called 
To banquet at his Altar's ; and installed , 
A Goddess with him , since she files the Year , 
And knits the oblique scarce that girds the sphere . 
Whilst four faced ●anus turns his vernal look 
Upon their meeting hours , as if he took 
High pride and pleasure . 


GOE   Sure thou still dost dream . 
And both thy tongue , and thought rides on the strea●e 
Of Phantasie : Behold here He nor She , 
Have any Altar ▪ Fane , or Deity . 
Stoop ; read but this Inscription : and then view 
To whom the place is consecrate . 't is true 
That this is janus' Temple , and that now 
He turns upon the Year his freshest brow ; 
That this is Mars his month ; and these the ides , 
Wherein his Anne was honoured ; Both the Tides , 
Titles , and Place , we know : But these dead rites 
Are long since buried , and new power excites 
more high and hearty flames . Lo , there is he , 
Who brings with him a greater Anne than she : 
Whose strong and potent virtues have defaced 
Stern Mars his statues , and upon them placed 
His , and the world's blessed blessings : This hath brought 
Sweet Peace to sit in that bright state she ought 
Unbloody , or untroubled ; hath forced hence 
All tumults , ●earess , or other dark portents , 
That might invade weak minds ; hath made men see 
Once more the face of welcome Liberty : 
And doth ( in all his present acts ) restore 
That first pure world , made of the better Ore. 
Now Innocence shall cease to be the spoil 
Of ravenous Greatness , or to sleep the soil 
Of raised Peasantry with tears , and blood ; 
no more shall rich men ( for their little good ) 
Sul●●● to be made guilty ; or vile Sp●eses 
Emoy the lust of their so murdering eyes : 
Men shall put off their Iron minds , and hearts ; 
The I●me forget his old malicious art's 
〈◊〉 this new minute ; and no print remain 
Of what was thought the former age's stain . 
Back Flamen , with thy superstitious fumes , 
And s●nse not here ; Thy ignorance presumes 
Too much , in acting any Ethnic rite 
In this translated Temple : here no wight , 
To sacrifice save my devotion comes , 
That brings in steed of those thy Masculine gums . 
My City's heart , which shall for ever burn 
Upon this Altar , and no Time shall turn 
The same to ashes : here I fix it fast , 
Flame bright , flame high , and may it ever last . 
Whilst I , before the figure of thy Peace , 
Still tend the fire ; and give it quick increase 
With prayers , wishes , vows ; whereof be these 
The least , and weakest : that no Age may lose 
The memory of this so rich a day ; 
But rather , that it henceforth yearly may 
Begin our spring , and with our spring the prime , 
And first account of Years , of Months , of Time : 
And may these ides as fortunate appear 
To thee , as they to Caesar fatal were . 
Be all thy Thoughts born perfect , and thy Hopes 
In their events still crowned beyond their scopes . 
Let not wide Heaven that secret blessing know 
To give , which she on thee will not bestow : 
Blind Fortune be thy slave ; and may her store 
( The less thou seest it ) follow thee the more . 
Much more I would : but see , these brazen Gates 
Make haste to close , as urged by thy Fates ; 
Here ends my City's office , here it breaks : 
Yet with my tongue , and this pure heart , she speaks 
A short farewell ; and lower than thy feet , 
With fervent thanks , thy royal pains doth greet . 
Pardon , if my abruptness breed disease ; 
He merit's not t' offend , that hasts to please . 


Lectori Candido . 

READER , The limbs of these great Triumphal bodies ( lately disjointed and taken in sunder ) I have thou seest ( for thy sake ) set in their apt and right places again : so that now they are to stand as perpetual monuments , not to be shaken in pieces , or to be broken down , by the malice of that envious destroyer of all things , Time. Which labour's of mine , if they yield thee either profit or pleasure , thou art ( in requital thereof ) to pay many thanks to this honourable City , whose bounty towards me , not only in making choice of me , to give directions for the entire workmanship of the five Triumphal Arches builded by the same , but also ( in publishing these Pieces , ) I do here gladly acknowledge to have been exceeding liberal . 

Nor shall it be amiss in this place to give thee intelligence of some matters ( by way of notes ) which were not fully observed , nor freely enough set down in the Printed Book of these Triumphs : amongst which these that follow are chiefest . 

His Majesty departed from the Tower between the hours of 11. and 12 and before 5. had made his royal passage through the City , having a Canopy born over him by 8.  Knights . 

The first Object that his Majesty's eye encountered ( after his entrance into London ) was part of the children of Christ's Church Hospital , to the number of 300. who were placed on a Scaffold , erected for that purpose in Barking Churchyard by the Tower.  

The way from the Tower to Temple-bar was not only sufficiently gravelled , but all the streets ( lying between those two places ) were on both sides ( where the breadth would permit ) railed in at the charges of the City , Paul's Churchyard excepted . 

The Liveries of the Companies ( having their Streamers , Ensigns , and Banerets spread on the tops of their rails before them ) reached from the middle of Mark Lane , to the Pegma at Temple Bar . 

Two Marshals were chosen for the day , to clear the passage both of them being well mounted , and attended on by six men ( suitably attired ) to each Marshal . 

The Conduits of Cornhill , of Cheap , and of Fleetstreet , that day ran Claret wine very plenteously : which ( by reason of so much excellent Music , that sounded forth not only from each several Pegma , but also from divers other places ) ran the faster and more merrily down into some body's bellies . 

As touching the Oration uttered by Sir Henry Montague ( Recorder of the City ) with the gifts bestowed on the King , the Queen , and the Prince ( being three Cups of gold ) as also , all such songs , as were that day sung in the several Arches , I refer you to the Book in print , where they are set down at large . 

And thus much you shall understand , that no manner of person whatsoever , did disburse any part towards the charge of these five Triumphs , but only the mere Citizens being all freemen ; heretofore the charge being born by fifteen and the Chamber of London ( as may appear by ancient precedents ) but now it was levied amongst the Companies . The other two Arches erected by Merchant-strangers ( viz the Italians and Dutchmen ) were only their own particular charge . 

The City elected 16.  Committees to whom the managing of the whole business was absolutely referred : of which number 4. were Aldermen , the other 12.  Commoners , viz. one out of each of the 12.  Companies . Other Committees were also appointed as overseers and surveyors of the work . Farewell . 

Imprinted at London by john Windet , Printer to the Honourable City of London , and are to be sold at the Author's house in Lime-street , at the sign of the Snail . 1604.  

