A Pleasant Comedy , called A MAIDENHEAD WELL LOST . As it hath been publicly Acted at the Cockpit in Drury-lane , with much Applause : By her Majesty's Servants . 

Written by THOMAS HEYWOOD . 

Aut predessesolent , aut delectare . 

LONDON , Printed by Nicholas Okes for john jackson and Francis Church , and are to be sold at the King's Arms in Cheapside . 1634.  

To the Reader . 

Courteous Reader , ( of what sex soever ) let not the Title of this Play any way deter thee from the perusal thereof : For there is nothing herein contained , which doth deviate either from Modesty , or good Manners . For though the Argument be drawn from a Maidenhead lost , yet to be well lost , clears it from all aspersion . Neither can this be drawn within the Critical censure of that most horrible Histriomastix , whose uncharitable doom having damned all such to the flames of Hell , hath itself already suffered a most remarkable fire here upon Earth . This hath been frequently , and publicly Acted without exception , and I presume may be freely read without distaste ; and of all in general : excepting such , whose prepared palates , disgusting all Poems of this nature , are poisoned with the bitter juice of that Coloquintida and Hemlock , which can neither relish the peace of the Church nor Commonweal . Nothing remaineth further to be said , but read charitably , and then censure without prejudice . 

By him who hath been ever studious of thy favour , 

Thomas Heywood . 

Dramatis Personae . 

The Duke of Florence . 
The Prince of Florence . 
Mounsieur , the Tutor to the Prince . 
The Widow of the General . 
Sforza . 
Their Daughter Lauretta . 
The Clown their Servant . 
A Huntsman . 
A Lord of Florence . 
The Duke of Milan . 
The Prince of Parma . 
julia Daughter to Milan , 
Stroza Secretary to the Duke . 
A Soldier of Sforza'es . 
Three maimed Soldiers . 
A Lord of Milan . 
Attendants , 
Other Lord's , etc.  
The Prologue . 

Prologues to Plays in use , and common are , 
As Ushers to Great Ladies : Both walk bare , 
And comely both ; conducting Beauty they 
And we appear , to usher in our Play. 
Yet , be their faces foul , or featured well , 
Be they hard-favoured , or in looks excel ; 
Yet being Usher , he owes no less duty 
Unto the most deformed , than the choice Beauty . 
It is our case ; we usher Acts and Scenes , 
Some honest , and yet some may prove like Queans . 
( loose and base stuff ) yet that is not our fault , 
We walk before , but not like Panders halt 
Before such crippled ware : th' Acts we present 
We hope are Virgins , drawn for your content 
Unto this Stage : Maids grateful are to Men , 
Our Scenes being such , ( like such ) accept them then . 
A MAIDENHEAD WELL LOST . 

Actus primus , Scena prima . 

Enter julia and Strazo . julia.   That she should do 't ? 


Stroza .  She ? 


jul.   May we build upon 't ? 


Str.   As on a base of Marble ; I have seen 
Strange passages of love , loose interchanges 
Of hands and eyes betwixt her and the Prince , 
Madama look to 't . 


jul.   What hope hath he in one 
So meanly bred ? or she t' obtain a Prince 
Of such descent and lineage ? 


Str.   What but this 
That you must undergo the name of wife , 
And she to intercept the sweets of love 
Due to your bed . 


jul.   To be his strumpet Stroza ? 


Str.   Madame a woman may guess unhappily . 


jul.   thou shouldst be honest Stroza . 


Str.   Yes , many should 
Be what they are not : but I always was , 
And ever will be one , ( that 's still myself . ) 


jul.   The General Sforsaes' daughter ? is 't not she ? 


Str.   Is that yet questioned ? as if the chaste Court 
Had save herself one so degenerate , 
So dissolutely wanton , so profuse 
In prostitution too , so impudent 
And blushless in her proud ambitious aim , 
As if no man could her intemperance please , 
Save him whom Heaven hath destined to your bed . 


jul.   I never saw them yet familiar . 


Str.   ha , ha , as if they 'd send for you to see 't , 
To witness what they most strive to conceal , 
Be gulled ? be branded : ' lasto me , all 's nothing , 
I shall never smart for 't , what is 't to me ? 
If being a Bride , you have a widowed fortune ; 
If being married , you must throw yourself 
Upon a desolate bed , and in your arms , 
Clasp naught but Air , whilst his arms full of pleasure 
Borrowed from a stolen beauty , shall this grieve 
Or trouble me ? break my sleeps ? make me start 
At midnight up , and fill the house with clamours ? 
Shall this bring strange brats to be bred and brought 
Up at my fire , and call me Dad ? no : this 
Concerns not me more than my love to you 
To your high Sovereignty . 


jul.   I now repent 
Too late , since I too lavishly have given him 
The utmost he could ask , and stretched my honour 
Beyond all lawful bounds of modesty . 
he 's covetous of others , and neglects 
His own ; but I will part those their stolen pleasures , 
And cross those lustful sports they have in chase , 
Not be the pillow to my own disgrace . 


Exit . Str.   The game 's on foot , and there 's an easy path 
To my revenge ; this beauteous Milanese 
Unto th' duke sole heir , still courted , craved , 
And by the Parma Prince solicited , 
Which I still study how to break , and cast 
Aspersions betwixt both of strange dislike ; 
But wherein hath the other innocent Maid 
So injured me , that I should scandal her ? 
Her Father is the General to the Duke : 
For when I studied to be raised by Arms , 
And purchase me high eminence in Camp , 
He crossed my fortunes , and returned me home 
A Cashiered Captain ; for which injury 
I scandal all his means unto the Duke , 
And to the Princess all his daughter's virtues , 
I labour to invert , and bring them both 
Into disgraceful hatred . 


Enter Prince Parma . Par.   Stroza ? 


Str.   My Lord ? 


Par.   saw you the Princess ? 


Str.   julia ? 


Par.   She ? 


Str.   I have my Lord of late no ear of hers , 
Nor she a tongue of mine ; the , time hath been 
Till soothing Sycophantsand Court Parasites 
Supplanted me . 


Par.   I have the power with her 
To bring thee into grace . 


Str.   Have you the power 
To keep yourself in ? do you smile my Lord ? 


Par.   I tell thee Stroza , I have that interest 
In julias' bosom , that the proudest Prince 
In Italy cannot supplant me thence . 


Str.   Sir , 
Ino way question it : but have I not known 
A Prince hath been repulsed , and meanest persons 
Bosomed ? the Prince would once have looked upon me , 
When small entreaty would have gained an eye , 
An ear , a tongue , to speak yea , and a heart , 
To think I could be secret . 


Par.   What means Stroza ? 


Str.   But 't is the fate of all mortality : 
Man cannot long be happy ; but my passion 
Will make me turn blab , I shall out with all . 


Par.   Whence comes this ? 't is suspicious , and I must be 
Inquisitive to know 't . 


Str.   A jest my Lord , 
I 'll tell you a good jest.  


Par.   Prithee let 's hear it . 


Str.   What will you say , if at your meeting next 
With this fair Princess ? she begins to rave , 
To rail upon you , to exclaim on your 
Inconstancy , and call the innocent name 
Of some chaste Maid in question , whom perhaps 
You never eyed my Lord  


Par.   What of all this ? 


Str.   What but to excuse her own : ( I 'll not say what ) 
Put off the purposed Contract : and my Lord 
Come , come , I know you have a pregnant wit.  


Par.   We parted last with all the kindest greeting 
Lovers could add farewell with : but should this change 
Suit thy report , I should be forced to think 
That , which cven Oracles themselves could never 
Force me to that she is . 


Str.   All women are not 
Sincerely constant , but observe my Lord  


Enter julia , the General's Wife , and Lauretta her Daughter . jul.   Minion is 't you ? there 's for you , know your own . 


Str.   Observed you that my Lord ? 
Inlia meets her and strikes her , then speaks . 

Lau.   Why did you strike me Madam ? 


jul.   Strumpet , why ? 
Dare you contest with us ? 


Lau.   Who dare with Princess ? subjects' must forbear 
Each step I tread I 'll water with a tear . 


Exeunt Mother and Lauretta weeping . Str.   I spy a storm a coming , I 'll to shelter . 


Exit Stro.  Par.   Your meaning Madam ? 


jul.   Did it Sir with yours 
But correspond , it would be bad indeed . 


Par.   Why did you strike that Lady ? 


jul.   'Cause you should pity her . 


Par.   Small cause for blows . 


jul.   I struck her publicly . 


Par.   You give her blows in private . 


Par.   Stroza still ? 


jul.   Go perjured and dispose thy false allurements 
Amongst them that will believe thee , thou hast lost 
Thy credit here for ever . 


Par.   I shall find 
Faith elsewhere then . 


jul.   Eye spread thy snares 
To catch poor innocent Maids : and having ta'en them 
In the like pitfall , with their shipwrecked honours , 
Make seizure of their lives . 


Par.   Injurious Lady , 
All thou canst touch my Honour with , I cast 
On thee , and henceforth I will fly thee as 
A Basaliske . I have found the change of lust , 
Your loose inconstancy , which is as plain 
To me , as were it written upon thy brow , 
You shall not cast me off : I hate thy sight , 
And from this hour I will abjure thee quite . 


Exit Parma . jul.   I 'll call him back : if Stroza be no villain , 
He is not worth my clamour . What was that startled 
Within me ? O I am dishonoured 
Perpetually ; for he hath left behind 
That pledge of his acquaintance , that will for ever 
Cleave to my blood in scandal , I must now 
Sue , send , and crave , and what before I scorned 
By prayers to grant , submissively implore . 


Exit julia.  A flourish . Enter the Duke of Millenie , the General's wife , and delivers apetition with Stroza , Lauretta , and attendants . Duke .  Lady your suit ? 


Wife .  So please your Grace peruse it , 
It is included there . 


Duk.   Our general's Wife ? 


Duk.   We know you Lady , and your beauteous Daughter , 
Nay you shall spare your knee , 


Str.   more plot for me ; 
My brain 's in labour , and must be delivered 
Of some new mischief ? 


Duk.   You petition here 
For Men and Money I making a free relation 
Of all your Husband's fortunes , how supplies 
Have been delayed , and what extremities 
He hath endured at Naples dreadful Siege ; 
We know them all , and withal do acknowledge 
All plenteous blessings by the power of Heaven , 
By him we do obtain , and by his valour 
Lady we greve he hath been so neglected . 


Wife .  OH Royal Sir , you still were Gracious , 
But 'twixt your Virtues and his Merits there 
Hath been some interception , that hath stopped 
The current of your favours . 


Duk.   All which shall be removed , and he appear 
Henceforth a bright star in our courtly sphere . 


Str.   But no such Comet here shall daze my sight , 
Whilst I a Cloud am to Eclipse that light 


Exit Stroza . Duk.   We sent out our Commissions two Months since 
For Men and Money , nor was 't our intent 
It should be thus delayed : though we are Prince , 
We only can command , to Execute 
't is not in us but in our Officers , 
We understand that by their negligence 
He has been put to much extremity 
Of Dearth and Famine ; many a stormy night 
Been forced to roof himself i' th' open field , 
Nay more than this , much of his own revenue 
He hath expended , all to pay his Soldiers : 
Yet Reverend Madam , but forget what 's past , 
Though late , we 'll quit his merit at the last . 


Enter julia and Stroza whispering . Wife .  Your Highness is most Royal ? 


Stro.   Her Father shall be in the Camp relieved , 
She graced in Court , how will she brave you then ? 
If suffer this take all ? why the meanest Lady 
Would never brook an equal ? you a Princess ? 
And can you brook a base competitor ? 


julia   It shall not , we are fixed and stand immoved , 
And will be swayed by no hand . 


Duk.   julia ? 


julia.   A Suitor to that Lady Royal Father , 
Before she be a widow that you are 
So private in discourse ? 


Duk.   OH you mistake , 
For she the suitor is and hath obtained . 


julia.   I 'm glad I have found you in the giving vain 
Will you grant me one boon to ? 


Duk.   Question not , 
To hast your Marriage with the former Prince , 
Or at the least the contract , is 't not that ? 


julia.   Say ' were my Lord ? 


Duk.   It could not be denied 
But speak ? thy suit ? 


julia.   To have this modest Gentlewoman 
Banished the Court , 


Wife .  My Daughter Royal princess , 
Show us some cause I beg it ? 


julia.   Lady though 
You be i' th' begging vain , I am not now 
In the giving , will you leave us ? 


Lauretta .  Wherein OH Heaven 
Have I deserved your wrath , that you should thus 
Pursue me ? I have searched , indeed beyond 
My understanding , but yet cannot find ? 
Wherein I have offended by my chastity . 


julia.   How chastitiy ? 
A thing long sought amongst Captain's wives and daughters , 
Yet hardly can be found . 


Duk.   Fair Lady yield 
Unto my daughter's spleen her rage blown o'er , 
Fear not , I 'll make your peace , as for your suit 
Touching your husband , that will I secure . 


jul.   Haste Stroza , unto the Prince his chamber , 
Give him this letter , it concerns my honour , 
My state , my life , all that I can call good 
Depends upon the safe delivery 
Of these few broken Letters . 


Str.   Madam , 't is done — 


Exit . jul.   What stays she to outface me ? 


Lau.   Madam , I yield 
Way to your spleen , not knowing whence it grows , 
Bearing your words more heavy than your blows . 


Wife .  Small hope there is to see the Father righted . 
When the child is thus wronged . 


Enter a Soldier and Stroza . Soul.   Must speak with the Duke , 


Str.   Must fellow ? stay your hour , and dance attendance 
Until the duke 's at leisure . 


Soul.   I 'll do neither , 
I come in haste with news , 


Str.   Why then keep out sir.  


Soul.   ha Milksop ? know portcullised gates 
Though kept with Pikes & Muskets , could ne'er keep me out 
And dost thou think to shut me out with Wainscot ? 


Duk.   what 's he ? 


Soul.   A Soldier , 


Duk.   Whence ? 


Soul.   The Camp 


Duk.   The news ? 


Soul.   A mighty loss ; a glorious victory 


Duke   But which the greater ? 


Soul.   't is uncertain Sir : 
But will you hear the best or bad news first ? 


Duke .  Cheer me with conquest first , that being armed 
With thy best news , we better may endure 
What sounds more fatal . 


Soul.   Hear me then my Lord , 
We sacked the City after nine Month's siege , 
Furnished with store of all wars furniture , 
Our ( never to be praised enough ) brave General 
Fought in the Cannon's face , their number still 
Increased , but our diminished ; their soldiers pay 
Doubled , and ours kept back : but we ( brave spirits ) 
The loss we had of Coin , the more we took 
Unto ourselves of Courage , but when all 
Our furniture was spent even to one day , 
And that to morrow we must be enforced 
To raise a shameful siege , than stood our General 
( Our valiant General ) up , and breathed upon us 
His own undaunted spirit , which spread through 
The Camp , returned it doubly armed again : 
For he did mean to lay upon one shot 
His state and fortune , and then instantly 
He bade us arm and follow : On than he went , 
We after him ; o ! 't was a glorious sight , 
Fit for a Theatre of Gods to see , 
How we made up and maugre all opposure , 
Made way through raging storms of showering bullets ; 
At last we came to hook our ladders , and 
By them to scale . The first that mounted , was 
Our bold courageous General : after him 
Ten thousand , so we instantly were made 
Lords of the City , purchased in two hours 
After a nine Month's siege : all by the valour 
Of our approved General . 


Duke .  I never heard a braver victory , 
But what 's our loss ? 


Soul.   O that , which ten such Conquests 
Cannot make good , your worthy General . 


Wife .  My Lord and husband ? spare me passion , 
I must withdraw to death . 


Exit . Duke .  How perished he ? 
What died he by the sword ? 


Soul.   Sword ? no alas , 
no sword durst bite upon his noble flesh , 
Nor bullet raze his skin : he whom War feared , 
The Cannon spared , no steel durst venture on . 
no Duke , 't was thy unkind ingratitude 
Hath slain brave Sforza . 


Duke .  Speak the cause ? 


Soul.   I shall : 
This City seized , his purpose was the spoil 
To give his Soldiers ; but when his sealed Commission 
He had unripped , and saw express command , 
To deal no farther then to victory , 
And that his great Authority was curbed , 
And given to others , that respect their profit 
more than the worth of soldiers : even for grief , 
That he could neither furnish us with pay 
Which was kept back , nor guerdon us with spoil , 
What was about him he distributed , 
Even to the best deservers , as his garments , 
His Arms , and Tent , than some few words spoke , 
And so oppressed with grief , his great heart broke . 


Str.   there 's one gone then . 


Duke .  Attend for thy reward , 
So leave us.  


Soul.   Pray on whom shall I attend ? 
Who is 't must pay me ? 


Str.   I sir.  


Soul.   You sir ? tell me , 
Will it not cost me more the waiting for , 
then the sum comes to when it is received ? 
I do but ask the question . 


Str.   You are a bold 
And saucy soldier . 


Soul.   You are a cunning slave , 
And cowardly Courtier . 


Duke .  See all things be dispatched 
Touching conditions of atoned peace 
Betwixt us and Naples : see that soldier to 
Have his reward . 


Soul.   Come will you pay me sir ? 


Exit Soul.  Str.   Sir , will you walk : as for your sauciness 
I 'll teach you a Court-tricke : you shall be taught 
How to attend . 


Duke .  But that our general 's lost : 


Str.   Is 't not now peace , what should a General do ? 
Had he returned , he would have looked for honours , 
This suit and that for such a follower : 
Now Royal sir , that debt is quite discharged . 


Duke .  But for his wife , we must be mindful of her , 
And see we do so . 


Exit Duke . jul.   Speak , will he come ? 


Str.   Madam , I found him ready to depart 
The Court with expedition : but at my urgence 
He promised you a parley . 


jul.   It is well : 
If prayers or tears can move him , I 'll make way 
To save my own shame , and enforce his stay . 


Exeunt . Enter three soldiers : one without an arm . 1 Soul.   Come fellow soldiers , do you know the reason 
That we are summoned thus unto the house 
Of our dead General ? 


2 Soul.   Sure 't is about 
Our pay . 


3 Soul.   But stand aside , here comes the Lady . 


Enter the Mother , Lauretta , and Clown . Wife .  Are all these Gentlemen summoned together , 
That were my Husband's followers , and whose fortunes 
Expired in him ? 


Clo.   They are if please your Ladyship : though I was never Tawny-coate , I have played the summoners part , and the rest are already paid , only these three attend your Ladyship's remuneration . 



Wife .  Welcome Gentlemen , 
My Husband led you on to many dangers 
Two years , and last to poverty : His revenues 
Before hand he sold to maintain his Army , 
When the Dukes pay still failed , you know you were 
Stored ever from his Coffers . 


1 Soul.   He was a right 
And worthy General . 


2 Soul.   He was no less . 


Clo.   He was no less ; and all you know he was no more , well , had he lived , I had been placed in some house of office or other ere this time . 



Wife .  It was his will , which to my utmost power 
I will make good , to satisfy his soldiers 
To the utmost farthing . All his Gold and jewels 
I have already added , yet are we still 
To score to soldiery ? what is your sum ? 


1 Soul.   Pay for three Months . 


Wife .  there 's double that in Gold.  


1 Soul.   I thank your Ladyship . 


Wife .  What yours ? 


2 Soul.   Why Madam , 
For four Month's pay . 


Wife .  This jewel 〈◊〉 mounts that . 


2 Soul.   I am treble satisfied . 


Wife .  You are behind hand too : 


Clo.   Ey but Madam , I think he be no true soldier . 


Wife .  no true Soldier your reason ? 


Clo.   Mary because he walks without his Arms . 


Wife .  The Duke's Treasure 
Cannot make good that loss , yet are we rich 
In one thing : 
Nothing we have that were of nothing made , 
Nothing we have , my Husband's debts are paid . 
Morrow Gentlemen . 


All.   Madam , Hearts , Swords and hands , rest still 
At your command . 


Wife .  Gentlemen I 'm sorry that I cannot pay you better , 
Unto my wishes and your own desert , 
't is plainly seen great persons oft times fall , 
And the most Rich cannot give more than all . 
Good morrow Gentlemen , 


All.   May you be ever happy . 


Exeunt Soldiers . Clo.   I but Madam , this is a hard case being truly considered , to give away all , why your Shoemaker , though he hath many other Tools to work with , he will not give away his All.  



Wife .  All ours was his alone , it came by him . 
And for his Honour it was paid again . 


Clo.   Why , say I had a piece of Meat , I had a mind to , I might perhaps give away a Modicum , a Morsel , a Fragment or so , but to give away and be a hungry myself , I durst not do 't for my Guts , or say I should meet with a friend that had but one Penny in his Purse , that should give me a Pot of Ale , that should drink to me , and drink up all , I 'll stand to 't there 's no Conscience in 't . 



Lau.   What hath been done was for my Fathers Honor.  


Clo.   She might have given away a little , and a little , but 
When all is gone , what 's left for me ? 


Wife .  We will leave Milan and to Florence strait , 
Though we are poor , yet where we live unknown 
't is the less grief , sirrah , will you consort 
With us , and bear a part in our misfortunes ? 


Clo.   Troth Madam , I could find in my heart to go with you but for one thing . 



Wife .  what 's that ? 


Clow.   Because you are too liberal a Mistress : and that 's a fault seldom found among Ladies : For look , you use oh give away all , and I am all that is left ; and I am afraid when you come into a strange Country , you 'll give away me too , so that I shall never live to be my own man  



Wife .  Tush , fear it not . 


Clow.   Why then I 'll go with you inspite of your teeth . 


Wife .  Leave Milleine then , to Florence be our guide , 
Heaven when man fails , must for our help provide . 


Exeunt . Actus Secundus , Scena prima . 

Enter Parma reading a Letter : after him julia.  Par.   This Letter came from you , 't is your Character . 


jul.   That hand in Contract you so long have had , 
Should not seem strange to you now . 


Par.   You are with-childe , 
So doth your Letter say : what change your face ? 


Iu.   My blushes must speak for me . 


Par.   And this Child 
You would bestow on me : y are very liberal Lady , 
You give me more than I did mean to ask . 


Iu.   And yet but what 's your own Sir , I am serious , 
And it will ill become your Oaths and Vows 
To jest at my undoeing . 


Par.   You would say 
Rather your doing . 


Iu.   In doing thus , you should undo me quite . 


Par.   What do you weep , that late did rail in clamour ? 
Your thunders turned to showers ? It is most strange . 


Iu.   You have dishonoured me , and by your flattery 
Have robbed me of my chaste Virginity : 
Yet ere I yielded , we were man and wife , 
Saving the Churches outward Ceremony . 


Par.   But Lady , you that would be won by me 
To such an act of lust , would soon consent 
Unto another . 


Iu.   Can this be found in man ? 


Par.   This Strozas language moves me , and I intent 
To try what patience , constancy , and love 
There can be found in woman : why do you weep ? 
You are not hungry , for your bellie's full ; 
Lady , be ruled by me : take the advice 
A Doctor gave a Gentleman of eaten , 
That sent to him to know , whether Tobacco 
Were good for him or no : My friend quoth he , 
If thou didst never love it , never take it ; 
If thou didst ever love it , never leave it : 
So I to thee ; if thou wert as thou hast 
Been always honest , I could wish thee still 
So to continue ; but being a broken Lady , 
Your only way 's to make use of your Talon , 
Farewell , I 'll to my Country . 


Exit Parma . Iu.   O miserable , 
Let me but reckon up ten thousand ills 
My looseness hath committed , the aspersion 
And scandalous reputation of my Child , 
My Father too , 't must come unto his care , 
O — 


Enter Milleine . Duke .  julia.  


Iu.   Away . 


Duke .  Come hither , but one word . 


Iu.   That all those black occurrents should conspire , 
And end in my disgrace . 


Duke .  Ha! what 's the business ? 


Iu.   If all men were such , 
I should be sorry that a man begot me , 
Although he were my father . 


Duke .  julia , how 's that ? 


jul.   O Sir , you come to know whether Tobacco be good for you or no ; I 'll tell you , if you never took it , never take it then , or it you ever used it , take it still ; Nay , I 'm an excellent Philistian grown of late I tell you . 


Duke .  What mean these strange Anagrams ? 
I am thy Father and I love thee sweet . 


jul.   Love me thou dost not . 


Duke .  Why thou dost know I do . 


jul.   I say thou dost not : lay no wager with me , 
For if thou dost , there will be two to one 
On my side against thee . 


Duke .  Ha! I am thy Father 
Why julia ? 


Iu.   How my Father ! then do one thing 
For me your Daughter 


Duke .  One thing ? any thing , 
Ay all things . 


Iu.   Instantly then draw your sword 
And pierce me to the heart . 


Duke .  I love thee not so ill , 
To be the Author of thy death . 


Iu.   Nor I myself so well , as to desire 
A longer life : if you be then my Father , 
Punish a sin that hath disgraced your Daughter , 
Scandald your blood , and poisoned it with mud . 


Duke .  Be plain with us.  


Iu.   See , I am strumpeted , 
A bastard issue grows within my womb . 


Duke .  Whose fact ? 


Iu.   Prince Parmaes . 


Duke .  Stroza . 


Str.   My Lord  


Duke .  Search out 
Prince Parma , bring the Traitor back again 
Dead or alive . 


Str.   My Lord , he is a Prince . 


Duke .  no matter ; for his head shall be the ransom 
Of this foul Treason . When I say begun . 
But as for thee base and degenerate — 


jul.   Do show yourself a Prince : let her no longer 
Live , that hath thus disgraced your Royal Blood.  


Duke .  Nature prevails ' 'bove honour : her offence 
Merit's my vengeance , but the name of Child 
Abates my Swords keen edge : yet Royalty 
Take th'vpper hand of pity : kill the strumpet , 
And be renowned for justice.  


jul.   Strike , I 'll stand . 


Duke .  How easy could I period all my care , 
could I her kill , and yet her Infant spare : 
A double Murder I must needs commit , 
To ruin that which never offended yet . 
O Heaven ! in this I your assistance crave , 
Punish the falter , and the innocent save . 


jul.   You are not true to your own honour Father . 
To let me longer live . 


Duke .  O julia , julia , 
thou hast overwhelmed upon my aged head 
Mountains of grief , t' oppress me to my grave . 
Is Parma found ? 


Str.   My Lord , he 's privately 
Fled from the Court 


Duke .  then fly thou after villain . 


Str.   Sir , are you mad ? 


Duke .  what 's to be done ? Alack , 
I cannot change a father and a Prince 
Into a eviell Hangman : tell me julia , 
Is thy guilt yet but private to thyself ? 


jul.   It is my Lord  


Duke .  Conceal it then : we 'll study 
To salve thy honour , and to keep thy looseness 
From all the world concealed , compress thy grief , 
And I will study how to shadow mine . 
Wipe from thy cheeks these tears : o cursed Age , 
When Children against their Parents all things dare , 
Yet Fathers still prove Fathers in their care . 


Exeunt . Enter Mother , Lauretta , and Clown . Moth.   O misery beyond comparison ! 
When save the Heavens we have no roof at all 
To shelter us.  


Clow.   That word all 

Sticks more in my stomach then my victuals can : For indeed we can get none to eat now ; I told you , you were so prodiga'l we should pinch for 't . 



Wife   What place may we call this ? what Clime ? what Province ? 


Clow.   Why this is the Dukedom of Florence , and this is the Forest where the hardhearted Duke hunt's many a Hart : and there 's no Deer so dear to him , but he 'll kill it : as goodly a large place to starve in , as your Ladyship can desire to see in a Summer's day . 



Wife   Yet here , since no man knows us , no man can 
Deride our misery : better die starved , 
then basely beg . 


Clow.   How better starve then beg ; all the Ladies of Florence shall never make me of that belief . I had rather beg a thousand times , then starve once , do you scorn begging ? Your betters do not , no Madam ; get me a Snapsack , I 'll to Florence : I 'll make all the high ways ring of me with for the Lords sake . I have studied a Prayer for him that gives , and a Pox take him that gives nothing : I have one for the Horse-way , another for the Foote-way , and a third for the turning-ftile . no Madam , begging is grown a gentlemanlike Calling here in our Country . 



Wife   I have yet one poor piece of Gold reserved , 
Step to the Village by and fetch some Wine . 


Clow.   You had better keep your Gold , and trust to my begging Oratory , yet this is the worst they can say to me , that I am my Lady's Bottleman . 



Exit Clown . Wife   here 's a strange change : we must be patient , 
Yet can I not but weep thinking on thee . 


Lau.   Madam on me ? there is no change of Fortune 
Can puff me or deject me ; I am all one 
In rich abundance and penurious want : 
So little do my miseries vex me , 
Or the fair Princess wrong , that I will end 
My passions in a Song . 


A Song . Sound Horns within . Wife   It seems the Duke is Hunting in the Forest , 
Here let us rest ourselves , and listen to 
Their Tones , for nothing but mishap here lies ; 
Sing thou fair Child , I 'll keep tune with my eyes . 


Wind horns . And enter the Prince of Florence & Mounsieur . Prince   This way the voice was , let us leave the Chase . 


Moun.   Behold my Lord two sad dejected Creatures 
Thrown on the humble verdure . 


Prince   here 's beauty mixed with tears , that poverty 
Was never bred in Cottage : I 'll farther question 
Their state and fortune . 


Wife   we 're discovered , 
Daughter arise . 


Prince   What are you gentle Creatures ? 
Nay answer not in tears . 
If you by casual loss , or by the hand 
Of Fortune have been crushed beneath these sorrows , 
He demands your grief 
That hath as much will as ability 
To succour you , and for your own fair sake ; 
Nay beauteous Damsel , you need not question that . 


Lau.   If by the front we may believe the heart , 
Or by the outside judge the inward virtue : 
You fair Sir , have even in yourself alone 
All that this world can promise ; for I never 
Beheld one so complete ; and were I sure 
Although you would not pity , yet at least 
You would not mock our misery : I would relate 
A Tale should make you weep . 


Prince .  Sweet if the Prologue 
To thy sad passion move thus : what will the Scene 
And tragic act itself do ? Is that Gentlewoman 
Your Mother sweet ? 


Lau.   My wretched Mother Sir.  


Prince .  Pray of what Province ? 


Lau.   Milleine . 


Prince .  What fortune there ? 


Lau.   My Father was a Noble Gentleman , 
Ranked with the best in Birth , and which did add 
To all his other virtues , a bold Soldier ; 
But when he died — 


Prince .  Nay , proceed beauteous Lady , 
How was your Father styled ? 


Lau.   To tell you that , 
Were to exclaim upon my Prince , my Country 
And their Ingratitude : For he being dead , 
With him our fortunes and our hopes both failed ; 
My Mother loath to live ignobly base , 
Where once she flourished , having spent her means 
Not loosely nor in riot , but in the honour 
Of her dead Husband : left th' ingrateful Land , 
Rather to spend her years in poverty , 
Amongst those that never knew her height of Fortune , 
then with her thankless Friends and Countrymen , 
Fled here to perish . 


Prince .  more than her Charming beauty 
Her passion moves me : where inhabit you ? 


Lau.   Here , every where . 


Prince .  Beneath these Trees ? 


Lau.   We have 
no other roof then what kind Heaven lends . 


Prince .  Gentle Creature , 
Had you not told me that your Birth was Noble , 
I should have found it in your face and gesture . 
Mounsieur . 


Mounsieur   My Lord  


Prince .  Go wind thy Horn abroad , and call to us 
Some of our train : we pity these two Ladies , 
And we will raise their hope : Cheer you old Madam , 
You shall receive some bounty from a Prince . 
Enter a Huntsman . Who keeps the Lodge below ? 


Hunts.   Your Highness' Huntsman . 


Prince .  Command him to remove , and instantly 
We give it to these Ladies : besides , add 
Unto our Guest three thousand pounds a year : 
we 'll see it furnished too with Plate and hangings . 
Alas pretyt Maid , your father's dead you say , 
we 'll take you now to our own Patronage , 
And trust me Lady , whiel we 're Prince of Florence , 
You shall not want nor food , nor harbourage . 


Wife   Pardon Great Sir , this our neglect of duty 
Unto a Prince so gracious and complete 
In virtuous endowments . 


Lau.   To excuse 
Our former negligence , behold I cast 
Me at your foot . 


Prince   Arise sweet , pray your name ? 


Lau.   Lauretta . 


Prince   Fair Laure●t● , you shall be henceforth ours , 
O Mounsieur ! I never saw where I could love 
Till now . 


Moun.   How now my Lord , remember pray , 
What you are to this poor dejected Maid . 


Prince   Well Mounsieur , well ; when ever I match , pray Heaven , 
We love so well : but love and toil hath made us 
Even somewhat thirsty , would we had some Wine . 


Enter Clown . Clow.   Nay , now I think I have fitted you with a Cup of 
N●psi●●t● . 


Moun.   How now sirrah , what are you ? 


Clow.   What am I ? Nay what art thou ? 
I think you le prove little better than a smell-smock , 
That can find out a pretty wench in such a Corner . 


Wife   P●ace sirrah , 't is the Prince . 


Clow.   What if he be ? he may love a Wench as well as another man  



Prince   What hast thou there ? 


Clow.   A bottle of Wine and a Manchet that my Lady sent me for . 



Prince   thou never couldst come to us in better time , 
Reach it us Mounsieur . 


Moun.   Your bottle quickly sirrah , come I say . 


Clow.   Yes , when ? can you tell ? do you think I am such an Ass , to part so lightly with my liquor ? Know thou my friend , before I could get this bottle filled , I was glad to change a piece of Gold , and call for the rest again . And do you think I 'll lose my liquor , and have no Gold nor rest again ? Not so my Friend , not so . 



Moun.   there 's Gold sir.  


Clow.   Madam , will you give me a Licence to sell Wine ? 
I could get no P●ate in the Forest but a wooden Dish . 


Wife   Fill to the Prince Lauretia . 


Lau.   Will it please 
Your Highness' drink out of a wooden Mazer ? 


Prince   Yes sweet with thee in any thing : you know 
We are a Prince , and you shall be our taster . 


Lau.   Why should I love this Prince ? his bounteous gifts 
Exalt me not , but make me much more poor , 
I 'm more dejected than I was before . 


Wife   Sir.  


Moun.   Lady , thanks : I fear me he is caught , 
But if he be , my Counsel must divert him . 


Clow.   The bottom of the bottle is at your service Sir , 
Shall you and I part stakes ? 


Moun.   T●cie's' more Gold for you . 


Clow.   I had rather you had broke my pate then my draught , but hark you Sir , are you as a man should say , a belonger to ? 



Hunt.   A belonger to ? what 's that sir ? 


Clow.   O ignorant ! are you a follower ? 


Hunt.   I seldom go before when my betters are in place . 


Clow.   A Servingman I take it . 


Hunt.   Right sir.  


Clow.   I desire you the more compliment : I have the courtesy of the Forest for you . 



Hunt.   And I have the courtesy of the Court for you sir.  


Clow.   that 's to bring me to the Buttery hatch , and never make me drink . 



Prince   Sirrah , conduct those Ladies to the Lodge , 
And tell the Keeper we have stored for him , 
A better fortune ; you shall hear further from us , 
You usher them . 


Hunt.   Come Ladies will you walk ? 


Clow.   How now saucebox , know your manners : was not I Gentleman usher before you came ? am not I he that did the bottle bring ? Come Ladies follow me . 



Exit Clown with Ladies , with Huntsman . Moun.   Your purpose Sir , is to love this Lady , 
And hazard all your hopes . 


Prince   O gentle Friend , 
Why was I born high ? but to raise their hopes 
That are dejected : so much for my bounty . 


Moun.   But for your love . 


Prince   It is with no intent 
To make the Maid my wife , because I know 
Her fortunes cannot equal mine . 


Moun.   then 't were more dishonourable 
To strumpet her . 


Prince   Still thou mistak'st , mine 
Is honourable love , and built on virtue ; 
Nor would I for the Emperor's Diadem , 
Corrupt her whom I love . 


Moun.   Brave Prince I 'm glad 
That ere I kept thy Company . 


Prince   Come Mounsieur , night steals on , not many years 
Shall pass me , but I purpose to revisit 
This my new Mistress , my auspicious fate 
To thee my happy love I consecrate . 


Exeunt . A Dumb show . Enter the Duke of Millein● , a Midwife with a young Child , and after them Stroza : the Duke shows the Child to Stroza , he takes it : then the Duke swears them both to secrecy upon his Sword , and exit with the Midwife : then Stroza goes to hide it , and Parma dogs him : when he hath laid the Child in a Corner , he departs in haste , and Parma takes up the Child and speaks . Par.   thou shouldst be mind : and durst I for my Head 
Even in the open Court I 'd challenge thee . 
But I have so incensed th' offended Duke , 
And laid such heavy spots upon her head , 
I cannot do 't uviht safety : methinks this Child 
Doth look me in the face , as if 't would call 
Me Father , and but this suspected Stroza 
Stuffed my too credulous ears with jealousies . 
For thee sweet Babe I 'll swear , that if not all , 
Part of my blood runs in thy tender veins , 
For those few drops I will not see the perish ; 
Be it for her sake whom once I loved , 
And shall do ever : O injurious Stroza ! 
I now begin to fear ; for this sweet Babe 
Hath in his face no bastardy , but shows 
A Princely semblance : but Stroza and the Duke , 
This will I keep as chary as her honour , 
The which I prise above the Universe . 
Though she were forced to be unnatural , 
I 'll take to me this Infant's pupillage ; 
Nor yet resolved , till I a way have found 
To make that perfect which is yet unsound . 


Exit . Explicit Actus Secundus . 

Enter Milleine with Lords and julia.  Milleine   Forbear my Lords for a few private words : 
Fair Daughter , we 'll not chide you farther now 
Nor add unto your blushes : by our rude 
Reproofs your faults are covered with these your sighs , 
Since all your fire of lust is quenched in ashes . 


jul.   durst I presume my Lord , to know 
whither you have send my son ? 


Mil.   I 'll not have it questioned . 
I strive to salve thy honour , and thou seekest 
To publish thy disgrace : my study is 
Where I may pick thee out a noble Husband , 
To shadow these dishonours , and keep thee 
From the like scandal . 


jul.   Whom but Parmaes' Prince . 


Mil.   O name him not thou strumpet . 


jul.   I have done . 


Mil.   there 's a Prince of noble hopes and fortunes , 
The Prince of Florence : what if I sent to him 
About a speedy Marriage ? for I fear , 
Delay may breed strange doubts . 


jul.   Since I have lost the name of Child , 
I am a servant now and must obey . 


Enter Stroza and Lords . Mil.   Stroza . 


Str.   Your ear my Lord , 't is done . 


Mil.   Laid out ? 


Str.   To safety as I hope . 


Mil.   What , and suspectless ? 


Str.   Unless the silent Grove of Trees should blabe , 
There is no fear of scandal , mantled close , 
I left the sucking Babe where the next passenger 
Must find it needs , and so it happened for 
Some two years after , 
Passing that way to know where 't was become , 
'T was gone , and by some courteous hand I hope 
Removed to gentle fosterage . 


Mil.   My excellent friend , 
For this we 'll bosom thee : your counsel Stroza , 
Our daughter 's grown to years , and we intent 
To pick her out a Husband , in whose issue 
Her name may flourish , and her honours live : 


All Lords   Most carefully devised . 


Mil.   But where my Lords 
May we provide a match to equal her ? 


1 Lord   Ferrara hath a fair and hopeful Heir . 


2 Lord   And so hath Mantua . 


3 Lord   How do you prise the Noble Florentine ? 


1 Lord   In fame no whit inferior . 


2 Lord   But in state 
Many degrees excelling : aim no further 
Sir , if that may be accepted . 


Duke   To Florence then we 'll straight dispatch Ambassadors , 
Stroza , be 't your care to manage this high business . 
O to see 
How Parents love descends : and how soe'er 
The Children prove ungrateful and unkind , 
Though they deride , we weep our poor eyes blind . 


Excum . Enter Clowne gallant , and the Huntiman . Clow.   Nay , nay , the case is altered with me since you saw me last : I was never in any hope to purchase any other suit then that I wore yesterday ; but now I can say Ecce signum , the case is altered . Now every beggar comes upon me with good Gentleman , good Gentleman : when yesterday Gentlemen would have shunned the way for fear I should have begged of them . then comes another upon me with good your Worship , good your Worship , then do I double my files , and cast him a 〈◊〉 two pence . 



Hunt.   Sirrah , thou may st thank the Prince for this . 


Clow.   Tnou sayest true ; for he hath changed our wooden Dishes to Si for Coblets : goodly large Arras that never yet deserved hanging , he hath caused to be hanged round about the Chamber : My Lady and Mistress , now my Lady and Mistress lies over head and cares in Down and Feathers : well , if they be ruied by me , I would have them to keep their beds . 



Hunt.   Why wouldst thou have them lie a bed all day ? 


Clow.   O dull ignorant ! I mean knowing how hard they have been lodged in the Forest ; I would not have them sell away their beds , and lie upon the boards . 



Hunt.   O now I understand you sir.  


Clow ,  Ay , ey ; thou may'st get much understanding by keeping my company : But Sir , does not the new Gown the Prince sent my Mistress , become her most incomparably ? 



Hunt.   't is true : 't is strange to see how Apparel makes or maries . 



Clow.   Right : for yeasterday thou wouldst have taken me for a very Clown , a very Clown ; and now to see , to see . — 



Enter Mother and the young Lady gallant . Wife   Sirrah . 


Clow.   Madam . 


Lau.   To see if the Tailor that made your Gown , hath put never an M●un●er your Girdle , there belongs more to beaten S●tin than sirrah . 



Lau.   What think you Mother of the Prince his bounty , 
His venue , and perfection ? 


Wife   he 's a mirror , and deserves a name 
amongst the famous Worthies . 


Lau.   H●igh●e . 


Wife   Why sigh you ? 


Lau.   Pray tell me one thing Mother : when you were 
Of my years , and first loved , how did you feel 
Yourself ? 


Wife   Love's Daughter ? 


Clow.   She talks : Now , if she should be enuamored of my comely shape ; for I have ( as they say ) such a foolish young and relenting heart I should never say her nay , I should never wear off this stand further off . 



Lau.   Stand farther off sir.  


Clow.   no , I 'll assure your Ladyship 't is beaten Satin . 


Lau.   then take your Satin farther . 


Clow.   Your Ladyship hath conjured me , and I will avoid 
Satan . 


Lau.   Had you not sometimes muse , sometimes ecstasies , 
When some delicate above other 
Was present ? 


Wife   I advice you curb your sense in time , 
Or you will bring yourself into the way 
Of much dishonour . 


Lau.   And speak you by experience Mother ? then 
I do begin to fear lest that his shape 
Should tempt me , or his bounty work above 
My strength and patience ; pray Mother leave us never , 
lest that without your Company , my love 
Contending with my weakness , should in time 
Get of the upper hand . 


Wife   For this I love thee . 


Enter Clowne running . Clow.   So ho Mistress Madam , yonder is the Prince , and two or three Gentlemen come riding upon the goodliest Horses that ever I set my eyes upon : and the Prince's Horse did no sooner see me , but he weeighed and wagged his tail : now I thinking he had done it to take acquaintance of me , said again to him , Gramery Horse ; so I left them , and came to tell your Ladyship . 



Lau.   Go see them stabled , my soul leapt within me 
To hear the Prince but named . 


Enter Prince and Mounsieur . Prince   Now my fair Friend . 


Lau.   Your handmaid mighty Prince . 


Prince   Look Mounsieur , 
Can she be less than Noble ? nay deserves she 
Thus habited , to be termed less than Royal , 
What thinkst thou Mounsieur ? 


Moun.   Faith my Lord , 
I never love a woman for her habit , 
When sir I love , I 'll fee my lone stark naked . 


Prince   Right courteous Lady , 
Our bounty is too sparing for your worth , 
Yet such as 't is accept it . 


Wife   Royal Sir , 
't is beyond hope or merit . 


Prince   I prithee Mounsieur , 
A little comp ement with that old Lady , 
Whilst I confer with her . 


Moun.   I thank you Sir : 
See , you would make me a sir Panderus , 
He talks with the old Lady . Yet far as I can see you , I will trust you . 
Sweet Lady , how long is 't — nay keep that hand , 
Since those fierce wars betwixt Florence and great Milan 
Nay that hand still . 


Prince   And have you never a love then ? 


Lau.   Yes my Lord : 
I should belie my own thoughts to deny , 
And say I had none . 


Prince   Pray acquaint me with him , 
And for thy sake I 'll give him state and Honours , 
And make him great in Florence . Is he of birth ? 


Lau.   A mighty Dukedom's Heir . 


Prince   How now my Lauretta ? 
I prithee sweet where lives he ? 


Lau.   In his Country . 


Prince   Honour me so much 
As let me know him . 


Lau.   In that your Grace must pardon me . 


Prince   Must ? then I william Is he of presence sweet ? 


Lau.   As like your Grace as one Prince to another . 


Prince   Honour me so much then , as let me know him . 


Lau.   In that excuse me Sir.  


Prince   Thee , love I will 
In all things : wherefore study you ? 


Lau.   Why my Lord ? 
I was even wishing you a mighty harm ; 
But pardon me 't was out even unawares . 


Prince   Harme ? there 's none can come from thee Lauretta , 
thou art all goodness , nay confess it sweet . 


Lau.   I was wishing with myself that you were poor : 
O pardon me my Lord , a poor , a poor man  


Prince .  Why my Lauretta ? 


Lau.   Sir , because that little 
I have , Might do you good : I would you had 
no , money , nay , no means : but I speak idly , 
Pray pardon me my Lord  


Prince .  By all my hopes 
I have in Florence , would thou wert a Duchess , 
That I might court thee upon equal terms ; 
Or that I were of low dejected fortunes , 
To rank with thee in Birth : for to enjoy 
Thy beauty , were a greater Dowry than Florence 
Great Dukedom . 


Enter Clown . Clow.   O my Lord , my Lord , 
Are you close at it ? and you too crabbed Age , and you the — there 's Rods in piss for some of you . 



Prince .  Now sir , the news ? 


Clow.   O my Lord , there 's a Nobleman come from the 
Court to speak with you . 


Prince .  Mounsieur , upon my life 't is some Ambassador . 


Moun.   Good Sir make haste , lest I be challenged for you . 


Prince .  no worthy Friend , for me thou shalt not suffer , 
At our best leisured hours we mean to visit you ; 
Now give me leave to take a short farewell . 


Exeunt Prince and Mounsieur . Lau.   Your pleasure is your own , 
To part from him I am rend quite asunder . 


Clow.   And you can but keep your legs close , 
Let him rend any thing else and spare not . 


Exeunt . Enter Florence and Lords with Stroza Ambassador . Flo.   Speak the true Tenor of your Embassy . 


Str.   If Florence prise the Duke of Milan's love , 
His endeared Amity : If he have mind 
To mix with him in consanguinity , 
To strengthen both your Realms : he make the project 
To your fair Treaty , that your hopeful Heir 
Shall with the princeise julia his fair Daughter , 
Be joined in Marriage ; her large Dowry shall be 
A spacious Dukedom after his decease . 
But which my Lord count's most , is a fair League 
Betwixt your divided Dukedoms . 


Florence   We do conceit you : 
But for the Dowry you crave ? 


Str.   Ten thousand Crowns 
By th'yeare . 


Flo.   't is granted : only our Son's consent 
Is wanting : but see here , he wished for comes . 


Enter Prince and Mounsicur . Prince   Mounsieur what are those ? 


Moun.   Ambassadors my Lord  


Prince   Whence are these Lords ? 


Duke   From Milan . 


Prince   Their business Royal Sir ? 


Flo.   About a match , 
Which if youed please , we highly shall applaud . 
They offer you a fair and virtuous Princess 
Unto your bed : 


Prince   Unto my bed my Lord ? 
I am not so afraid of spirits Sir , 
But I can lie alone without a bedfellow . 


Flo.   't is the fair Princess julia you must Mary . 


Prince   Mary my Lord ? 


Flo.   I marry must you Sir , 
Or you divorce yourself from our dear love . 


Prince   But is she fair ? 


Stro.   As ever Helen was . 


Prince .  What , and as Charte ? 


Stroza .  It were not Princely in you , Royal Sir , 
To question such a Princess Chastity ; 
I could have instanced Lucrece . 


Prince .  Would you had , 
For both were ravished . 


Moun.   how 's this my Lord ? 
They offer love and beauty , which being both 
So freely offered , do deserve acceptance , 


Stroza ,  Your answer Sir ? 


Prince .  That I am yours : 
The States ; and if you please 
So to dispose me , hers : what ere she be , 
Come friend , I must impart my Love this news , 
Or it will rend my heart . 


Exit Prince . Stroza .  I shall return this answer . 


Florens .  Faithfully 
As we intent it : But you first shall taste 
The bounty of our Court , with royal Presents 
Both to the Duke your master , and the Princess ; 
It done , prepare we for this great solemnity , 
Of Hymeneal jubilies . Fixed is the day , 
Wherein rich Florens shall her pomp display . 


Exeunt . Enter Parma and a Lord of Milan . Parm.   Only to you , of all the Milan Peers , 
I dare expose my safety . 


Lord.   In these arms 
My Lord , you are Sanctuared . 


Parm.   I do not doubt it : 
But I pray you tell me , since I left the Court , 
How is my absence taken ? 


Lord.   Of the Duke , 
With much distaste . 


Parm.   But of the Princess julia ? 


Lord   Full two Months 
She kept her Chamber , grievously distracted , 
They say , mere grief for your departure hence . 


Parm.   Bravely managed , 
The Duke I see was more kind to her fame , 
then to his pretty grandchild ; well I 'll salt it all , 
But what think you if after all I should 
send Letters to her , or Ambassadors ? 
I should not win her , for I know 
  her heart in bondage . 


Lord   Why worthy Prince , 
Have you not heard the news : She hath been offered 
Unto the Florentine , the match accepted , 
And the Nuptial day the tenth of the next Month . 


Parm.   no more : Pray leave me Sir.  


Lord.   I will : Pray Sir 
Regard your safety . 


Exit Lord.  Parm.   To be married , Ruimus in vestitum semper , 
I did neglect her , but being denied , 
I dote upon her beauty : Methinks 't is fit , 
If I begot the Child ? I wed the Mother : 
The Prince , I pity he should be so wronged , 
And I the Instrument : Now help me brain , 
That near was wont to fail me : 't is decreed 
Something to Plot , although I fail to speed . 


Exit Parma . Enter Clown , Mother , and Lauretta . Clown   I wonder you should be so sad and melancholy , 
I 'll lay a years' wages before hand I 'll tell your disease , 
As well as any Doctor in Florence , and 
Let me but feel your pulse . 


Lauret .  Away , you are a fool , and trouble us.  


Clown   that 's no matter whether I be a fool or a physician , 
If I lose , I 'll pay , that 's certaina . 


Wife   Try the fool's counsel daughter , but be sure 
To forfeit , and to pay . 


Lauret .  Now sir , your skill . 


Clown   Nay , I must feel your pulse first , for if a Woman's pulse be near a place , I know there 's few here of my years but would be glad to turn Doctors . 



Lauret .  Now sir , you see I do not smile . 


Clown   Nay , if it be nothing else , I 'll fetch that will cure you presently . 



Exit Clown . Wife   Child I must chide you , you give too much way unto this humour : It altars much your beauty . 



Enter the Clown . Clown   O young Mistress , where are you , the Prince , 
The Prince . 


Lauret .  O Mother , do you hear the news , the Prince , 
The Prince is coming . Where is he , o where ? 


Clown   Where is he ? Why at the Court ; where should he be ? I did but do 't to make you smile : Nay , I 'll tickle you for a Doctor : Madam I have a years' wages before hand . 



Lauret .  Is he not come then ? 


Clown   no marry is he not . 


Lawret.   My soul did leap within , to hear the Prince 
But named : It started every joint . 


Clown   Nay Madam , the Prince is come . 


Wife   Away , your foolerie's unseasonable , 
we 'll not believe you . 


Enter the Prince and Mounsieur . Clown   If you will not believe me , will you believe these ? 


Lauret .  Welcome my Lord : And wherefore do you sigh ? 


Prince   I fie Lauretta , cause I cannot choose . 


Lauret .  Nor could I choose , should you but sigh again . 


Prince   I 'll tell thee Love , strange news : I must be married . 


Lauret .  Married my Lord ! 


Prince   Why do you weep ? You blamed me now for sighing : Why do you melt in tears ? Sweet what 's the cause ? 



Lauret .  Nay , nothing . 


Prince   And as I told thee Sweet ; I must be married , 
My Father and the State will have it so ; 
And I came instantly to tell the news 
To thee Lauretta ; As to one , from whom 
I nothing can conceal . 


Lauret .  Why should you grieve 
For that ? For I , my Lord , must have a Husband too . 


Prince   Must you ? But when 's the day ? 


Lauret .  when 's yours my Lord ? 


Prince   The tenth of the next month . 


Lauret .  The self same day , 
And selfsame hour that you enjoy your love , 
My Princely Husband I must then enjoy . 


Prince   But do you love him ? 


Lauret .  Not myself more dear . 


Prince   How happy are you above me fair friend , 
That must enjoy where you affect ? When I 
am tie to others fancies : It was your promise 
That I should know him further . 


Lauret .  You shall see him 
That day , as richly habited as the great 
Heir of Florence : But royal Sir , what 's she 
That you must bed then ? 


Prince   't is julia , 
The Duke of Milan's daughter : Why change your Face ? 


Lauretta speaks to herself . Lauret .  That she that hate's me most should live to enjoy 
Him I affect best : OH my ominous fate , 
I thought to have hid me from thee in these deserts , 
But thou dost dog me every where . 


She Swoons . Prince   Look to her safety , not for the Crown 
Of Florence I would have her perish . 


Wife   Help to support her . 


Exit with Mother and Clown . Prince   O Friend , that I should change my Royalty 
To weakness now : I do think this lodge 
A Palace , and this Beauteous Maidenhead 
Of greater worth than julia.  


Moun.   Come my Lord , 
Lay by these idle thoughts , and make you ready 
To entertain your Bride . 


Enter Parma disguised . Parm.   The Prince , the Prince , 
I come to seek the Prince , and was directed 
Unto this place . 


Prince   Thy news . 


Parm.   A Letter . 


Prince   Whence ? 


Parm.   Read , the Contents will show you ; their eyes are from me , and I must hence . 



Exit Parma . The Prince reads . Prince   The Milan Princess is betrothed ; deflowered , 
Not worthy of your love , believe this true 
Upon a Prince his word ; when you , shall bed her , 
And find her flawd in her Virginity , 
You shall have cause to think upon his love 
From whom you had this caution ; 
But do it with that Princely management , 
Her honour be not slandered : He that loves , 
Admires , and honour's you : 
where 's he that brought this Letter ? 


Moun.   Fled my Lord  


Prince   Post after ; bring him back , 
could he not set his hand to 't — 
How now , the news ? 


Moun.   he 's fled upon a milk white Jennet Sir , 
Seeming t' out strip the wind , and I — lost him . 


Prince   thou hast lost me quite . 


Moun.   What means this passions Sir ? 


Prince   Mounsieur read there , 
What will confound thee : O if she be unchaste ! 
could they find none but me to work upon . 


Moun.   It confounds me my Lord  


Prince   If she be chaste , 
How shall I wrong her , to question her fair Virtues ? 


Moun.   Right . 


Prince   But if she be not right ? I wrong my Honour , 
Which after marriage , how shall I recall ? 


Moun.   't is certain . 


Prince   Yes : O how am I perplexed ! 
Come , I 'll to Court , 
I 'll not be swayed : Were she a Potent Queen , 
Where Counsel fails me , I 'll once trust to spleen . 


Exeunt . Enter the Clown with his Table-books . Clown .  Let me see , the Prince is to be married to morrow , and my young Mistress means to keep a Feast in the Forest , in honour of his wedding at the Court : Now am I sent as Caterer into the City to provide them victuals , which they charged me to buy ; no ordinary fare , no more it shall , and therefore I have cast it thus ; First and foremost , we will have — ( yes down it shall ) we will have a Gammon of Bacon roasted , and stuffed with Oysters ; And six Black-puddings to be served up in Sorrell-sops ; A pickled shoulder of Mutton , and a sirloin of Beef in White-broth , so much for the first course . Now , for the second , we will have a Cherry-tart cut into Rashers and broiled ; A Custard Carbonadoed on the coals ; A live Eel swimming in clouted Cream ; And six Sheeps-heads baked , with the horns peer●●gout of the pasty-crust . The moral is , because it is a wedding dinner . 



Enter Stroza with another Lord  Stro.   The joyful day 's to morrow . Pass this plunge 
And we are made for ever . 


Clown .  What , my old Politician ? he that undermined my old Lady and my young Mistress ? now that I could find but one stratagem to blow him up ; I would toss him , I would blanket him i' th' Air , and make him cut an Italian caper in the Clouds : These Politicians can do more execution with a pen , in their studies , than a good Soldier with his sword in the field , but he hath spied me . 



Stro.   Thee friend I should have known ? 


Clown .  And you too , I should have known , but whether for a friend , or no , there 's the question ? 



Stro.   thou servest the General Sforza . 


Clow.   I confess it ; but whether you have served him well , or no , there hangs a Tale.  



Stro.   How doth thy noble Lady , fair Lauretta ? 
They have left Milan long , reside they here 
Near to the City Florence ? 


Clow.   Some three miles off , here in the Forest , not half an hours riding . 



Stro.   I pray thee recommend me to them both , 
And say , It shall go hard with mine affairs 
But I 'll find seasoned hours to visit them . 


Clow.   You shall not want directions to find the place , come when you will , you shall be most heartily — poisoned . 



Stro.   Tell them , The news that they are well 
Is wondrous pleasing to me , and that power 
I have in Milan is reserved for them , 
To work them into grace : I can but smile , 
To see how close I have plotted their exile . 
Now business calls me hence : farewell . 
Exit . 

Clow.   And behanged , Monsieur Stroza , whose description 
My Muse hath included in these few lines ; 
Stroza , Thy Head is of a compely Block , 
And would show well , crowned with the comb of Cock : 
His Face an Inn , his Brow a sluttish Room , 
His Nose the Chamberlain , his Beard the Broom , 
Or like New-market Heath , that makes thieves rich , 
In which his Mouth stands just like Devills-ditch 


And so farewell to your worship , grave Mounsieur Stroza , 
For I must about my market . 
Exeunt . 

Actus Quartus . 

A Dumb show . Enter at one door , the Duke of Milan , julia , Stroza , and a Bishop : At the other door , the Duke of Florens , the Prince and Mounsieur , with attendants : then the Bishop takes their hands and makes signs to marry them , and then the Prince speaks . Prince .  Stay till we be resolved . 


Florens .  What means our son ? 


Princ.   Not to be gulled by the best Prince in Europe ; 
Much less by Milan . 


Milan .  Sir , be plain with us.  


Prin.   I much suspect that Lady's Chastity . 


Milan .  Hers.  


Prin.   I have said . 


Stroza .  there 's Wormwood . 


Milan .  I came in terms of Honour , 
Brought with me , all my comforts here on earth , 
My daughter ; to bestow her on thy son : 
Poor Lady , innocently coming , forsaking all , 
Father and Country , to betake herself 
Unto his bosom ; and is she for all this , 
Branded with shame ? 


Stro.   Who can accuse her , speak ? what probabilities ? 
What ground ? the place ? the means ? the season how 
She did become corrupt ? 


Prince .  Sir , so we have heard . 


Stro.   Produce the witness ; and behold , I stand 
The Champion for her honour , and will aver 
Her Chaste , above degree ; infinitely honest : 
O Prince ! what , can you ground such injury 
Upon vain hearsay ? Speak for yourself , take spirit 


julia.   Apart to herself . Came we thus far , to be thus wronged ? 


Stro.   Was the slave never Christened , hath he no name ? 


julia.   Have you sent for me , to accuse me here 
In this strange Clime ? It is not Princely done . 


Prince .  OH Heaven , how am I perplexed ! 


Floren.   Son , Son , you wrong 
Yourself and me too , to accuse a Lady 
Of such high birth and fame ; unless you confess 
Yourself to have erred , you needs must forfeit us.  


Moun.   My Lord , yield to your father , lest you draw 
His wrath upon you . 


Prince .  Well , since I must , I will : 
Your pardon , Royal Father : Yours fair Princess : 
And yours great Duke : 
If I shall find myself truly to have erred , 
I shall confess your chastity much injured . 


julia   Submission is to me full recompense . 


Milla.   My daughter's honour ? 


Stro.   Do not stand off my Lord , 
If she be wronged , she 's not much behindhand . 


Milla.   O let me alone Stroza . 


Flor.   Nay , good Brother 
Accept him as your Son . 


Milla.   My hearts no closet for revenge ; 't is done . 


Prin.   Now hear my protestations : I receive 
This Lady's hand on these Conditions ; 
If you , my Lord , her father , or herself , 
Know herself faulty , O confess it here , 
Before the Ceremonies fasten on me : for if hereafter 
I find you once corrupted ? by this right hand , 
My future hopes , my Father's royalty , 
And all the honours due unto our house , 
He have as many lives and heads for it , 
As he hath Manners Castles , Lives and Towers ; 
It shall be worthy to be booked in Chronicles 
Of all strange tongues : And therefore beauteous Lady , 
As you esteem a Prince his name or honour , 
That you 'd be a Maecenas unto virtue ; 
If in the least of these you guilty be , 
Pull back your hand . 


Stro.   What if you find her chaste ? 


Prin.   If chaste ? she shall be dearer far to me . 
then my own soul : I will respect her honour , 
Equal with that of my great Ancestors ; 
All this I vow , as I am Prince and virtuous . 


Stro.   then join their hands . 


Prin.   she 's mine : Set forward then . 


Exeunt all but Stroza . Stro.   All goes not well , This juggling will be found , 
then where am I then ? would I were safe in Milan . 
Here Matchivell th'wast hatched : could not the same 
Planet inspire this pate of mine with some 
Rare stratagem , worthy a lasting Character : 
no , 't will not be ; my brain is at a nonplus , 
For I am dull . 


Enter Milan . Milla.   Stroza . 


Stro.   My Lord  


Milla.   O now , or never Stroza ! 


Stro.   I am turned Fool , Ass , Iddeott ; Are they married ? 


Milla.   Yes , and the Prince after the Ceremony , 
Embraced her lovingly . 


Stro.   But the hell is , 
That they must lie together , there 's the Devil . 


Milla.   And then — 


Stro.   And then we are disgraced and shamed . 


Milla.   Canst thou not helped man ? 


Stro.   Why you would make 
A man — midwife , wooed you ? I have no skill . 


Milla.   Stroza , awake , thou art drowsy . 


Stro.   Peace , interrupt me not , 
I have't : so to revenge me upon her 
Whom most I hate . To Strumpet her 't were brave . 


Milla.   Counsel advice me . 


Stro.   you 'll make me mad my Lord : 
And in this sweet revenge , I am not only 
Pleased ( with just satisfaction for all wrongs ) 
But the great Prince most palpably deceived . 


Milla.   The time runs on , 
Think on my honour Stroza . 


Stro.   If you 'll eat grapes unripe , edge your own teeth , 
I 'll stay the mellowed season , do 't yourself , 
Unless you give me time for 't . 


Milla.   But think with mine , on thine own safety Stroza . 


Stro.   Peace , give me way my Lord , so shall the Prince 
Be palpably deceived , Fair Julia's honour 
Most prosperously deserved , The Duke my master , 
Freed from all blame , Wane hindered , Peace confirmed , 
And I secured ; O I am fortunate 
Beyond imagination ! 


Milla.   OH dear Stroza , 
Help now , or never ! 


Stro.   He was a a mere Ass 
That raised Troy's Horse : 't was a pretty structure . 


Milla.   O me ! 


Stro.   Sinon , a fool , I can do more 
With precious Gold , than he with whining Tears . 


Milla.   O my tormented soul ! 


Stro.   Pray my Lord , give me 
Five hundred crowns . 


Milla.   What to do with them man ? 


Stro.   See how you stand on trifles ; when our lives , 
Your honour ; all our fortunes lie a bleeding : 
What shall I have the Gold ? 


Milla.   Thy purpose prithee ? 


Stro.   I know a desolate Lady , whom with Gold 
I can corrupt . 


Milla.   There are five hundred Crowns , 
Snroza bethink thee what thou undertakest , 
Such an Act , would make huge Atlas bend his head 
Unto his heel . 


Stro.   But say I cannot win her , 
They bide the brunt of all , here let them stay , 
With these five hundred Crowns I 'll post away . 


Exit Stroza , and Duke . Enter Mother , Daughter , and Clown . Clow.   Madam , yonder 's a Gentleman comes to speak with you in all haste . 



Lauret .  Admit him in . 


Enter Stroza . Stro.   Lady be happy , and from this blessed hour 
Ever rejoice fair Virgin , for I bring you 
Gold , and Enlargement ; with a recovery 
Of all your former loss , and dignity , 
But for a two hour's labour : Nay , that no labour 
Nor toil , but a mere pleasure . 


Lau   Your words like music , please me with delight , 
Beyond imagination : Offered to us ? 
Being exiled our Country , and our friends , 
Therefore good sir , delay not with long compliment , 
But tell these hopes more plain . 


Stro.   Have we not here 
Too many ●aress ? 


Lauret .  We would be private sirrah , 
And therefore leave us.  


Exit . Clown Stro.   You have seen the Prince of Florence ? 


Lauret .  Yes , I have . 


Stro.   Is he not for his Feature , Beauty , Goodness , 
The most Complete ? So absolute in all things . 


Lauret .  All this is granted . 


Stro.   How happy do you think that Lady than 
That shall Enjoy him ? Nay , that shall be the first 
To prove him , 
And exchange Virginity , 
Were 't not bright Lady a great happiness ? 


Lauret .  I wish that nappinesse were mine alone , 
O my faint heart : Passion over-swayes me quite , 
But hide thy grief Lauretta : Sir , you ' le make 
Me fall in love with him : Were I his equal , 
I then should judge him worthy of no less . 


Stro.   Love him : what 's she doth not , if she have eyes ? 
Were I myself a Woman : I would lay 
Myself a prostitute unto the Prince : 
She is not wise that would refuse him Lady . 


Lauret .  Good Sir be brief : 
To what prey tends these speeches ? 


Stro.   To thee sweet Lady : I offer all these pleasures , 
O happy fate that hath selected me 
To be your raiser : Lady take this gold , 
But that 's not all : For there are greater honours 
Prepared for you ; the Duke of Milan doth 
Commend him to you : julia his daughter 
Hath in her honour late miscarried , 
Now 't lies in you to salve and make all good . 


Wife .  Who ? Lies this in my daughter ? 


Stro.   Yes , in her , 
She hath the power to make the Duke her friend , 
julia her sister , and all Milan bound 
To offer up for her their Orrisons . 


Lauret .  Good Sir be plain . 


Stro.   This night lie with the Prince 
In Julia's stead : there 's way made for you , 
Who would not woe , for what you are wooed too ? 


Lauret .  Do you not blush , when you deliver this 
Pray tell the Duke , all Women are not julia , 
And though we be dejected , thus much tell him , 
We hold our honour at too high a price , 
For Gold to buy . 


Stro.   Nay Lady , hear me out ; 
You shall preserve her honour , gain the Duke , 
Redeem your fortunes : Strengthen you in friends , 
You shall have many Towns and Turrets standing , 
Which future War may ruin : Think on that . 


Wife .  Lauretta , o behold thy mother's tears ! 
Think on they Father , and his honour won , 
And call to mind our exile : All the wrongs 
We have endured by her , to whom we gave 
no cause , and now are plunge in a deep stream . 
Which not resisted , will for ever blemish 
The name of Sforza thy great Ancestors , 
thou 'lt waken thy dead Father from his grave , 
And cause his honoured wounds which he received 
From that unthankful Duke , to bleed afresh , 
Pouring out new blood from is grisly wounds , 
If thou consentest to this abhorred fact , 
Thy Mother's curse will seize on thee for ever : 
O child , behold me on my knees : I 'll follow thee , 
O do not leave me thus , and pull on thee 
An everlasting stain , to scandal all 
Thy former Virtues , for the momentary 
Short pleasures of one night . 


Stro.   She doth not council well ; 't is foolish rashness , 
Womanish Indiscretion 


Lauret .  Sir be answered , 
If julia be disloyal : Let her be found 
So by the Prince she weds : Let her be branded 
With the vile name of strumpet : She disgraced 
Me , that ne'er thought her harms ; publicly struck me , 
Nay in the Court : And after that , procured 
My banishment : These Injuries I reaped 
By her alone , then let it light on her . 


Stro.   Now see your error , 
What better ; safer , or more sweet revenge , 
then with the Husband ? what more could woman ask ? 


Lauret .  My blood rebels against my reason , and 
I no way can withstand it : 't is not the Gold 
Moves me , but that dear love I bear the Prince , 
Makes me neglect the credit and the honour 
Of my dear Father's house : Sir , what the Duke desire's 
I am resolved to do his utmost william  


Wife .  O my dear daughter . 


Lauret .  Good Mother speak not , for my word is past . 
And cannot be recalled , Sir will you away ? 
I am resolute . 


Stro.   She yields unto her shame ; which makes me blessed , 
Let Million fall , so I be crowned with rest . 


Wife .  O me , unhappy , that here knew grief till not . 
Exeunt . 

Music . A Dumb Show . Enter Milan , to him Stroza , and brings in Lauretta masked , the Duke takes her and puts her into the Bed , and Exit . Enter both the Duke and julia , they make signs to her and Exit : Stroza hides julia in a corner , and stands before her . Enter again with the Prince to bring him to bed ; They cheer him on , and others snatch his Points , and so Exit . The Duke's Embrace , and Exeunt . Actus Quintus . 

Enter Milan to Stroza . Milla.   thou art our trusty Counsellor ; if this pass 〈◊〉 
we 're passed all fear : What is she prithee ? What ? 


Stro.   what 's that to you , be she what ere she can , 
all 's one to us , so she be found a Virgin ; 
I have hired her , and she 's pleased . 


Milla.   But gave you charge 
Assoon as ere the Prince was fast asleep , 
That she should rise and give place to our daughter ? 


Stro.   Doubt you not that ; what , jealous already ? 


Milla.   How long she stays , I fain would be a bed ; 
Pray heaven she do not fail 
By him asleep , and so forget herself . 


Stro.   here 's in my heart , a violent Fever still ; 
Nor shall I find myself in my true temper , 
Until this brunt be passed . 


Milla.   What , not yet ? had she with Parma been a bed so long , 
It would have more perplexed me . 


Enter Lauretta . Stro.   See , here she is ; 
The news ? 


Lauret .  The Prince is fast , all done . 


Milla.   Step in her place ; 
Nay when ? and counterfeit sleep presently . 


Stro.   Away to bed my Lord : You to the Forest . 
I 'll to my Coach , all 's well . 


Exeunt Stroza and the Duke . Lauret .  And for my part , it was not much amiss , 
Because my Lord the Prince had such content 
Which caused him give his Charter to my hand , 
The full assurance of fair Julia's dowry : 
Day 'gins to break , and I must to the Lodge . 
O what a grief it was to leave the Prince ! 
But leave those thoughts : These Gifts to me assigned , 
Are nothing worth the gem I left behind . 


Exit . Enter Prince and Mounsieur with a Torch . Moun.   What do you not like your bedfellow , my Lord ; 
That you are up so soon ? 


Prin.   O friend , was never man blessed with a Bride 
So chaste ! I 'm fierce myself , till this be known 
To my fair Forest friend : Let 's mount away , 
The nights quite spent ; and now begins the day . 


Enter Mother and Clown . Wife .  And what was it you said sirrah ? 


Clow.   Mary , I would entreat your Ladyship to turn away 
My fellow jerom , for I think he 's 
no true man  


Wife   no true man , Why ? 


Clo.   Mary we were both in the Tavern together t'other day — 


Wife   And he stole some Plate ? 


Clo.   no Madam , but there stood at our elbow a pottle Pot — 


Wife   And he stole the Pot ? 


Clo.   no Madam , but he stole the wine in the Pot , and drunk it off , 
And made himself so drunk he bepissed himself : 
Your Ladyship could not be better bepissed in a Summers-day . 


Enter Prince and Mounsieur . Prin.   Good morrow Lady : where 's your daughter pray ? 


Wife   She took so little rest last night , my Lord 
I think she is scarce well . 


Prin.   Pray may we see her ? 


Wife .  My Lord you may . 


she 's drawn out upon a Bed.  Song . 

Hence with Passion , Sighs and Tears , 
Desasters , Sorrows , Cares and Fears . 
See , My Love ( my Love ) appears , 
That thought himself exiled . 
Whence might all these loud joys grow ? 
Whence might Mirth , and Banquet's flow ? 
But that he 's come ( he 's come ) I know . 
Fair Fortune thou hast smiled . 
2 

Give to these blind windows , Eyes ; 
Daze the Stars , and mock the Skies , 
And let us two ( us two ) device , 
To lavish our best Treasures 
Crown our Wishes with Content , 
Meet our Souls in sweet consent , 
And let this night ( this night ) be spent 
In all abundant pleasures . 
Prince .  O good morrow Lady , 
I come to tell you news ! 


Lauret .  They are welcome to me my Lord  


Prin.   You know the Princess julia was supposed to be Adulterate — 


Lauret .  So we have heard it rumoured 


Prin.   O but fair friend , she was indeed belied ! 
And I this morning rose from her chaste bed : 
But wherefore sweet cast you that blushing smile ? 
But you have broke promise with me : For you told me 
That the same day and hour I took my Bride , 
You should Enjoy a Princely Husband . 


Lauret .  True 
My Lord , I did . 


Prin.   And are you married then ? 


Lauret .  And lay with him last night . 


Prin.   Is he oft fortunes ? 


Lauret .  That you may soon conjecture by this gift . 


Prin.   What have you then , some tokens that were his ? 


Lauret .  Some few my Lord , amongst the rest , this diamond 
He put upon my finger . 


Prin.   You amaze me ! 
Yet Rings may be alike : If then your husband 
Bee of such state and fortunes , What dowry are you allotted . 


Lauret .  Sir , ten thousand crowns by th' year . 


Prin.   I gave no more unto my julia. 
But where is the security you have 
For the performance of it ? 


Lauret .  See here , My Lord , 
Sir , Is not that sufficient for a dowry ? 


Prin.   This is the Indenture that I gave to julia ; 
Prithee Lauretta , but resolve me true , 
How came you by this Charter ? 


Lauret .  Pardon great Prince ; for all that love you spoke 
To julia , you whispered in my ear : 
She is unchaste ; which , lest you should have found , 
Her father sent me here , five hundred crowns 
By Stroza ; but neither his gold , nor all 
His sly temptations , could one whit move me ; 
Only the love I ever bore your honour , 
Made me not prize my own . no lust full appetite 
Made me attempt such an ambitious practice , 
As to aspire unto your bed my Lord  


Prin.   Rise , d' ye not weep , O I am strangely rapt 
Into deep strange confusion ? 


Moun.   Milan should know , were it my case my Lord , 
A better Prince than he should not wrong me . 


Prin.   I have bethought already how to be are me ; 
This Charter and this Ring , fair Love , keep you ; 
And when I send for you , you shall repair 
Unto the Court : This all I shall enjoin you . 


Lauret .  Great Sir , I shall . 


Prin.   Come Mounsieur , now 't is cast , 
Revenge near rules , so it be found at last . 


Exeunt omnes . Enter the two Dukes with julia , Stroza and attendants . Milla.   Who saw the Prince last ? Is 't a custom with him 
To rise thus early ? 


Floren.   Sir , he never sleeps 
Longer than th'day , nor keeps his bed by Sun : 
't is not the loan of the fairest Lady lives , 
Can make him leave his morning exercise . 


julia   He never exercised with me , I 'm sure ; 
I might have laid as safe , free , and untouched , 
By any Lady living . 


Enter the Prince and Mounsi . Prince   Pardon Lords , 
I have stayed you long , your blessing royal Father . 
My custom is , ever to rise before 
A woman's hour : Now hear me speak my Lords , 
I 'm married to a Lady , whose chaste honour , 
Reports and false Suggestions , did enforce me 
To call in public question ; but that we leave 
Unto our last night's rest . 


Stro.   True my good Lord ; 
But did you find me faulty ? 


Prin.   I do protest , my Lords , I bosomed with 
As true and chaste a Virgin , as ere lodged 
Within a Prince's arms ; All this I vow 
As I am Royal . 


Str.   all 's well my Lord ? 


〈◊〉 .  all 's excellent Stroza . 


〈◊〉 .  Now for a●endss and public satisfaction , 
For the foul wrong I did her , questioning 
Her Virtue , I 'll confirm her dowry , and that 
Before I eat : Sweet Lady , reach the Charter 
I gave you last night , before you were full mine ? 


julia   I received none Sir.  


Prin.   Sweet , will you tell me that ? 
With which you did receive a Ring the Duke 
My father gave me . 


julia   When ? 


Prince   Last night . 


julia   Where ? 


Prince   In your Bed.  


julia   'T was in my dream then . 


Prince   Being broad awake . 


Stro.   I like not this : I smell a Rat.  


Milla.   Stroza , I fear too . 


Stro.   Brazen forehead , wilt 
thou leave now : 't is true my Lord You did 
Receive them both , Have you forgot sweet Lady , 
This very morning , that you gave them both 
To me ? The Princess jested , to see how 
You wooed but take it . 


Moun.   Excellent Villain ! 


Prince   'T was well put off : 
't is strange she 's so forgetful : I prithee Stroza 
Where are they ? 


Stro.   Where are they ? they are — 


Prince   Where ? 
Why study you ? 


Stro.   They are there — 


Prince   Where man ? 


Stro.   I posted them 
To Milan , sent them safe , dare you not trust my word 


Prince .  Not till I see my deeds . 


Stro.   By one o' th' Prince's Train . 


Prince   See which o the Train is wanting . 


Moun.   I shall my Lord  


Stro.   I would I were in Turkey . 


Milla.   Would I were on horseback . 


Prin.   Nay , look not you dejected beauteous Bride , 
For this is done only to honour you . 


Enter a Servingman with a child in a covered Dish . Gent.   The Prince , my Master , hearing your solemnities , 
Hath sent this dish , to add a present to 
Your royal Feasts , wishing himself therein 
To be a welcome guest . 


Prince .  Your Master's name ? 


Gent.   Prince Parma . 


Prince   Give this Gentleman 
A 100 crowns : This will much grace our banquet . 


Flo.   there 's in that dish , some Moral . 


Milla.   Coming from him , 
Methinks it should be seasoned with some strange 
And dangerous poison : Touched not , my Lord  


Flo.   There should be more in 't , than a feasting dish ; 
what 's here , a Child ? 


julia   O my perplexed heart ! 


Pri.   Upon his breast there 's something written , I 'll read it . 
't is fit , if justice be not quite exiled 
That he that weds the mother , keep the child . 
This Child was sent to me . 


Stro.   From whom ? whom , Parma ? break the bastard's neck , 
As I would do the Fathers , were he here . 


Prin.   Sure spareed for the Mother's sake ; 't was sent to us : 
Which of the train is wanting ? 


Enter Mounsieus . Moun.   None my Lord  


Prin.   Stroza , where is this Charter and the Ring ? 


Stro.   I know of none . 


Moun.   Why , 't was confessed . 


Stro.   Right , I confessed it ; but your grace must know , 
'T was but to please your humour , which began 
To grow into some violence . 


Moun.   I can forbear no longer ; Impudent Stroza , 
thou art a Villain , perjured , and forsworn : 
That Duke dishonourable ; and she unchaste : 
Besides , thou hyredst a Virgin in her room ; 
( Slave as thou art ) to bosom with the Prince ; 
Gav'st her five hundred Crowns . That this is true , 
I will maintain by combat . 


Stro.   That I did this ? He lies below his entrailss , 
That dares to brave me with such a proud affront : 
And in the honour of my Prince and Country 
I will approve thee recreant . 


Prin.   A strife , that naught save combat can decide , 
The cause so full of doubts , and intricate . 
See , they are both armed , and evenly , without odds , 
Save what the justice of the cause can yield . 


Exit Mounsieur and Stroza , Enter Prince Parma . Par.   Be 't no intrusion held , if a strange Prince 
( Setting behind , all complemental leave ) 
amongst strange Princes enters : Let me know 
Which is the Prince of Florance ? 


Prince   We are he . 


Parm.   And Parma ? 


jult.   Parma ? 


Prince   Excuse me Sir , 
I know him not : But if I much mistake not , 
We are late indebted to you for a present . 


Parm.   It was a gift , I should be loath to part with , 
But upon good conditions . am I then 
To all a stranger : Do you not know me Lady ? 


Milla.   Hear him not speak , I charge thee by thine honour ? 


Prince .  Parma speak , and if thy speech was bend to me ? 


Parm.   E'er I proceed , let me behold this babe ; 
Near a Nurse here ? Pray hand it you sweet Lady , 
Till I find out a Mother . 


Milla.   Touch it not , 
I charge thee on my blessing . 


julia   Pardon Sir , 
It well becomes my handling . 


Prince .  Parma proceed . 


Parm.   then Florence know , thou hast wronged me beyond , thought ; 
Shipwrecked my Honour , and my Fame ; nay strumpeted 
Her , whom I term my Bride . 


Prince   't is false , I never embraced save with one , 
And her , I found to be most truly chaste . 


Parm.   then It maintain : Hast thou a Wife here ? 


Prince   Yes . 


Parm.   then I 'll approve her to be none of thine , 
That thou hast fetch 't her from another's arms . 
Nay more , that she 's unchaste ? 


Prin.   Know Parma , thou hast kindled such a Flame , 
That all the Ocean's billows scarce can quench : 
Be that onr quarrels ground . 


Florence   Princes , forbear : 
First see the Issue of the former Combat , 
Before more blood you hazard . 


Prince   We are pleased . 


Parm.   And we content . 


Enter Stroza and the Mounusieur , they fight , and Stroza is overcome . Moun.   Yield thyself recreant villain , or thou diest . 


Stro.   Save me , I will confess ; Is Parma here ? 


Parm.   Yes , here we are . 


Stro.   I falsely stuffed thy head with jealousies , 
And for some private ends of my revenge , 
Disgraced the General , and set odds betwixt 
Lauretta and the Princess : All these mischiefs 
Proceed from my suggestions . 


Milla.   Damn him for it . 


Stro.   Is that your kindness ? Give me lean to live , 
Be 't but to taint his honour . 


Prince   Tell me Stroza , 
Was julia chaste ? 


Stro.   No.  


Prince   Did her Father know it ? 


Stro.   Yes , and more too : I had the Gold from him , 
To bribe the General's daughter . 


Florence   Injuries , 
Beyond the thought of man  


Milla.   Which we ' le no longer strive with , since the heavens have laid that open most plain and palpable , which most we thought to conceal . 


Prince .  Will Parma fight ? 


Parm.   Resolve me first ? Was julia found chaste ? 


Prince .  I here protest , we parted both , as clear , 
As at our first encounter . 


Parm.   then I accept her , If you my Lord 
Be pleased so to part with her . 


Prince .  Willingly . 


julia   Now have I my desires : Had I withal , 
The Princely babe I boar . 


Parm.   See julia , 
Whom thy hardhearted Father doomed to death , 
My care hath still Conserved , Embrace it Lady ; 
Nay , 't is thy own ne'er fear it . 


Prince .  then Prince Parma , 
With your words I 'll proceed . 
't is fit all justice he not quite exiled , 
That he that weds the Mother keep the child . 


Florence   But Peers , the Virgin that this Stroza hired 
To justify thee wrongs ? 


Prince   At hand my Lord : 
Mounsieur conduct them hither ? 


Moun.   I shall Sir.  


Milla.   The General's Wife and Daughter . 


Enter Lauretta , Wife , and Clown . Clow.   Yes and their man too ; all that 's left of him . 


Prince   This the Maid , 
To whom I am so bound ? 


Laure.   O let me lie 
As prostrate at your foot in Vassalage , 
As I was at your pleasure . 


Prince .  Sweet arise . 


Clow.   Your Lordship hath been up already , when she was down : I hope if the thing you wot of go no worse forward than it hath hegun , and that you take charge of my young Lady , you need not be altogether unmindful of her Gentleman-usher . 



Florence   Of what birth is that Lady ? 


Milla.   Even the least 
Envy can speak , She is a Soldier's Daughter , 
Decended from a noble parentage . 


Wife .  Who with her mother , 
Thus kneels to him , as to their Sovereign . 
Entreating , grace and pity . 


Milla.   You have both : 
Sure , sure , the heavens for our Ingratitude , 
To noble Sforza , onr brave general , 
Hath saved crossed our proceedings : which to recompense , 
we 'll take you unto our best patronage . 


Wife .  Milan is honourable . 


Prince   But by your favour Sir , 
This must be our own charge . 


Florence   With which we are pleased . 


julia.   Stroza was cause of all , but his submission 
Hath saved him from our hate , arise in grace . 
Whilst we thus greet Lauretta . 


Lauret .  Royal Princess , 
I still shall be your handmaid . 


Stroza   Who would strive , 
To be a villain , when the good thus thrive ? 


Prince   You crown me with your wishes , Royal father ; 
My Mistress first , and next my bedfellow , 
And now my Bride most welcome . Excellent Sir , 
Embrace the Milan Duke , whilst I change hand 
With Princely Parma ; julia , once my Wife ? 
Back to your husband I return you chaste : 
Mounsieur , be still our friend : You our kind Mother : 
And let succeeding Ages , thus much say : 
Never was Maidenhead better given away . 


Exeunt omnes . FINIS . 

The Epilogue . 

New Plays , are like new Fashions ; If they take ? 
Followed and worn : And happy 's he can make 
First into ' th' Garb : But when they once have past 
Censure , and prove not well , they seldom last . 
Our Play is new , but whether shaped well 
In Act or Scene , judge you , you best can tell : 
We hope the best , and 't is our least of fear , 
That any thing but comely should show here ; 
However Gentlemen , 't is in your powers , 
To make it last ; or wear out , in two hours . 
