POETICAL VARIETIES : OR , VARIETY OF FANCIES . 

By Tho. jordan Gent.  

Carpere vel noli nostra vel ede tua : 

Marti . Epigram . 



LONDON , Printed by T. C. for Humphrey Blunden , and are to 〈…〉 his shop , near the Castle Tavern , in Cornhill . 〈…〉 

TO THE MAECENAS OF CANDID INDUSTRY , Mr. JOHN FORD of Gray's Inn , Gent. My humble Muse directs her weak Endeavours . 

Worthy Sir , 

I Have had a long propension in my soul to endeavour something worthy your acceptance , and gain me honour in the oblation , had loved Thalia pleased to bless my brain with some deserving subject ; yet these green fruits ( though gathered in the Springtime of my knowledge ) and far unworthy of so choice a Palate , may by your kind acceptance be digested , and thought as sweet to all that taste , as the rich fruit the pregnant Summer yieldeth . Yet , Candid Sir , I had not robbed the Age of so much Impudence as to communicate the weak effects my Infant Muse produceth to your judgement , but that I knew a sweet encouragement life's in your gentle censure can give an inspiration to that brain that is but yet ambitious of desert ; which gives me hope I shall ( when I write next ) produce things that may merit approbation , and cause you to confess me , 

A Servant studious to deserve your love , THO. JORDAN . 

TO THE CRITICAL READER . 

Sour Sir , a word with you ; 

Since I am fallen into the hazard of your infectious censure , and that I know you come to kill , not nurse my infant Muse , my language will have licence ; I must tell you , you are ungently bold to trespass on a Page of mine , seek some known Author , whose applauded name selfe-loved opinion taught you to admire ; The title page you censure , not the work , I am condemned already by that rule , but 't is no legal trial ; Is your wise knowledge so prophetic grown , that in an Author's name you read his merit , or think you that the learned Magazine is quite exhausted from the thrifty schools to make but one man happy Either resolve to read me honestly with a true purpose to be just in censure , condemning only theft , or such black guilt , or fairly leave me to my Candid Reader . 

THO. JORDAN . 

TO THE CANDID Reader , Health and increase of Knowledge . 

The pregnant Bee , filled with the honeyed bounty of the Rose , flies to the wealth Hive as doth my humble Muse unto your Candour , you are a true Maecenas the perfect Storehouse of a royal soul , whose genuine disposition is not turned with the next breath of frail opinion ; but will the meanest merit est imate with a most gentle censure . You understand what man would do , and think it more etherial to give his Muse a birth then a destroying sentence ; I have composed to feed thy gentle view these various Poems , for which I must Apologise thus much ; I have not robbed the Hive of any man's endeavours , or exhausted his honey treasury to enrich my barren labours , but from the native flower sucked I my sweetness , if there be aught that may content thy wealth palate , it is thine own , the Cook prepared it for thee : Farewell . 

thine THO. JORDAN . 

Of my friend Mr. Thomas jordan , Tetraslichon . 

Iordan in Harvest swells , and so thy vain 
Runn's like a sudden Torrent after rain . 
End as thou hast begun , and as that River 
That bears thy name ; thou mayst be read forever . 
THO. HEYWOOD . 

To my Friend Mr. Tho. jordan on his Poems , which I title , His Underwood . 

When ( jordan ) I had read thine Under wood 
of growing Poesy , I understood , 
( At least imagined ) that I saw a Spring 
Break through the depth of Winter ; and a Ring 
Of Sylvans , Satyrs , and lightfooted Fawns , 
That haunt the Woods , the Mountains , and the Lawns , 
( Each with his Nymph ) unanimously met , 
All overjoyed to dance a roundelet . 
For that they found in thy delightful Grove , 
Something for every one of them to love ; 
Each in his several kind ; and o'er them sat 
The airy Choristers , ( none without a Mate ) 
Upon thy branches , who unto their dance , 
( With no less joy in Music ) did advance 
A welcome , and a wished increasefull way , 
To every stem , to every sprig , and spray , 
Sprung from thy pregnant brain . The Muse's throng . 
To hear those birds chant forth the cheerful Song 
They had inspired them with ; whilst through his Rays 
Phoebus sat smiling down , to see his Bays , 
Yet unneglected ; and this leaden age 
( Whose dulness damps his Laurel , which the rage 
Of Thunder never blasted ) to send forth 
A Genius that to wear it sings its worth . 
And now ( most happily ) when the Poets old 
Are sinking too ! That one so young should hold 
The club up 'gainst the Giant ignorance , 
The malice of the times , and blinder chance , 
Apollo pleased , thou mayst expect soon after 
( For only thou hast moved his this years laughter ) 
To be in 's Darlings list , then will he shine , 
Propitiously on every plant of thine ; 
And make them flourish by his cheering light , 
Through the gross darkness of detraction's spite ; 
And send thee followers , and admirers , who 
Shall cry up all thou dost or aim'st to do . 
Mean time I lend ( that dares on envy look ) 
This Page to bear a Torch before thy book . 
RICH. BROME . 

To Mr. Thomas jordan on his Fancies . 

I Read thy Fancies ; wondered how 
Such streams of wit should from thee flow , 
Friend jordan ; Inere thought thy head 
( Like Nile's scarce yet discovered ) 
Would so break out ; but now I am 
Pleased with the knowledge whence they came ▪ 
Some Poetasters of the times , 
That dabble in the Lake of Rhimes ; 
Care not , so they be in Print 
What sordidtrash or stuff is in 't . 
There are too many such I fear 
That make Books cheap and Paper dear . 
But thou art poesy 's true son , 
The Issue of thy brain doth run 
With well digested matter , thine , 
Are Moral some , and some Divine , 
Some Satyrs some love's Rhapsodies , 
The dead live by thy Elegies . 
We that are old in th' art must leak , 
And worn with often usage break ; 
Thy younger pot the Muses will 
With their best waters always fill ; 
When we are gone , the World shall see , 
A full-brimed Helicon in thee . 
THO. NABBES . 

To his Friend the Author Mr. Thomas jordan , on his Varieties . 

I Must not jordan pass , though the waves glide 
with equal favour of the wind and tide : 
Nor for the land will I forsake the streams , 
On whose brow danceth flowery Anadems . 
But every limb bathing in fresh delight , 
Quicken the bravery of my appetite , 
I scud amid st the Curls ▪ and with my palm , 
Stroke the delicious waters in a calm , 
Whose virtues are more powerful in their birth ▪ 
then all the distillations of the earth ; 
To sip of this from Cupid's hollow hand , 
Creates effects more strange than dart , or brand : 
Quaff Candid Reader , but dull clots be gone , 
For Iordan's waters , are pure Helicon . 
ED. MAY.  

On my Friend and adopted son Mr. Thomas jordan the Infant-poet of our Age.  

From smallest Springs , arise the greatest streams , 
thou hast begun well ; who dares hinder thee 
Still to go forward , and dilate thy beams , 
T' acquaint the world with thy sweet Poetry . 
Speak still in tune , hide not thy worth but show it , 
That men may say , thou art born not made a Poe● . 
And he that fails thy growing Muse to cherish , 
May his fixed hopes in expectation perish . 
thine ( sans Compliment ) 
I B.  

POETICAL VARIETIES . 

A Gentleman in love with twenty Mistresses . 

I Prithee leave me love , go place desire 
In those cold hearts that never felt Amorous fire , 
Or let me be thy Martyr , let me burn 
Till I am naught but ashes , and my urn 
Translated to some common Spicery , 
May serve thee more than thy Artillery . 
Coy Madams tasting me in their hot spice , 
Shall feel more flames than all the learned advice 
Of Esculapius can allay , though he 
Descend from Heaven to teach new Mystery ; 
If this may not be granted , let me crave 
As many hearts as flames , then shall I have 
A multitude of fayre-ones ; then I may 
Enjoy my Rosa , spend the Amorous day 
Within her arms , and at the night retire 
To Violetta , quench another fire 
In her cold bosom , but ere day doth rise 
Salute the Morn in my Aurora's eyes : 
There like to an Idolater I 'll gaze 
Till my Honoria rids me of the maze 
And draws me to her Bower , where having spent 
Some heavenly hours , I 'll find out Millescent 
( That wonder of perfection ) we two , 
Can teach the Turtles what they ought to do ; 
With kisses moist her Ruby lips I 'll cover . 
But then Castara says I do not love her ; 
Who with a witty sweet indulgent smile 
Tells me I do forget her all this while . 
then do I kiss and study to excuse , 
But yet am straight instructed by my Muse. 
B●lla●a wants me , there 's a mind as fair 
And beautiful as all the other Are : 
In their external features , such a one 
Might have persuaded desperate Phaeton , 
To have forsook his Chariot ; her I love 
Next to my Beads , till Fancy bids me prove 
My chaste Eliza , in her Virg●n breast , 
Lies far more worth than Poets have expressed . 
In painting ou● Pandora , I confess 
I honour her as I do happiness ; 
But not like my beloved Beata , she 
Can give instructions to Martalitie , 
How we may scape Hell's fatal fire and come , 
To ( loves blessed Paradise ) Elysium ; 
Except Thalia ( one as fair and kind ) 
Persuade 's us to be of another mind ; 
Makes us believe Elysium is a place 
But feigned unless it be in her embrace ▪ 
Where I could ever rest , thence never part 
Would Eglentina send me back my heart , 
Yet such sweet chains of love she binds it in , 
That should I think to lose , 't would be a sin 
To great for Absolution , I must rest 
Until Dulcella ( not more fair then blessed ) 
Please for to give release , in her it lies 
To make me hug my own dear perjuries ; 
And yet she knows Ambrosia being by 
I can neglect her and her potency . 
Ambrosia can conduct my happy feet 
To Columbina ( she that is more sweet 
Than natures poe fumed violet ) he that knows 
Her sweetness , as I do , will say the Rose 
Breathes but contagion , yet Candora shall 
Maintain though she be sweet , she has not all 
Kind nature did bestow , for in her breast 
Arabiahs , and the chaste Phoenix nest . 
Must I though loose Fidelia and deny 
My faith to Anabella , let me die 
When I remember not the sacred love 
'twixt me and my Musea ; The fond Dove 
Affects not like Lucella , they are all 
So fair , so sweet I know not which to call 
My best or happiest , for unhappy I , 
Must love but one of all , or by love die ; 
I 'll leave all therefore , and myself incline 
To court Urania , she 's a love divine . 
A Gentleman's deploration for his Mistress , falling from Virtue . 

Patience , inhabit humble souls ; extend 
Thy passive power to those whose sorrows end ; 
Mine are eternal , powerful , and immense ; 
Such as may teach thee wrath fond Patience ; 
Ixion's wheel is easy , and the stone 
Sissiphus rolls he doth but sleep upon , 
Compared to mine ; The greatness of my wrongs 
Would want Oration , though an hundred tongues 
Guided by fluent Orators , should dare 
In thrifty speech but briefly to declare ; 
They would destroy all Memories , all Sense , 
And drive all Language from Intelligence . 
thou that art rich in sorrow ▪ and canst swear 
thou hast more than Mortality can bear . 
Attend , and give me audience , I will show 
Thy quaking sense what thou shalt fear to know ; 
thou wilt believe ( if I at large declare ) 
Sorrow hath ta'en her dwelling in thy Eare. 
And think thou mayst with lesser patience 
Endure thy wrongs , than give mine audience . 
Felina's fallen from virtue ; she 's acute 
In learned Levity , turned Prostitute . 
I loved her dear , while her eyes were pure , 
While she blushed innocent , and kissed to cure . 
When smiles were modest ensigns , while her breath , 
Carried more balm than poison , life then death ; 
When she weeped honest grief ; and I did see , 
Her Salutations were humility ; 
then was she perfect Virgin ; then did I 
Contract my heart to this Idolatry . 
Her eyes do now look glorious , but to tell 
Unhappy man , the fairest way to Hell. 
She blush's now for guilt , smiles to do ill , 
Breathes but to poison , kisses but to kill ; 
Weep's to ●●snare , salut's but to destroy , 
Flatters to craze , embraceth to betray ; 
Betrays to get no profit , or renown , 
But falls herself , to pluck another down . 
O false Felina , must your beauty be 
Exposed to Incest , and Adultery . 
You are a Whore , and 't is the choicest name 
That he will render , who first caused your shame ; 
Sometimes you are his Mistress , when his lust 
Hath itching Fevers , and must take on trust , 
But having done he loathes ye , nay will swear , 
't is you that made him turn Adulterer . 
Perhaps you 'll then repent and think on me , 
( That only prized you for your purity ) 
Resolve to be reserved , and never look 
Upon ( that dangerous forbidden Book ) 
Incontinence . then doth another come , 
Who gives your penitence a Martyrdom , 
Whom you embrace with such an appetite , 
As if you had been kept from your delight 
An age of hours ; you deities ( that see 
Such shipwreck made of divine purity ) 
Lend me your perfect patience , or I fear 
My sorrow will become my murderer , 
Release me of the contract that I vowed 
Unto Felina ; Let her not be proud 
Of my undoing too , that I may bear 
My sorrows like a man , and let my care 
Be to admonish those that mean to wed , 
no path so full of danger man can tread , 
Let not frail beauty , ( that 's the road we pass ; 
Be much adored ; fair my Felina was . 
Let not your Mistress wealth or wit surprise , 
For fair Felina was both rich and wise . 
And let not blush's Lady's virtues tell , 
Felina was once chaste , and yet she fell . 
To his Mistress Philonella , being at her Looking-glass . 

MY sweetest Philonella , turn away 
From that Angelic figure , lest you pay 
An adoration to your shade ; your eye 
May win an Hermit to Idolatry . 
Admit your soul be better guarded , know 
I have still cause for doubt , lest some rash vow 
( Made in an ●mrous ecstasy ) should tie 
Yourself to your fair shade eternally , 
Which heaven defend , when you bring this to pass . 
Be kind you powers , translate me to her glass , 
That when the coral creatures come to give 
Their daily tribute to me , I may live 
The glory of a ●over , and enjoy 
more kisses than Adonis ( Mirrha●'s boy ) 
O but some danger will pursue this bliss 
Love is a feeding Fever , and each ●isse 
Creates another appetite , Alas 
I shall become your beauties burning glass . 
Sad lovers will relate , ( should you expire ) 
Narcissus died by water , you by fire , 
Both for one Amorous folly ; yet ( as he 
Is now a Flower ) could you a Phoenix be , 
And I the sweet Arabian tree , so blessed 
With the rich treasure of your spicy nest ; 
Most willingly I should desire the bliss , 
Of so divine a Metamorphosis . 
Apollo sure would leave his Daphnean tree , 
( With Lyric Airs ) to keep us company . 
But these are fancies , leave your glass , I vow , 
You are to me a better Phoenix now . 
To Clora a farewell , once his coy Mistress . 

Clora farewell , you may be cruel now 
And keep the never-violated vow 
You made unto your goddess ; I am free 
As the great Monarch , whose large Empery 
Contains a thousand Regions , I can sit 
Viewing your beauty , yet betray my wit 
Unto no greater folly ; I can say 
Your cheeks are july Roses , and the day 
Borrows its radiant lustre from your eyes , 
And yet retain my own ; I can be wise ; 
I do disdain the power that made me turn 
Apostata to reason ; and do burn 
With a devoute vexation , I should spend 
My precious time to such a thriftless end 
As to be your Admirer , therefore when 
You shall dispute the follies of youngmen , 
Let me entreat you , ( though it raise your fame 
High as Diana's self ) you will not name 
Me'mongst your captived servants , lest that I 
Ruin that fame , and you repenting die . 
To Leda his coy Bride , on the Bridal Night . 

Why art thou coy ( my Leda ) art not mine : 
Hath not the holy Hymeneal twine 
Power to contract our Natures ? must I be 
Still interposed with needless Modesty ? 
What though my former passions made me vow 
You were an Angel ; be a Mortal now . 
The bride-maides all are vanished , and the crew 
Of Virgin Ladies that ●id wait on you , 
Have left us to ourselves ; as loath to be 
Injurious to our loves wished privawe . 
Come then undress ; why blush you , prithee smile ; 
Faith I 'll disrobe ye , nay I will not spoil 
Your Necklace , or your ●orget ; here 's a Pin 
Pricks you ( fair Led● ) ' were a cruel sin 
Not to remove it ; O how many gates 
Are to Elysium ? ( yet the sweetest straits 
That ever made voyage happy ) here 's a Lace 
Me thinks should stifle you ; it doth embrace 
Your body too severely , take a knife , 
't is tedious to undo it ; By my life , 
It shall be cut . Let your Carnation gown 
Be pulled off ( too ) and next let me pull down 
This Rosy Petticoat ; What is this cloud 
That keeps the day light from us , and 's allowed 
more privilege than I ? ( Though it be white ) 
't is not the white I aim at ( by this light ) 
It shall go off ( too ) no ? then let 't alone , 
Come , let 's to bed , why look you so ? here 's none 
See's you , but I ; be quick or ( by this hand ) 
I 'll lay you down myself ; you make me stand 
Too longi'th cold ; Why do you lie so far , 
I 'll follow you , this distance shall not bar 
Your body from me ; O , 't is well , and now 
I 'll let thy Virgin innocence know how 
Kings propagate young Princes , marriage beds 
Never destroy , but erect maidenheads : 
Fair Virgins , fairly wedded , but repair 
Declining beauty in a prosperous heir . 
Come then , le 's kiss , let us embrace each other , 
Till we have found a babe , fair ( like the mother . ) 
Such face , breast's , waste , soft belly , such a — why 
Do you thrust back my hand so scornfully ? 
you 'll make me strive ( I think ) Led● , you ●now , 
I have a warrant for what ere I do , 
And can commit no trespass ; therefore come 
Make me believe theirs no Elysium 
Stweeterthen these embraces — Now you are kind , 
( My gentle Leda ) since you have resigned , 
I 'll leave my talking ( too ) lovers grow mutes 
When Amrous Ladies grant such pr●tty suits . 
A Paradox on his Mistress , who is coal Black , Blind , Wrinkled , Crooked and Dumb . 

Which of thy virtues shall I first admire , 
( Rare piece of nature's wo●der ? ) OH inspire 
My over-amorous soul , ye Virgins nine 
That bless the fount of flowing Hippocrene : 
create a fancy in me , that may fly 
Above the towering head of Rhapsody . 
Negra , thou art not fair ; I cannot say 
The blushing morn ( bright Herald to the day ) 
riseth in either Cheek ; nor yet suppose 
The blameless Lily and chaste bashful Rose 
Have a contention there , for these ( we know ) 
Change with their seasons , they but bud , and blow , 
And then expire for ever ; all their story 
Is at an end , when they begin their glory . 
But thou art Black , and therein lovely ( too ) 
Constant , as Fate , unto thy changeless Hue , 
( Like to thy inward soul ) where we may find 
Thy face to be fit Emblem to thy mind , 
Constant in all chaste thoughts ; and a black night 
Sometimes allows more pleasure , than the light 
Of a clear Summer morning , when we please 
To dedicate our wearied brains to ease 
On a soft Pillow ; Marriage-beds allow 
The night for lovers actions and ( we know ) 
That , ere the seasons of the year decay , 
Night claim 's as much of rule , as doth the Day . 
Thy Blackness is thy happiness ; by thee 
The paint of white and red Adultery 
Can have no entertainment ; all men's eyes 
May trust thy face , for it brooks no disguise ; 
thou needest no Scarves , no Black-bags here prevail , 
Thy face is both thy Beauty and thy Veil . 
Wert thou not blind ( some say ) thou wouldst despair , 
For being so , thou thinkst thyself as fair 
As Helen was ; but those are fools , and know 
no reason to allege , until I show 
The perfect truth ; thou dost reserve thy eyes 
But to look inward , where true beauty lies . 
thou look'st not on vain glory , idle toys 
That mock the sense , and are not real joys , 
But lights that lead to misery ; In thee 
It is a virtue that thou canst not see . 
Some call the Wrinkled ( Negra ) and are bold 
To tell me that my Mistress is as old 
As twice my age , ( Thus all seek to beguile 
Thy precious worth ) each wrinkle is a smile , 
( Had they my eyes to see ) then , they would know 
( If they be smiles ) why they continue so ; 
I answered that those smiles are always shown , 
To tell thou still art friends with every one . 
So art thou termed crooked , cause they see 
Thee ( like the figure of Humility ) 
Still bending to the earth ; but thou art wise 
And wilt salute all creatures ( since thy eyes 
Deny thee to make choice ) ' were better be 
Always so bend , then loose humility . 
then do they call thee Dumb , ( alas ) because 
thou art not frequent in the talking laws 
Of idle women ; must the cruel throng 
Of rank backbiters say thou hast no tongue ? 
Admit thou hast not , 't is not thy intent 
That thy chaste silence should give free consent 
To every motion ; then they wonder what 
thou movest thy head , or pointest thy fingers at , 
These were Enigmas to them , till I told , 
The meaning , and the Riddle did unfold , 
That none but they , who in thy thoughts abode , 
Can understand the virtue of thy nod . 
So , art thou none but mine ; for only I , 
Retain the knowledge of that mystery , 
And I am thine , who ( spite of envious mocks ) 
Will marry thee — by way of Paradox ; 
no otherwise ( believe me Negra ; ) so 
I 'll lie with thee , and beget children too . 
Thus you that marry ill , and live worse lives , 
( Like me ) make Para-doxes of your wives . 
A Dialogue betwixt Castadorus and Arabellain bed . 

Arabella .  Dear Castadorus let me rise 
Aurora 'gins to jeer me . 
She tells me I do wantonise , 


Castadorus .  I prithee sweet lie near me . 
Let red Aurora smile my dear 
And Phoebus laughing follow , 
thou only art Aurora here 
Let me be thy Apollo . 
It is to envy at our bliss 
That they do rise before us , 
Is there such hurt in this , or this ; 


Arabella .  Nay fie , why Castadorus . 


Castadorus .  What , Arabella can one night 
Of loving dalliance tire ye ? 
I could lie ever ( if I might ) 
One hour let me desire ye . 


Arabella .  Fie , fie , you hurt me , let me go 
If you so roughly use me , 
What can I say , or think of you ; 
I prithee ( Love ) excuse me . 


Castadorus .  Thy beauty and my love defend 
I should ungently move thee , 
't is kiss ( sweet ) that I intent , 
Is it not I that l●ve thee ? 


Arabella .  I do confess it is , but then 
Since you do so importune , 
That I should once lie down again , 
Vouchsafe to draw the Curtain 
Aurora and Apollo ( too ) 
May visit silent fields , 
By my consent they ne'er shall know 
The bliss our pleasure yields . 


To his faithless Mistress Vxoria . 

Where was I , when I called my mistress fair 
As the bright East ( when clouds dispersed are 
To the vast North ) how did I grossly err , 
When ( rashly confident ) I durst prefer 
Her virtue 'bove Diana's ! when we met , 
Why did I think the coole-liped Violet 
Kissed not more chastely sweet , or did suppose 
Her cheeks begat a colour in the rose ! 
But ( worst of all ) what madness Seized my sense 
When I conceived her craft , pure innocence ! 
Ye men of happy souls , ( I mean ) that be 
Unblasted with the breath of perjury 
Proceeding from frail woman ; keep ye so , 
Or you will find , earth cannot bear a foe 
So full of kill mischief ; all that prove 
Embrace their ruin , and yet call it love . 
O in what Chaos did that Caitiff dwell , 
That taught the Age so good a word for Hell ! 
Because your Mistress eyes starrelike appear , 
Will you blaspheming cry that heaven 's there ? 
't is melancholy madness , and I 'll prove 
You are seduced by sorcery not love , 
Her heart is deep perdition ; can her eye 
Retain one part of Heaven , Hell so nigh ? 
I am experienced , read your Fate in me , 
Let Adam's tasting the excluded tree 
Work fear in you ; good Angels tongues forbid 
That you should lose your Eden as we did . 
Women have subtle slights , they 'll tell ye then , 
What Evah lost , Mary restored again , 
Producing all her virgin purity 
To be their honour , though impiety 
Distracted into Arrogance , and lust 
Engross their souls and bodies , yet they must 
In the black book of their lives fatal story 
write for their own , the Virgin Maries glory : 
Such false Vxoria is , but if there be 
A woman Phoenix let her pardon me , 
She was excluded , when she knows my wrong , 
I know she 'll be too just to blame my tongue , 
And thus conceive , what virtue can he find 
In any woman , hath his own unkind ? 
To her perjured Love Maritus , her dishonorer . 

O my undoing faith , now I repent 
My hope ere gave my charity consent 
To be thy love Maritus , couldst thou spy 
Within the Sphere of my transparent eye 
One Cupid loosely revel to invite 
Thy soul to so unchaste an appetite 
That for its satisfaction I must die , 
Killed in my innocence by perjury ? 
O false Maritus I have heard you tell 
That in my eyes two purer Cherub's dwell , 
then those that guard Elysium ; and my lip 
So chastely cool , that should a Lecher sip , 
He might convert to Angel ; my hands touch 
To a more guilty person do as much . 
What wor●er thing are you , these virtues can 
Convert them Angels , and not you to man ; 
Have you a soul ? do you believe it must 
( When to some urn you have resigned your dust ) 
Have any residence ? do you not feel 
In your wide conscience , that Ixion's wheel 
The Poets paint for Moral , yet agree 
To take his torment as one worse than he ? 
Repent , sigh , weep ( Maritus ) your wild youth 
Hath murdered innocence , and wounded truth 
Whilst I stand my own statue , and my eyes 
write this in tears — 
HERE MY DEAD HONOUR LIES . 
A vow to his inestimable Mistress . 

BY the two Rosy blushes that did move 
In your chaste cheeks when I revealed my love , 
By those Favonian sighs whose gentle calm 
Perfumed the Air sweet , as judean balm , 
By those two Ruby Portals , that disclose 
Two Hemispheres of Pearl , contrived to pose 
The yet amazed beholder , by your eyes , 
Brighter to me then Titan when he flies 
Over Arabian mountains ere his heat ● 
Doth cause the toiling rural Negro sweat 
Under his spicy burden , by your hair , 
Which pardon sweetest if I term a snare 
To catch a Cupid in , and falling low 
Into your bosom where the banks of Po 
Show nurseryes of Lilies , I protest 
With a chaste kiss upon your virgin breast 
( Love's sacred register of vows ) in thee 
My love and life hath chose eternity ; 
Yet take my countervow this zealous kiss 
I will be true — so Angels meet their bliss . 
A Dialogue between Icarus and surprised Phillida . 

Phil.   Pretty sweete-one look on me 
Feign I would thy captive be , 
bound by thee is liberty . 


Icar .  Be not so unkindly wise 
For your looks will bribe my eyes 
To divulge where my heart lies . 


Phil.   If they do , thou needst not fear , 
By my innocence I swear , 
I 'll but place another there . 


Icar .  that 's my fear I dare not prove 
Nor my resolution move , 
'Cause I know you are in love . 


Phil.   Loved Icarus and if I be 
I know I cannot injure thee , 
Love and beauty will agree . 


Ica .  O you do my hearing wrong , 
I have turned my eyes thus long 
To be captived by your tongue . 


Phil.   then my hours are happy spent , 
If my tongue give such content 
It shall be thy Instrument . 


Ica .  But be sure you use it then 
Thus unto no other men , 
lest that I grow deaf again . 


Love's progress . 

Love is my honest character ; I am 
The child of a fair mother , and I came 
From yon celestial Palace , to surround 
This universe , I did so , and have found 
My deity adored by all , I was 
Their only Genius ▪ brought all acts to pass ; 
I entered a great City where I spied 
A fourscore Bridegroom and a sixteen Bride , 
Going to Hymen's Temple , though her eye 
Looked but disdainful of his Gravity 
( She was compelled ) I pitying the wrong 
Shot a sharp shaft , she loved , and he grew young ; 
This was my first effectual work and then 
I met a venerable Citizen , 
A Usurer , well troubled with the strife 
Of worldly cares , and yet without a wife ; 
I made him wed his maid , and break his store 
For pious uses , to maintain the poor . 
I interrupted ( next ) the serious Muse 
Of a sad Student , busy to peruse 
The hearts of minerals , who let gold fly 
To purchase glass , and practise Alchemy ; 
I did infuse a Quintessence that made 
My wise Philosopher mistake his trade , 
Dazzled his fancy so , that he did spy 
Faces and lip● in his Philosophy ; 
Sweet Roseate blushes , smiles , choice locks of hair , 
Soft fingers , and such eyes as women wear ▪ 
When all was perfected in every part 
A Lady was th' Elixir of his Art 
Love is a Courtier ( too ) I went to Court , 
There did I see a general resort 
Of royal persons , Dukes , Earls , Lords and Knights ; 
Each one his Lady , and most choice delights 
Ushering their pomp ; the Virgin Ladies ( too ) 
Frequent that Senate , who prepare to do 
Their amrous rites to love ; the youthful squires 
Neglect no office that may keep the fires 
Of Cupid ever burning ; yet amongst these 
Diana had a vestal did displease 
My angry soul ; she was a virgin fair 
As lovely Psyche ; in her trameld hair 
Hung precious Diamonds , yet might you spy 
no lustre in them , cause her eyes were by , 
And to reveal her fully , I durst swear 
I h●d beheld another Venus there . 
This Lady was beloved adored and sought 
By a rich heir , ( that as much virtue brought 
As she had beauty ) in whose soul did move 
The divine graces , yet he was in love 
With this coy piece of Ladyship ; but she 
Contemned as much , now note the destiny , 
I could not brook her humour , but did burn 
With hot vexation ; which did sudden turn 
To royal madness , and in zealous rage 
I made him wed a Countess , she a Page . 
Thus did I traverse earth , and now am come 
To rest my tired limbs in Elysium . 
To his most excellent Mistress , Avis Booth . 

Melpomene , forget thou art a Muse 
Or in thy tragic brain a juice infuse 
May keep thee sleeping , let Thalia bring 
From green Parnassus , plenty of that spring 
Inspires our Laureate Lovers ; could I praise 
Loved Avis to her worth , I might wear Bays 
Thrown from fair Daphne's arms bedewed with tears , 
For grief all others are her ravishers . 
Who but beholds her cheeks and not supposes 
December to be june , there live such Roses ; 
Here would I rest , should I ascend her eyes , 
't is feared my own would be their sacrifice ; 
I 'll leave particulars lest I should wrong 
Those that must ne'er enjoy her , if my tongue 
( Made eloquent by her ) could but declare 
Each beauty fully , love and sad despair 
Would execute all hearers , there would be 
A civil war 'twixt faith and Piety ; 
Since she 'll breed ruin if I should discover 
I 'll draw the Curtains close ; but let no lover 
Compare his Mistress to her , lest that I 
Describe at large , and he by surfeit die , 
Such virtue hath her beauty , for she is 
A Rara Avis , and my fair Mistress . 
A●hrostick to his Mistress . 

Sweet Soul of goodness , in whose Saintlike breast 
Virtue Vowe's dwelling , to make beauty blessed ; 
Sure Sighing Cytherea sits , your eyes 
Are Altars whereon she might sacrifice ; 
Now None will of the Paphean order be ; 
nature 's New work transcends a deity ; 
Arabia's Aromatticks court your scent ; 
Bright Beauty makes your gazer's eloquent , 
Let Little Cupid his lost eyes obtain 
( Veiled ) Viewing you would strike him blind again ; 
Nay Never think I flatter , If you be 
Thus To none else ( by love ) you are to me . 
A Gentleman desirous to have his Lady's Picture drawn , describes her thus . 

Ingenious Artist teach thy Pencil how 
To paint a goddess , I would let thee know 
I have a Mistress thy admired Art 
Must limne like my description ; do no● start 
If I command a work above thy skill 
And send thee once more to Parnassus' hill 
To hear Thalia's Lectures ; have you seen 
The lovely feature of the Cypri●● Queen , 
Her cheeks resemble somewhat ; though each Rose 
In here's seems plucked , and my Aurelia's grows ; 
Yet they may pass ; the Lillies that do stand 
Upon her breasts , tells you my Mistress hand 
Is pattern to their whiteness ; let her eyes 
Not want that heavenly virtue to surprise 
Only my heart , let them be loved by none 
Whose glories are to captive every one . 
't is only my ambition for to be 
Fit for my Mistress , and she fit for me . 
But to my first description ; for those hairs 
Adorn her head , paint them Dia●a wears ; 
And let her forehead not inferior be 
To that which shows great Juno's majesty , 
Let those two Rosy portals , that I call 
Her ruby lips , be but so magical 
As his her own , so sweet , so balmy made , 
Sure I shall leave the substance for the shade . 
If you think these Enigmas and that I 
Strive but to pose you with my Poetry ; 
Making an argument you never saw 
Such goddesses feigned by Poetic law : 
I answer such divine powers you shall see 
Get but a Mistress , be in love ( like me ) 
Chaste Love sitting under a Grove of ●ong Bay-tre●s , is thus solicited by Lust.  

Love.   What ? sighing Love , for shame arise 
Sat not crosse-armed , ( by Venus' eyes ) 
thou dost thy passion Idolise . 
I 'll bring thee to a Mistress , fair 
As Lillies when they first prepare 
To kiss the Amorous morning air ; 
she 's as active as desire , 
Her voice transcends the Mermaids choir ; 
In each touch glowe's Cupid's fire . 
Corinthian wantoness whose rare merits 
Were in raising leaden spirits , 
My choice Mistress breast inherits . 
Cold Anchorites , ( prepared to mourn 
Their past crimes ) should they but turn 
Their eyes on her ; would ( gazing ) burn ; 
And in that scorching ecstasy 
Not desire to be set free , 
But wish to burn eternally . 
How can she but so surprise 
The chaste hearts of the most wise , 
Cupid's heaven is her eyes . 
Yet if yours whom you do keep 
Chary as your thoughts in sleep , 
For whom you nightly pray and weep , 
Be so fair , so kind , so loving , 
So attractive , sweet , and moving , 
Let me know her by your proving . 


Love.   I have a Mistress chaster far , 
then thine is fair , shall be a star , 
When she is in a Sepulchre . 
With the harmony divine 
Angels limbs with Angels twine , 
As does her white soul and mine . 
We can kiss without desire , 
Enjoy our sweets , and feel no fire 
To inflame , or yet expire . 
Divinity itself may see , 
In her souls fair Symmetry , 
What Religion ought to be . 
In her eyes an Anchorite may 
Make purer his Religious Clay , 
And to heaven tread the way . 
I am chaste Love , not confined 
To your feigned Archer blind , 
But adore a virtuous mind ; 
And whoever will deny 
Sensual Lust , and do as I , 
Shall ever love , and never die . 


What a Whore is . 

Nature's unhappy workmanship ; if Fair 
So much the worse , all mischiefs doubled are : 
If Modest , there 's a hell in her intent , 
She kills secure , when she seems innocent : 
If coy and nice , take heed , it is a slight , 
She useth but to strengthen Appetite : 
If witty , in her power more dangers lie , 
she 'll give you Logic for Adultery , 
Prove lust legitimate ; at last beguile 
Your easy sense with a deluding smile , 
more subtle than her Logic ; in such ways 
She spends her precious ne'er returning days . 
( The glory of her youth ) And ( which is worse ) 
Had she Helena's beauty , yet the curse , 
Of Strumpets will attend her ; sickness seizes 
Her overcharged body , and diseases , 
Will understand no Physic , but prepare 
Her limbs for earth , ere a repentant Prayer 
Can cherish her lost soul ; Thus she defloure's 
Her living kindred and dead ancestors 
Of all their fertile fame , so buried lies , 
A pitiful example to the wise ; 
But those whom she abused in life will laugh 
Her final fall , and curse an Epitaph . 
An abused Man : Quasi , a Cuccold . 

YE Gods that lend me Patience , tell me why 
My guiltless fame ( pure as your Piety ) 
Must suffer for its innocence ; can fate 
For virtuous men such ills predestinate : 
Is (null) not enough you have confined my life 
To the loathed prison of an unchaste wife ; 
Extinguished Hymen's Tapers , and bespread 
With ●we and Cypress my poor nuptial bed , 
But I must suffer the injurious wrong 
And Contumelic of each idiots tongue , 
Take the reproach of him ( perhaps ) that thrives 
In his warm Plush by naught else but his wives 
( Thrice bought ) adultery , yet such as he 
Must on my Patience brand his Calumny : 
Teach wiser men , and such as know the price 
Of a chaste wife , It is a Paradise 
All candid souls enjoy not if they do● , 
Ye are unjust , my merits claim one ( too ) 
But I repent my rage , conceive again 
The reason why you punish virtuous men ; 
To make it in their suffering appear 
They must attend , their heaven is not here ; 
Yet tell my rude abusers only this , 
Not my unkindness causeth her amiss , 
Nor is it poverty my torment brings , 
For such as mine may be the fate of Kings . 
Lust loseth all . 

Lvst ( The hot mother of unchaste desires , 
●lacke spotted s●averss and destroying fires ) 
I must take breath to curse ye , for I see 
My ruin will be perfected by thee . 
Why do men call thee love , when as no hate 
Retaines a Plague , makes man more desperate : 
thou robbest him of all honour , mak'st his name 
Become the only title of a shame ; 
O may thy fawning falsehood ne'er have rest 
Within the confines of a noble breast . 
All the choice virtues , that I ere could boast 
My soul enjoyed , insatiate lust hath lost : 
Religion bid me first farewell , for I 
Behold no beauty in Divinity ; 
then wisdom left the mansion of my mind 
To folly 's trust ( who never was inclined 
Unto chaste laws ) I did not wisdom miss , 
Wealth can obtain a lustful Mistress : 
But soon as wisdom from my soul did slide , 
Reason removed and bade me seek a guide , 
Which thus I did , my present fancy flies 
Unto the daylight of my Mistress eyes , 
Which being darkened by divine decrce , 
I lost my way , and was as blind as she : 
But when Religion , Wisdom , Reason went , 
Faith left me ( too ) and with a firm consent 
Her sister Hope did follow , both agree 
To heaven to transport kind charity ; 
Love lost his labour in me , for unjust 
I did convert his civil laws to lust . 
Honour declined , saying it is not right 
Man should be servant to his appetite : 
Manhood exiled himself and would not own 
Me nor my acts ▪ I was all Woman grown . 
Who thinks I am no loser ? who will say 
he 's not undone that hath no more to p●ay ? 
Let no man then expose his life and fame 
He must needs lose , the devils in the game ; 
He that buys pleasure at so dear a price 
Obtaines an apple to lose Paradise . 
A Dialogue betwixt Adversus and his Mistress the Lady Contra.  

Adver .  Fair Contra , in the bosom of yond shade 
Remains a soft repose , by nature made 
To give your beauty welcome , 't is a Bow●r 
Solicited by every fragrant Flower 
Nursed in this Rosy Province , shall I crave 
I may conduct you to it , ( sweet ) I have 
A gentle story to reveal , so dear 
Unto myself , that none but your chaste ear 
May hear the petty volume , be but pleased 
To sit and hear and my desire is eased . 


Contra.   You will not kill my patience or betray 
My ears to some loose fancy , from what Play 
Have you traduced your story ? is it new , 
Decently delectable , strange and true ? 
What title hath your story ? may it be 
Herd without tears ? comes it off merrily ? 


Adver .  't is called a Game at Hearts , both strange and new ; 
The losers win if both the hearts play true . 


Con.   This is a riddle sure , some fine defeat , 
You have composed to give my wit the cheat . 


Adver .  There is a man — that 's I — his heart doth vow 
Unto a virtuous Lady — that is you . 
Be not offended fairest , this is all 
The story I can tell or ever shall , 
I love you ; love you dear , in your eye 
Life's my devotion , there 's a deity 
So powerful , that is calls my early eyes 
From practic Prayer to give it sacrifice . 
I love you chastely , my divine desire 
Aims but at honoured marriage , all the fire 
Love ( the great king of passions ) did create 
Within my breast , is as immaculate , 
Temprate and pure as the bright flame that flies 
In zeal from an accepted sacrifice . 


Con.   Is this your stories end ? is your game done ? 
Where be your losing winners ? who hath wone ? 


Adver●   The heart that never played , play then and be 
A double winner , I 'll lose all to thee . 


Co● .  Indeed I cannot love , or if I do , 
Credit me Sir , I cannot fancy you , 
You are to full of passion , if you can 
Exile it from you and turn merry man , 
You may obtain my favour , but if not 
Your game is done , your story quite forgot● 


Ad●er .  O the blind cu●se of lovers it doth make 
Man become Idiot for his mistress sake , 
But I disdain the task and let you know 
( Your superficial fayre-one ) that I bow 
Not to the feature of your female kind , 
But to a breast enriched with a fair mind ; 
If yours be so , I love you , but if not , 
My love ( like to my story ) is forgot : 
Must I become a Zane , laugh and toy , 
Your ever-losing favour to enjoy ; 
Doth your wise Ladyship conceit it fit , 
I should implore the virtue of your wit 
With idle mirth , reserved for want on guests , 
Or must I pled my marriage love in jests ? 
't is a severe conjunction that do●h tie 
Two souls in one unto eternity , 
And requires serious wisdom , such as may 
Keep the knot tied more than the marriage day ; 
Perhaps you are engaged , your heart doth dwell 
Within another's , love him then — farewell . 


Contra Sola .  Thus Virgin's sport away their loves , thus I 
Have at one blast lost more felicity 
Than many Queens can boast , some pitying fate 
Contrive a means I may be fortunate 
In his loved love again , O be so kind 
To render me the object of his mind ; 
If your strict Canons this request deny , 
And that your sentence tells me I must die 
For my transgression , I no mourners crave , 
But let some Zane laugh me to my grave ; 
no Epitaph be written nor yet a stone 
With this Inscription , here lies buried One , 
lest my lost Love should come , and when he spies 
My Sepulchre with pity lose his eyes . 


Rara Avis in terris nigroque Similima Cigno . 

Fly , fly my nimble Genius round about 
The peopled world , find me this Riddle out , 
There is much doubt in 't , to the City fly 
amongst the Female Beauties , where each eye 
Begets a gazing admiration ; there 
Choose me a young Wench that doth know she 's fair , 
Who in Thought , Word , and Deed is chaste , and yet 
Hath been thrice tempted by Wealth , Worth and Wit. 
In the same City do the best you can 
By narrow search , to spy me out a Man 
Wedded to Female follies , yet shall be 
The City's Lord Mayor for his Gravity . 
Repair to Court , you shall a Lady see 
Decked like Aurora in choice Bravery , 
Win her from those delights , see if you can 
Persuade her Ladyship turn Pur●tan . 
Perchance she hath a husband , one that is 
Of youthful mettle , can Da●ce , Sing , and Kis●● 
Court amorous Ladies , is completely fair , 
That owes to Art for a large crispy hair . 
Produce him ( too ) he with the rest may pass 
If he did ne'er behold a Lookingglass , 
Take Cart and to the Country go with speed , 
Where C●●wneses , Cow●s , Calves , Sheep , and fat Oxen feed , 
Persuade some great Corn-master , that hath been 
A Grand Offender in the thriving Sin 
Of Transportation ; only to refrain 
That thrifty course , and give his Country Graine , 
Bid his Old wife for sake her Country tongue , 
And trade in Compliment , tell her she 's young ; 
If you can make her leave her Country jig , 
Shave off her Hair and wear a Periwig , 
Bring her , and all the rest , I dare say than 
I have as Rare a Bird , as your black Swan . 
To his Mistress Elizabeth Brooke . 

Elizabeth inspire me , than I shall 
write naught Obscene , but Beauty , Virtue all . 
There was a Queen of whom Fame's tongue can tell 
Called Virtue Servant , she did all Excel , 
durst call themselves Elizabeth ; to me , 
Me thinks you keep her still in Memory , 
Did I not think you chaste , as is the Snow 
Gird in Diana's girdle , fair one know 
I could not court you , though your beauty might 
Play the fair thief , and steal me at first sight , 
I should affect no longer than I gazed : 
Beauty and Virtue both make Souls amazed 
Be you my Brook , my shadow , and I vow 
Like fond Narcissus to kiss none but you , 
And in that crystal Rivulet , your Eye 
Bury my Sight , my Self — 't is life to die . 
A Dialogue betwixt Fidelius and his Silent Mistress Flora.  

Fide.   MY dearest Flora can you love me . 


Flo.   Prithee prove me . 


Fide.   Shall I have your hand to kiss . 


Flo.   Yes , yes . 


Fide.   On this whiteness let me swear . 


Flo.   no pray forbear . 


Fide.   I love you dearer than my eyes . 


Flo.   Be wise . 


Fide.   I prise no happiness like you . 


Flo.   Will you be True.  


Fide.   As is the Turtle to her Mate . 


Flo.   I hate . 


Fide.   Who my Divinest Flora , me . 


Flo.   no , flattery . 


Fide.   He that flatters , may he die . 


Flo.   Perpetually . 


Fide.   And his black Urn be the cell . 


Flo.   Where furies dwell . 


Fide.   May his Name be blasphemous . 


Flo.   To us . 


Fide.   His Memory for ever Rot.  


Flo.   And be forgot . 


Fide.   Lest it keep our age and youth . 


Flo.   From Love and Truth . 


Fide.   Thus upon your Virgin hand . 


Flo.   Your Vows shall stand . 


Fide.   This kiss confirms my Act and Deed.  


Flo.   You may exceed . 


Fide.   Your Hand , your Lip , I 'll vow on both 


Flo.   A dangerous oath . 


Fide.   My Resolution ne'er shall start , 


Flo.   You have my heart . 


A Lady's Complaint for the loss of her Love Theodorus . 

Lend me thy Arrows Cupid , teach me how 
To wear thy Quiver and to bend thy Bow , 
Show me that Shaft in which a Power doth lie 
To make man chastely Love eternally ; 
I have my eyes fair Boy with which I 'll find 
The mark that thou wilt miss , 'las , thou art blind , 
I See too much , and wish I could not see , 
Less I had power my bondage for to free 
Or bind another ; Theodorus then 
Should be my honoured Prisoner once again , 
Did I appear so worthless , is my face 
So poorly barren of the Female Grace 
Which Court's our Amorous youth , that I must be 
The Subject of a man's Inconstancy , 
What though there be no Cupids in my Eyes , 
Placed to make Erring Love idolatrise , 
What though the Roses in my Cheeks do faint , 
And I disdain with an Adulterate paint 
To Add a Sinful Beauty , my chaste mind 
Shall cast a lustre when all eyes are blind , 
That might have made my Theodorus Love 
With divine Loyalty , and constant prove , 
For Love that 's only fixed in fair Eyes 
And fading Colours , with their downfall dies 
Believe me Theodorus , I divine , 
( Though thou art gone , and the sad loss is mine ) 
thou wilt not be a winner ; O take heed 
Women are gilded follies , that exceed 
A glutton's Riot , Men do oft refuse 
( For Beauty's sake ) though they unchastly choose , 
If they be beauteously fair , can that 
Secure their Minds from Thoughts adulterate , 
And should they lose their Honour , can they then 
With all their Beauties fetch it back again , 
But be your own adviser , let not me 
Discourage your opinion , but be free 
In your new choice ; if my wish take effect , 
You never shall repent you did neglect 
My courser Fortunes ; if your Mistress be 
An Angel in your eyes , she 's so to me , 
Envye is still my Enemy ; although 
I loved you fond , I must have you know 
'T was very chastely ( too ) and ( without Wonder ) 
Hearts may contract when Bodies are asunder . 
Yet love your Mistress , and be truly zealous , 
I can Affect , yet never make her jealous . 
A Moral Eclogue presented by Virtue , Wealth , and Beauty . 

Wealth   Come hither Beauty , what sad dump hath got 
The upper hand of thy choice thoughts , what blot 
Hath overcome thy Beauty ; thou art sad , 
Thoughts discontented and concealed , make mad 
The serious Contemplator , then declare , 
I 'm a Physician , tell me what they are . 


Beauty   Insatiate Wealth , I will ; I come to crave 
Along-lost Servant , you unjustly have , 
And such a Servant none ere had but ●●hee 
Whom jove embraced ) Cadmean Semele , 
Though Nature make all men that mortal are 
All of one mould , she can but claim a share 
In this great Master piece ; ere he was fit 
Twelve Natures did in consultation sit , 
Had he but lived when the Egyptian Queen 
( Fair Cleopatra ) Reigned , to have been seen , 
By her in her high court , sure none but he 
Had exchanged places with Mark Anthony ; 
Or Helen viewed him , ere she went from Greece , 
no Wars had been , he could have kept the Peace . 


Wealth   Is this your cause of Grief , admit I have 
This honourable Servant which you crave , 
I am the worthier Mistress , what 's in you 
But a fair face , riches doth me endue , 
What will your Beauty , do wh●n 〈◊〉 shall 
Deal cruelly , and let your states both fall , 
Beg with your Beauty , can your Beauty then 
Contrive a means to raise you up again . 
But stay , yonder comes virtue ; do but see 
How poor she goes , yet she 's as nice as thee . 


Vertus   Health to you Ladies ; Beauty , unto you 
My message comes ; I have a Servant true , 
Corrupted by your eyes , till he did see 
Your ●aining Smiles he was content with me ; 
Pray give him back again : my mourning state 
Directs the Turtle that hath lost her Mate 
To beat her feathered bosom , Grief and I 
Are in contention for the Majesty 
Of perfect sorrow , and we find that none 
Have such true grief as those whose love 's are gone ; 
Such is my state , fair Lady , do not then 
Detain my Love , but send him home again . 


Bea● .  What Love do I detain , what Servant , where 
Did I subdue him , what 's his Character ? 


Virtue   When first I did behold him , I could spy 
The simple Soul of Candid Majesty 
Take state in either cheek ; for his defence , 
He never Blushed , but to show Innocence : 
When he did court me , a sweet Passion striven 
To tell me , that he lived in perfect love , 
I saw he did , and yet am bold to tell , 
He might have wrought Faith in an Infidel , 
He had Exterior Beauty ; ( too ) his eyes 
Had lustre from his inward Purities . 
They were a Frontispiece to all the good 
His Soul possessed ; greater in Grace then blood ; 
His name is Bellizarus , let me have 
His person ( too ) 't is all the bliss I crave . 


Wealth   That is my Love coy Virtue . 


Beau.   Which I claim . 


Virtue   But is my due . 


Wealth   O ye both loose your Aim , 
He hath a wealth Fortune , shall it be 
Exposed to the certain jeopardy 
Of Beauty or poor Virtue ; let him thrive 
In my esteems , Wealth keeps the heart alive . 
I 'll show him Ours of Treasure , which shall buy 
Pleasures , that may persuade Mortality 
Into a Godhead ; I 'll a Palace build 
Of chequered Marble , whose large roof shall yield 
Unparalleled delights ; a thousand boys 
( Fair as Adonis ) with melodious noise 
Of new found Timbrils , shall awake his Sense 
From sullen sadness ( with profuse expense , ) 
I 'll purchase curious diet , whose choice taste 
Shall create Odours in his Breath , I 'll waste 
My ( unknown ) Treasure to a Mite , that he 
May hate you both , and keep his Love with me . 


Beauty   You argue weakly for him ; in my Eye , 
A Lover's Amorous Passion can descry 
Ten thousand fairer boys , young Cupid's all , 
And with my voice ( at his commanding call ) 
I 'll warble various fancies , that shall make 
His heart ; cold Melancholy quite forsake 
This Ruby Lip being connexed with his , 
Shall be more pleasing than that Nectar is 
jove doth revive his Youth with ; for his Scent , 
My breath is sweeter than that Continent 
The Phoenix keeps her nest in when she burns 
In Aromats' , and a New Phoenix turns . 
These but a model of the pleasures be 
He shall enjoy , let him return to me . 


Virtue .  If he be true , no argument should make 
His honest soul his first chaste love forsake , 
then ( were he yours and I by strife should win ) 
How could I be a virtue but a sin : 
Fond women , know I 'll teach him how to climb 
Beyond your hopes , to treasures more sublime ; 
I 'll show him how to be content with that 
Would make you sorrow sick and desperate : 
Fortune can wound you wealth , & ( beauty ) know 
The sweetest Roses that do fairest blow , 
Will shatter into ruin ; you must fear 
Beauty will fade , Springs last not all the year : 
You talk of Boys and Cupids , I can see 
Through the pure cristalls of divinity : 
A heaven set with Angels , of whose glory 
no mortals pen could ere write perfect story , 
And to this joy I 'll bring him , if he be 
So wise to cast you off and live with me . 


Wealth .  Yet he is mine , and if the God of love 
Look pleasing ( as he did ) I then will move 
My next suit unto Hymen , and we 'll be 
jointly contracted by his Deity : 
Do not you rail then , nor you try your heart , 
I have possession that 's the greater part . 


Virtue .  I must return to sorrow , weep , and wail 
For his lost soul . 


Beauty .  I to revenge , and rail . 
Use your own counsel , when your rayling's past 
Go mourn with virtue and your beauty blast . 


The complaint of an old Lady for the loss of her beauty . 

A ge ( Beauties tyrant ) why dost thou , 
Furrowe my brow ; 
With what poison hast thou made , 
My Lilies fade ; 
What strange colour is this hair 
That I wear ; 
O for love's sake take 't away , 
't is to grey ; 
In my cheeks no Roses grow , 
Bud or blow ; 
But are gone , for ever gone , 
Every one ; 
In my eyes no Cupid's dance 
To advance 
The bravery of Appetite 
To delight ; 
I to Venus' shrine will go 
With my woe , 
And declare unto her all 
My beauties fall ; 
There complain that crooked Age 
Full of rage , 
Hath for ever banished 
White and red ; 
So perhaps I may obtain 
Allagaine . 
And disgraceful Age expel 
To her Cell ; 
But if not , most sure I shall 
Ruined fall ; 
For when beauty is away 
all 's but Clay , 
Fickle feature grows but brave 
For a Grave , 
Where the beauty most replete 
Worms will eat . 
Go then Beauty be not seen 
But in virgin 's at sixteen , 
When they are as old as I 
Let their Beauty fading dye , 
't is an age for to decline 
To our graves , not Venus' shrine . 
A Gentleman deploring his former follies . 

Reason I do salute thy brightness , thou 
Expellsts the mist of error ; from thy brow 
A radiant Beam is shot into my s●ule , 
By which I have discovered how soul 
My former follies made me ; it is thee 
That mak'st poor Man become a monarchy : 
Hadst thou been with me when the greedy grape 
Engrossed my senses , and committed Rape 
Upon my understanding , I might be 
Less in Arrearage for Ebriety . 
Had I enjoyed thy company when I 
( Infla●●ed with feaver-burning luxury ) 
Ruined a Lady's fame , she had been pure 
And kept her may den innocence secure ; 
I had been happy , for my tainted name 
Had been an honest Character , no shame , 
Had I employed thy council ( when my wrath ) 
Aided by envy trod a guilty path 
Unto my friends confusion , but because 
He was not regular in Bacchus' laws , 
My spleen had beee more temperate , for I 
Had conquered rashness by sobriety . 
Hadst thou been present when my ruder tongue 
Calumnious●y did do my Mistress wrong , 
Who chastely loved when I did boldly say , 
She was my loser creature to allay 
Lascivious desires ; that she would do 
What ( heaven ) knows ) I here saduced her to , 
thou hadst corrected the egregious ill , 
And I had lived her honoured servant still . 
Hadst thou been pleased ever to lend thy store 
Of saving help , such follies on my score 
Had ne'er been written , 't is not yet too late 
For devoute penitence to expiate ; 
Be my Adjutor , Reason 't is in thee 
That I will seek man's mediocrity . 
ELEGIAC POEMS . 

An Elegy on his Inestimable friend , Mr. Richard Gunnell , Gent.  

Go sell your smiles for weeping , change your mirth 
For mourning dirges , lave the precious earth 
Of my inestimable friend with tears 
( Fertile as them the cheek of April wears , 
When Flora propagates her blessing on 
th' approaching Daffodils ) under this stone 
Lies his neglected ashes , O that they 
Who knew his virtues best should let his Clay 
Lie unregarded so , and not appear 
With a full sorrow , in each eye a tear 
Once , daily o'er his urn , how can they think 
A pleasing thought , sit and securely drink 
Insatiate carouses ; these are they 
Can lose both friends and sorrows in one day 
( Not worth my observation ) let me turn 
Again to my sad duty , where I 'll mourn 
Till my corporeal essence do become 
A gliding rivulet ; and pay the sum 
To thy dear memory ; my stream shall lend 
A drop to none less he hath lost a friend : 
The melancholy madman that will prove 
His passion for his Mistress is but love , 
Were best be thrifty in his tears , for I 
Will not supply him though his mistress ; die ; 
My ford is thine dear Gunnell and for thee 
My Crystal Channel flows so currently , 
Tagus and great Pactolus may be proud 
Of their red sands , let me my Rivers shroud 
In course Meanders , where the waters shall 
In a grieved murmur , Gunnell , Gunnell , call , 
It is for thee I flow , for thee I glide , 
I had retained my floods hadst thou not died . 
And little water birds shall chant this theme , 
Thy jordan mourner is a jordan stream . 
An Epitaph on his kind friend , Mr. john Honiman , Gent.  

Thou that couldst never weep , and knowest not why 
Tears should be spent but in man's infancy , 
Come and repent thy error for here lies 
A Theme for Angels to write Elegies , 
Had they the loss as we have ; such a one 
As nature killed for his perfection , 
And when she sends those virtues back again 
His stock shall serve for twenty virtuous men . 
In April died this April to find May 
In Paradise , or celebrate a day 
With some celestial creature , had he been 
Designed for other than a Cherubin ; 
Earth would have gave him choice ; he was a man 
So sweetly good , that he who wisely can 
Describe at large , must such another be , 
Or court no Muses but Divinity . 
Here will I rest , for fear the Readers eyes 
Upon his urn become a Sacrifice . 
An Elegy on Mr. john Raven , Gent.  

no sooner did sad Rumour wound my ears 
With thy decease , but Myriad of tears 
Sprung in my fluent eyes , I sighed , O me 
Is Raven dead , why could the fatal THREE 
Not give some dispensation for a man 
Deserved the years of Nestor ; I began 
Much to invoke the destinies , but they 
Gave me no answer , sure they do obey 
Some greater power , whose immense sovereignty 
Admits no Inquisition How or Why ; 
( The curse of frailty ) we but see to choose , 
Choose to enjoy , ere we enjoy we loose : 
So is thy life to us , what if thou be 
Enthroned a Monarch for thy piety , 
Our loss is still the same , we loose our prize , 
Because we cannot see thee with these eyes , 
We do not doubt thy welfare ( dearest friend ) 
But do believe thy meritorious end 
Hath wone eternity , and yet indeed 
We cannot choose but grieve , tears will excced 
Though they allow no cause , for if thou be 
So truly happy as divinity 
Declares the blessed transmigration , than 
' were sinful grief to wish thee here again : 
Thy death is my instruction , and thy bliss 
The subject of my contemplation is . 
Heaven inspire thy merit into me , 
And I shall die , to deserve life with thee . 
An Elegy on his beloved friend Mr. Charles Rider Student in the Art of Limning , or Picture-drawing . 

IF you can weep , draw near ▪ but if your eyes 
Deny to yield a liquid 〈◊〉 
Laughter perplex ye , may you never be 
Worthy to be preserved in memory 
But amongst 〈…〉 such as know 
no season for their ●irth , 〈◊〉 will allow 
Their idle jests , and their more antic slights 
On Funerals as well as Bridal nights . 
Here ( you that have the magazine of tears ) 
Exhausted your thrifty fountains , he that wears 
Black with an honest sorrow I advice 
To aid us in our ( too sad ) obsequys . 
There is an Artist dead , who is (null) that can 
Deny 〈…〉 be friend of every man 
That makes wi●e use of knowdedg , 〈◊〉 was rare 
In limning 〈…〉 his chaste care 
could ne'er permit his 〈◊〉 to incline 
To the rude 〈◊〉 of lustful 〈◊〉 
But h●d his eyes beheld the 〈…〉 
P●sture & face , 〈…〉 
( Pure as he● simple Beauty such a one 
Was pattern for his Pencil , or else none , 
To be particular , I should 〈◊〉 
Foe to my 〈…〉 
But what my 〈…〉 
Expect in 〈…〉 
His virtues are too many for to be 
Composed in a weeping Elegy : 
But he is dead , that all-devouring death 
That scorns to give religious Monarches breathe 
An hour beyond his limits , hath thought fit 
To use his power on thee ; may thy soul sit 
In Angel's habitations , while we 
Deplore thy death , and bless 〈◊〉 memory . 
Since thou wert merit 〈◊〉 I crave 
That I may stick this 〈◊〉 on thy grave , 
Where if the 〈◊〉 heavens please to raise 
Showers like my tears , 't will grow a 〈◊〉 
〈…〉 
She did 〈…〉 
None but thy 〈…〉 
For there 〈…〉 
Eclipsed each 〈◊〉 , making midday , night ▪ 
Black night , worse waters , may ye ever be 
Used to make beauty black , so cursed by me ; 
May never discontents of 〈◊〉 life 
In greefe-afflicted bosoms , if their eyes 
Banish you thence , for when your floods are spent , 
There shall not be a cause for discontent : 
Rest peaceably ( sweet boy ) though to us dead , 
jove shall for thee exchange his Ganemed . 
An Elegy and Epitaph on his Mistress Fidelia . 

Patience the great Physician of the mind 
Hath lost his Art , for no balm can he find 
To give me cure , there is no Patience left , 
It is a virtue which the gfd , bereft . 
With my Fidelia , and since she is gone 
What good is left me , but distraction ; 
Yet in her name I do a virtue find . 
Charms all my senses , tells my raging mind 
She hath but left the earth for 〈◊〉 to try 
What throne the Gossip prepare for she and I 
Which having done , I then shall hear from her 
By that supreme commanding Harbinger , 
That summons Princes ; Qureenes , religious , Kings 
To cast off earth and put on 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ▪ 
My soul thus 〈…〉 
I 'll wait , and write thus on her mo●●ment . 
The Epitaph . 

In , this Marble , buried l●es 
Beauty , may enrich the skies , 
And add light to Phoebus' eyes . 
Sweeter than Aurora's air 
When she paints the Lillies fair , 
And gilds Cowslips with her hair ; 
Chaster than the virgin Spring , 
E'er her blossoms she doth bring , 
Or cause Philomel to sing . 
If such goodness buy amongst men 
Bring me to it , I know than 
She is come from 〈◊〉 again , 
But if not , ye standards by 
Cherish me , and say that I 
am the next designed to die . 
An 〈…〉 his Mistress Arbella . 

Ye are too quick , ye Pioners of death 
To execute your charge , I have yet breath 
Struggles within my labouring breast , to come 
And sigh and hasty Epicedium 
On my Arbella ; O what stupid sleep 
Ceazes your faculties , you do not weep 
Yourselves to restless rivolers ; my eyes 
Must act alone Arbella's obsequys ; 
Do you want common sense , how can you hear 
Arbella named ( dead named ) and shed no tear ; 
Know you not how to weep , pray look on me , 
Methinks each man should be a Niobe , 
〈…〉 
〈…〉 
〈…〉 
〈…〉 
〈…〉 
〈…〉 
They will pollute her beauty , 〈◊〉 them have 
A wealth banquet in some 〈◊〉 grave● 
Yet they may stay , for if 〈…〉 
Her beauteous cheeks , they 〈◊〉 by famine die , 
〈…〉 
〈…〉 
〈…〉 
〈…〉 
〈…〉 
〈…〉 
FINIS ▪ 





Rosa.  Violetta●'s  Aurora . Honoria . Millescent . Castara . Bellara . Eliza.  Beata . Thalia . Eglentina . Dulcella . Ambrosia . Columbina . Candora . Fidelia . Anabella . Musea . Lucella . Urania . Black . Blind . Wrinkled . Crooked . Love.  The losses . Religion . Wisdom . Reason . Faith.  Hope , and Charity . Love.  Honor.  Manhood . Contra Sola . 