THE FOUNTAIN OF SELF-LOVE . Or CYNTHIA'S REVELS . 

As it hath been sundry times privately acted in the Blackfriars by the Children of her Majesty's Chapel . Written by BEN : JOHNSON . 

Quod non daunt Proceres , dabit Histrio . 


Haud tamen invideas vati , quem pulpita pascunt . 


Imprinted at London for Walter Burr , and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard , at the sign of the Flower de-luce and Crown . 1601.  

The number and names of the Actors . 

1.  Cynthia . 
2.  Mercury . 
3.  Cupid . 
4.  Hesperus . 
5.  Echo . 
6.  Criticus ▪ 
7.  Arete . 
8.  Amorphus . 
9  Phantaste . 
10.  Asotus . 
11.  Argurion . 
12.  Hedon . 
13.  Philautia . 
14.  Anaides . 
15.  Moria . 
16.  Prosaites . 
17.  Cos.  
18.  Morus . 
19  Gelaia . 
20.  Phronesis . 
21.  Thauma . 
22.  Tim E.  
Mutes . 
AD LECTOREM . 

Nasutum volo , nolo polyposum . 

Praeludium . 

Enter three of the Children . 1.   Pray you away ; why Children ? God's so ▪ what do yo● mean ? 



2.   Marry that you shall not speak the Prologue Sir.  



3.   Why ? do you hope to speak it ? 



2.   ay , & I think I have most right to it ; I am sure I studied it first . 



3.   that 's all one , if the Author think I can speak it better . 



1.   I pled possession of the Cloak : Gentles , your suffrages for God's sake . 

Why Children , are you not ashamed ? come in there . 



Within . 3.   'Slid , I 'll play nothing i' the Play : unless I speak it . 



1.   Why ? will you stand to most voices of the Gentlemen ? let that decide it . 



3.   OH no Sir Gallant ; you presume to have the start of us there , and that makes you offer so bountifully . 



1.   no , would I were whipped , if I had any such thought ; try it by Lots either . 



2.   Faith , I dare tempt my Fortune in a greater venture than this . 



3.   Well said resolute jack : I am Content too ; so we draw first . make the Cuts . 



1.   But will you not snatch my Cloak while I am stooping ? 



3.   no , we scorn● treachery . 



2.   Which Cut shall speak it ? 



3.   The shortest . 



1.   Agreed : Draw. — The shortest is come to the shortest . Fortune was not altogether blind in this : Now Children , I hope I shall go forward without your Envy . 



2.   A spite of all mischievous luck : I was once plucking at the other . 



3.   Stay jack : 'Slid I 'll do somewhat now afore I go in , though it be nothing but to revenge myself of the Author ; since I speak not his Prologue . I 'll go tell all the Argument of his Play aforehand , and so stale his Invention to the Auditory before it come forth . 



1.   OH do not so . 



At the breaches in this speech following , the other two Boys interrupt him . 2.   By no means . 



3.   First the Title of his Play is CYNTHIA'S Revels , as any man ( that hath hope to be saved by his Book ) can witness ; the Scene , GARGAPHIA : which I do vehemently suspect for some Fustian Country ; but let that vanish . Here is the Court of Cynthia ; whither he brings Cupid ( travailing on foot ) resolved to turn Page : By the way Cupid meets with Mercury , ( as that 's a thing to be noted ▪ take any of our Playbooks without a Cupid , or a Mercury in it , and burn it for an Heretic in Poetry ) — Pray thee let me alone : Mercury , he , ( in the nature of a Conjurer ) raises up Echo : who weeps over her L●ue , or Daffodil Narcissus , a little ; sings ; curses the Spring wherein the pretty foolish Gentleman melted himself away : and there 's an end of her — Now , I am to inform you , that Cupid , and Mercury do both become Pages : Cupid attends on Philautia , ●r Self-love , a Court● Lady : Mercury follows Hedon the voluptuous Courtier ; one that ranks himself even with Anaides , or the impudent Gallant , ( and , that 's my part : ) a Fellow that keeps Laughter the daughter of Folly ( a wench in Boy's attire ) to wait ●n him — These , in the Court , meet with Amorphus , or the Deformed , a Traveller that hath drunk of the Fountain , and there tells the wonders of the Water ; they presently d●spatch away their Pages with Bottles to fetch of it , and themselves go to visit the Ladies : But I should have told you — Look , these Emmets put me out here : that with this Amorphus , there comes along a Citizenss heir , Asotus , or the Prodigal , who ( in Imitation ●f the Traveller , that hath the Whetstone , following him ▪ ) entertains the Beggar , to be his Attendant . — Now the Nymphs , who are Mistresses , to these Gallants , are Philautia , Self-love ; Phantaste , A light Wittiness ; Argurion , Money ; and their Guardian , Mother Moria ; or Mistress Folly. — 



〈◊〉   Pray thee no more . 



3.   There Cupid strikes Money in love with the Prodigal ; makes her dote upon him , give him jewels , Bracelets , Carcanets , etc. all which ( he most ingeniously ) departs withal , to be made known to the other Ladies , and Gallants ; and in the heat of this , increases his train with the Fool to follow him , as well as the Beggar — By this time your Beggar begins to wait close , who is returned with the rest of his fellow Bottle-men — There they all drink save Argurion , who is fallen into a sudden Apoplexy — 



1.   Stop his mouth . 



3.   And then there 's a retired Scholar there , you would not wish a thing to be better contemned of a Society of Gallants , than it is : and he applies his service ( good Gentleman ) to the Lady Arete , or Virtue , a poor Nymph of Cynthia's train , that 's scarce able to buy herself a Gown , you shall see her play in a Black Robe anon : A Creature , that ( I assure you ) is no less scorned , than himself . Where am I now ? at a stand ? 



2.   Come , leave at last yet . 



3.   OH , the Night is come , ( 't was somewhat dark , me thought ) and Cynthia intends to come forth : That helps it a little yet . All the Courtiers must provide for Revels ; they conclude upon a Masque , the device of which , is — what will you ravish me ? that each of these Vices , being to appear before Cynthia , would seem other then indeed they are : and therefore assume the most neighbouring Virtues as their masking Habits — I 'd cry a Rape but that you are Children . 



2.   Come , we 'll have no more of this Anticipation ; to give them the Inventory of their Cates aforehand , were the discipline of a Tavern , and n●t ●itting this Presence . 



1.   Tut , this was but to show us the happiness of his Memory ▪ I thought at first he would have played the Ignorant Critic with every thing along as he had gone ; I expected some such device . 



3.   OH you shall see me do that rarely ; lend me thy Cloak . 



1.   Soft Sir , you 'll speak my Prologue in it ? 



3.   no , would I might never stir then . 



2.   Lend it him , lend it him : 



1.   Well , you have sworn ? 



.3   I have . Now Sir ; suppose I am one of your gentile Auditors , that am come in ( having paid my money at the Door with much ado ) and here I take my place , an● sit down : I have my three sorts of Tobacco , in my Pocket , my Light by me ; and thus I Begin . By Gods so , I wonder that any man is so mad , to come to see these rascally Tits play here — They do act like so many Wrens or Pismires — not the fifth part of a good Face amongst them all — And then their Music is abominable — able to stretch a man's E●reses worse , than ten — Pillories , and their Ditties — most lamentable things , like the pitiful Fellows that make them — Poets . By God's lid , and 't were not for Tobacco — I think — the very stench of 'em would poison me , I should not dare to come in at their Gates — A man were better visit fifteen jails — or a dozen or two of Hospitals — then once adventure to come near them . How is 't ? well ? 



1.   Excellent ; give me my Cloak . 



3.   Stay ; you shall see me do another now : but a more sober , or better-gathered Gallant ; that is ( as it may be thought ) some Friend , or wellwisher to the House : And here I Enter . 



1.   What ? upon the Stage too ? 



2.   Yes : and I step forth like one of the Children , and ask● you ; Would you have Stool Sir ? 



3.   A Stool Boy ? 



2.   I Sir , if you 'll give me six pence , I 'll fetch you one . 



.3   For what I pray thee ? what shall I do with it ? 



2.   OH God Sir ! will you betray your Ignorance so much ? why , throne yourself in state on the Stage , as other Gentlemen use Sir.  



3.   Away Wag : what wouldst thou make an Implement of me ? 'Slid the Boy takes me for a piece of Prospective ( I hold my life ) or some silk Curtain , come to hang the Stage here : Sir Crack● I am none of your fresh Pictures , that use to beautify the decayed dead Arras , in a public Theatre . 



2.   't is a sign Sir , you put not that Confidence in your good clothes , and your better Face , that a Gentleman should do Sir. But I pray you Sir , let me be a Suitor to you , that you will quit our Stage then , and take a Place , the Play is instantly to begin . 



3.   Most willingly my good wag : but I would speak with your Author , where 's he ? 



2.   Not this way , I assure you Sir , we are not so officiously befriended by him , as to have his Presence in the Tiring-house , to prompt us aloud , stamp at the Book-holder , swear for our Properties , curtsy the poor Tire-man , rail the Musique●ut ●ut of tune , and sweated for every venial trespass we commit , as some Author would , if he had such ●ine Ingles as we : well , 't is but our hard Fortune . 



3.   Nay Crack be not disheartened . 



2.   Not I Sir : but if you please to confer with our Author by Attorney , you may Sir : our proper self here stands for him . 



3.   Tro●h , I have no such serious affair to negotiate with him ; but what may very safely be turned upon thy trust : It is in the general behalf of this fair Society here , that I am to speak ; at least the more judicious part of it : which seems much distasted with the immodest and obscene writing of many , in their Plays . Besides , they could wish , your Poets would leave to be Promoters of other men's jests ; and to waylay all the stale Apothegms , or old Books , they can hear of ( in Print or otherwise ) to farce their Scenes withal : That they would not so penuriously glean wit , from every Laundress , or Hackneyman ; or derive their best grace ( with servile Imitation ) from Common Stages , or Observation of the Company , they converse with ; as if their Invention lived wholly upon another man's Trencher . Again ; that feeding their friends with nothing of their own , but what they have twice , or thrice Cooked ) they should not wantonly give out , how soon they had dressed it ; nor how many Coaches came to carry away the broken-meate , besides Hobby-horses and Foote● cloth Nags . 



2.   So Sir , this is all the Reformation you seek ? 



3.   It is : do not you think it necessary to be practised , my little wag ? 



2.   Yes ; where there is any such ill-habited Custom received . 



3.   OH , I had almost forgot it too : they say , the Vmbrae , or Ghosts of some three or four Plays , departed a dozen years since , have been se●ne walking on your Stage here ; Take heed Boy , if your House be haunted with such Hobgoblins ▪ 't will fright away all your Spectators quickly . 



2.   Good Sir. But what will you say now , if a Poet ( untouched with any breath of this disease ) find God's Tokens upon you , that are of the Auditory ? As some one Civet - Wit among you , that knows no other Learning , than the price of Satin and Velvets ; nor other Perfection , than the wearing of a Neat Suit ; & yet will censure as desperately as the most professed Critic in the house : presuming , his clothes should bear him out in 't . Another ( whom it hath pleased Nature to furnish with more Beard , than Brain ) prunes his Mustachio ; lisps ; and ( with some score of affected Oaths ) swears down all that sit about him ; That the old Hieronimo , ( as it was first acted ) was the only best , and judiciously-pend Play , of Europe . A thirde great-bellied juggler talks of twenty years since , and when Monsieur was here ; and would enforce all Wit to be of that fashion , because his Doublet is still so . A fourth mis-calles all by the name of Fustian , that his grounded Capacity cannot aspire too . A fifth only shakes his Bottle Head , and out of his Corky Brain , squeezeth out a pittifull-learned Face , and is silent . 



3.   By my Faith , jack , you have put me down : I would I knew how to get off with any indifferent Grace : Here take your Cloak , and promise some satisfaction in your Prologue , or ( I 'll be sworn ) we have ward all . 

Exit . 

2.   Tut fear not Sall : this will never distaste a true Sense . Be not ●ut , and good enough : I would thou hadst some Sugar Candyed , to Sweeten thy Mouth . 

Exit . 

Prologus . 

IF gracious silence , sweet Attention , 
Quick sight , and quicker apprehension , 
( The lights of judgments throne ) shine any where ; 
Our doubtful author hopes , this is their Sphere 
And therefore opens he himself to those , 
To other weaker Beams , his labours close ; 
As loathe to prostitute their virgin strain , 
To every vulgar , and adulterate brain . 
In this alone , his Muse her sweetness hath , 
She shuns the print of any beaten path ; 
And proves new ways to come to learned ears : 
Pied ignorance she neither loves . nor fears . 
Nor hunt's she after popular applause , 
Or foamy praise , that drops from common jaws ; 
The garland that she wears , their hands must twine , 
Who can both censure , understand , define 
What Merit is : then cast those piercing rays , 
Round as a crown , instead of honoured Bays , 
About his Poesy ; which ( he knows ) affords , 
Words above Action : matter , above words . 
Exit . Actus Primus , 

Scena prima . 

Cupid . Mercury . Who goes there ? 

Merchant   't is I , blind Archer . 



Cup.   Who ? Mercury ? 



Merchant   I  



Cup.   Farewell . 



Merchant   Stay Cupid . 



Cup.   Not in your company Hermes , except your hands were riveted at your back . 



Merchant   Why so my little Rover ? 



Cup.   Because I know , you have not a finger , but is as long as my quiver , ( cousin Mercury , ) when you please to extend it . 



Merchant   Whence derive you this speech Boy ? 



Cup.   O! 't is your best policy to be Ignorant : you did never steal Mars his sword out of the sheath ; you ? nor Neptune's Trident ; nor Apollo's Bow ; no , not you ? Alas your palms ( jupiter knows ) they are as tender as the foot of a foundered Nag , or a Lady's face new Mercuried ; they 'll touch nothing . 



Merchant   Go to ( Infant ) you 'll be daring still . 



Cup.   Daring ? OH janus , what a word is there ? why my light fether-heeld Cousin , what are you , any more than my uncle jove's Pander , a Lackey that runs on errands for him , and can whisper a light message to a loose wench with some round volubility , wait at a table with a Trencher , and warble upon a Crowd a little ; One that sweeps the Gods drinking room every morning , and sets the Cushions in order again which they threw one at another's head overnight ? here 's the Catalogue of all your Employments now . OH no , I err : you have the Marshalling of all the Ghosts too , that pass the Stygian ferry ; and I suspect you for a share with the old Sculler there , if the truth were known ; but let that scape : one other peculiar virtue you possess ▪ in lifting or Legerdemain ( which few of the house of Heaven have else besides ) I must confess ; But ( me thinks ) that should not make you set such an extreme distance 'twixt yourself and others , that we should be said too over-dare in speaking to your nimble Deity : So Hercules might challenge a priority of us both , because he can throw the Bar farther ▪ or lift more joyndstooles at the arms end then we . If this might carry it ; then we ( who have made the whole body of Divinity tremble at the twang of our Bow , and enforced Saturnius himself to lay● by his curled front , Thunder , and three forkd-fiers , and put on a Masking suit , too light for a reveller of eighteen to be seen in — 



Mercu.   How now my dancing Braggart in Decimo sexto ? charm your skipping tongue , or I 'll — 



Cup.   What ? use the virtue of your Snaky Tipstaffe there upon us ? 



Merchant   no Boy , but the stretched vigour of mine arm about your ears ; you have forgot since I took your heels up into air , ( on the very hour I was born ) in sight of all the bench of Deities , when the silver roof of the Olympian Palace rung again with the applause of the fact . 



Cup.   OH no , I remember it freshly , and by a particular instance ; for my mother Venus ( at the same time ) but stooped to embrace you , and ( to speak by Metaphor ) you borrowed a Girdle of hers , as you did jove's Sceptre ( while he was laughing ) and would have done his thunder too , but that , ' was too hot for your itching fingers . 



Merchant   't is well sir.  



Cup.   I heard you but looked in at Vulcan's Forge the other day , and entreated a pair of his new Tongues along with you for company : 't is joy on you ( I faith ) that you will keep your hooked talons in practice with any thing . 'Slight , now you are on earth , we shall have you filche Spoons and Candlesticks rather than fail : pray jove the perfumed Courtiers keep their Casting-bottles , Picktooths , and Shittle-cocks from you , or our more ordinary Gallants their Tabaco-boxes , for I am strangely jealous of your nails . 



Merchant   Near trust me Cupid , but you are turned a most acute gallant of late , the edge of my wit is clear taken off with the fine and subtle stroke of your thin-ground tongue , you fight with too poignant a phrase , for me to deal with . 



Cup.   OH Hermes , your craft cannot make me confident , I know my own steel to be almost spent , and therefore entreat my peace with you in time : you are too cunning for me to encounter at length , and I think it my safest ward to close . 



Merchant   Well for once , I 'll suffer you to come within me wag , but use not these strains too often , theine stretch my patience . Whether might you march now ? 



Cup.   Faith ( to recover thy good thoughts ) I 'll discover my whole project . The Huntress and queen of these groves , Diana ( in regard of some black and envious slanders hourly breathed against her for her divine justice on Actaeon as she pretends ) hath here in the vale of Geography proclaimed a solemn revels , which she will grace with the full and royal expense of one of her clearest moons : In which time it shall be lawful for all sorts of ingenuous persons , to visit● her palace , to court her Nymphs , to exerci●e all variety of generous and noble pastimes , as well to intimate how far she treads such malicious imputations beneath her , as also to show how clear her beauties are from the least wrinkle of Austerity , they may be charged with . 



Merchant   But what is all this to Cupid ? 



Cup.   Here do I mean to put off the title of a God , and take the habit of a Page , in which disguise ( during the Interim of these revels ) I will get to follow some one of Diana's maids , where ( if my bow hold , and my shafts fly but with half the willingness and aim they are directed ) I doubt not but I shall really redeem the minutes I have lost by their so long and overnice proscription of my Deity , from their court . 



Merchant   Pursue it ( druine Cupid ) it will be rare . 



Cup.   But will Hermes second me . 



Merchant   I am now to put in act an especial designment from ●y father jove , but that performed , I am for any fresh action that offers itself . 

Exit . 

Cup.   Well then we part . 


Merchant   Farewell good wag , 
Now to my charge , Echo , fair Echo speak , 
't is Mercury that calls thee ; sorrowful Nymph : 
Salute me with thy repercussive voice , 
That I may know what caverne of the earth , 
Contains thy eyrie spirit : how , or where , 
I may direct my speech , that thou mayst hear , 


SCENA . 2.  

Echo , Mercury . Echo .  Here.  


Merchant   So nigh . 


Echo .  I  


Merchant   Know ( gentle soul ) then , I am sent from jou● , 
Who ( pitying the sad burden of thy woes , 
Still growing on thee , in thy want of words ▪ 
To vent thy passion for Narcissus death ) 
Commands that now ( after three thousand years , 
Which have been excercisde in juno's spite , ) 
thou take a corporal figure and ascend , 
Enriched with vocal , and articulate power , 
Make haste sad Nymph : thrice doth my winged rod , 
Strike th' ' obsequious earth to give thee way , 
Arise , and speak thy sorrows , Echo rise , 
here , by this Fountain where thy love did pine , 
Whose memory lives fresh to vulgar fame , 
Shrined in this yellow flower , that bears his name 


Ech.   His name revives and lists me up from earth . 
Ascendit O which way shall I first convert myself ? 
Or in what mood shall I assay to speak , 
That ( in a moment ) I may be delivered , 
Of the prodigious grief I go with all ? 
Se● , see , the morning fount whose spring weeps yet , 
th' untimely fate of that too-beauteous boy , 
That Trophaee of self love , and spoil of nature , 
Who ( now transformed into this drooping flower ) 
Hangs the repentant head , back , from the stream ; 
As if it wished : Would I had never looked , 
In such a flattering mirror . OH Narcissus , 
thou that wast once ( and yet art ) my Narcissus , 
Had Echo but been private with thy thoughts , 
She would have dropped away herself in tears , 
Till she had all turned water ; that in her , 
( As in a truer glass ) thou might'st have gazed , 
And seen thy beauties by more kind reflection : 
But Self love never yet could look on truth , 
but with bleared beams ; Slieke flattery and she : 
Are twin-born sisters , and so mix their eyes , 
As if you sever one , the other dyes . 
Why did the Gods give thee a heavenly form , 
And earthy thoughts to make thee proud of it ? 
Why do I ask ? 't is now the known disease 
That beauty hath , to bear to deep a sense , 
Of her own self-conceived excellence . 
OH hadst thou known the worth of heavens rich gift , 
thou wouldst have turned it to a truer use , 
And not ( with lean and covetous ignorance ) 
Pined in continual eyeing that bright Gem , 
The glance whereof to others had been more , 
then to thy famished mind the wide world's store ; 
" So wretched is it to be merely rich : 
Witness thy youths dear sweets , here spent untasted ; 
Like a fair Taper , with his own flame wasted . 


Merchant   Echo be brief , Saturnia is abroad ; 
And if she hear , she 'll storm at jove's high will : 


Echo .  I will ( kind Mercury ) be brief as time , 
Vouchsafe me I may do him these last Rites , 
But kis●e his flower , and sing some mourning strain : 
Over his watery hearse . 


Merchant   thou dost obtain , 
I were no son to love should I deny thee ; 
Begin , and ( more to grace thy cunning voice ) 
The humourous air shall mix her solemn tunes , 
With thy sad words : strike Music from the spheres , 
And with your golden raptures swell our ears . 


Cant.  

Slow , Slow Fresh fount , keep time with my salt tears ; 
yet flower , yet , oh faintly gentle springs ; 
List to the heavy part the Music bears , 
" Woe weeps out her division when she sings ▪ 
Droop herbs , and flowers , 
fall grief in showers ; 
" Our beauties are not ours : 
OH I could still 
( Like melting snow upon some craggy hill , ) 
drop , drop , drop , drop , 
Since Nature's pride , is now awithered Daffodil . 


Merchant   Now have you done ? 


Echo .  Done presently ( good Hermes ) bide a little ; 
Suffer my thirsty eye to gaze a while , 
But e'en to taste the place , and I am vanished : 


Merchant   Forgo thy use and liberty of tongue , 
And thou mayst dwell on earth , and sport thee there ; 


Echo .  Here young Action●ell ●ell , pursued , and torn 
By Cynthi●s' wrath ( more eager than his hounds ; ) 
And here , ( aye me the place is fatal ) see , 
The weeping Niobe , translated hither 
From Phrygian mountains : and by Phoebe reared 
As the proud Trophaee of her sharp revenge . 


Merchant   Nay but here ▪ 


Ech.   But here , o here , the Fountain of self love : 
In which Latona , and her careless Nymphs , 
( Regardless of my sorrows ) bathe themselves , 
In hourly pleasures . 


Merchant   Stint thy babbling tongue ; 
Fond Echo , thou prophanst the grace is done thee : 
So idle worldlings ( merely made of voice : ) 
Censure the powers above them . Come away , 
jove calls thee hence , and his will brooks no stay . 


Ech.   OH stay : I have but one poor thought to cloth , 
In eyrie garments and then ( faith ) I go : 
Henceforth , thou treacherous , and murdering spring , 
Be ever called the Fountain of self love : 
And with thy water let this curse remain , 
( As an inseparate plague ) that who but tastes , 
A drop thereof , may ( with the instant touch ) 
Grow dotingly enamoured on themselves . 
Now Hermes I have finished . 


Merchant   then thy speech , 
Must here forsake thee Echo , and thy voice : 
( As it was wont ) rebound but the last words , fare well . 


Echo .  Well . 
Exit . Now Cupid I am for you , and your mirth , 
To make me light before I leave the earth . 


SCENA . 3.  

Amorphus . Echo . Mercury . Amo.   Dear spark of beauty make not so fast away : 



Echo .  Away . 



Merchant   Stay let me observe this portent yet . 



Amo.   I am neither your Minotaur , nor your Centaur , nor your Satire , nor your Hyaena , nor your Baboon , but your mere traveller , believe me : 



Echo .  Leave me . 



Merchant   I guessed it should be some travelling Motion pursued Echo so . 



Amo.   Know you from whom you fly ? or whence ? 



Echo .  Hence . 

Exit . 

Amo.   This is somewhat above strange : a Nymph of her feature and lineament to be so preposterously rude ; well ; I will but cool myself at yon Spring and follow her . 



Merchant   Nay then I am familiar with the issue ; I 'll leave you too . 

Exit . 

Amo.   I am a Rhinoceros , if I had thought a creature of her Symmetry would have dared so improportionable and abrupte a digression . Liberal and divine Fount , suffer my profane hand to take of thy bounties . By the purity of my taste , here is most Ambrosiac water ; I will sup of it again . By thy favour sweet Fount . See , the water ( a more running , subtle , and humorous Nymph than she ) permits me to touch , and handle her : what should I infer ? If my behaviours had been of a cheap , or customary garb ; my Accent , or phrase , vulgar ; my Garments trite ; my Countenance illiterate ; or unpractizd in the encounter of a beautiful and brave-attirde Piece , than I might ( with some change of colour ) have suspected my faculties : but ( knowing myself an Essence so sublimated , and refin'de by Travail ; of so studied , and well exercised a gesture ; so alone in fashion , able to make the face of any Statesman living , and to speak the mere extraction of language ; One that hath now made the sixth return upon venture ; and was your first that ever enriched his country with the true laws of the Duello ; whose Optics have drunk the spirit of beauty , in some eight score and eighteen Princes Courts , where I have resided , and been there fortunate in the Amours of three hundred , forty , and five Ladies ( all nobly descended ) whose names I have in Catalogue : to conclude ; in all so happy , as even Admiration herself doth seem to fasten her kisses upon me : Certes I do neither see , nor feel , nor taste , nor favour , the least steam , or fume of a reason , that should invite this foolish fastidious Nymph so peevishly to abandon me : well let the memory of her fleet into Air ; my thoughts and I am for this other Element , water . 



SCENA . 4.  

Criticus . Asotus . Amorphus . Crit.   What ? the well-dieted Amorphus become a Water-drinker ? I see he means not to write verses then . 



Asot.   no Criticus ? why ? 



Crit.   Quia nulla placere diu ▪ nec vivere carmina possunt , quae scribuntur aquae po●oribus . 



Amor.   What say you to your Helicon ? 



Crit.   OH , the Muses , well ! that 's ever excepted . 



Amor.   Sir , your Muses have no such water I assure you ; your Nectar , or the juice of your Nepenthe is nothing to it ; 't is above your Metheglin , believe it . 



Asot.   Metheglin ! what 's that Sir ? may I be so Audacious to demand ? 



Amo.   A kind of Greek Wine I have met with Sir in my Travails : it is the same that Demosthenes usually drunk , in the composure of all his exquisite and Mellifluous Orations . 



Crit.   that 's to be argued , ( Amorphus ) if we may credit Lucian , who in his ( Enicomium Demosthenes' ) affirms , he never drunk but water in any of his Compositions . 



Amo.   Lucian is absurd , he knew nothing : I will believe my own Travels , before all the Lucian's of Europe ; he doth feed you with fictions , and leasings . 



Crit.   Indeed ( I think ) next a Traveller he does prettily well . 



Amo.   I assure you it was Wine , I have tasted it , and from the hand of an Italian Antiquary , who derives it authentically from the Duke of Ferrara's Bottles . How name you the Gentleman you are in rank with there , Sir ? 



Crit.   't is Asotus , son to the late deceased Philargyrus the Citizen . 



Amorphus .  Was his Father of any eminent place , or means ? 



Crit.   He was to have been Praetor next year . 



Amo.   Ha! A pretty formal young Gallant ( in good sooth ) pity , he is not more gently propagated . Hark you Criticus : you may say to him what I am , if you please ; though I affect not popularity , yet I would be loath to stand out to any , whom you shall vouchsafe to call friend . 



Crit.   Sir , I fear I may do wrong to your sufficiencies in the reporting them , by forgetting or misplacing some one ; yourself can best inform him of yourself Sir , except you had some Catalogue or Inventory of your faculties ready drawn , which you would request me to show him for you , and him to take notice of . 



Amo.   This Criti●us is sour : I will think Sir.  



Crit.   Do so Sir. OH heaven , that any thing ( in the likeness of man ) should suffer these racked extremities , for the uttering of his Sophisticate good parts . 



Asot.   Criticus , I have a suit to you ; but you must not deny me : pray you make this Gentleman and I friends . 



Crit.   Friends ! Why ? is there any difference between you ? 



Asotus .  no : I mean acquaintance , to know one another . 



Crit.   OH now I apprehend you ; your phrase was without me before . 



Asot.   In good faith he 's a most excellent rare man I warrant him . 



Crit.   'Slight , they are mutually enamoured by this time . 



Asot.   Will you sweet Criticus ? 



Crit.   Yes , yes . 



Asot.   Nay , but when ? you 'll defer it now , and forget it ? 



Crit.   Why , is (null) a thing of such present necessity , that it requires so violent a dispatch ? 



Asot.   no , but ( would I might never stir ) he 's a most ravishing man ; good Criticus you shall endear me to you , in good faith law . 



Crit.   Well your longing shall be satisfied Sir.  



Asot.   And withal , you may tell him what my father was , and how well he left me , and that I am his heir . 



Crit.   Leave it to me , I 'll forget none of your dear graces I warrant you . 



Asot ,  Nay I know you can better marshal these affairs than I can . — OH Gods I 'll give all the world ( if I had it ) for abundance of such acquaintance . 



Crit.   What ridiculous circumstance might I devose now , to bestow this reciprocal brace of Coxcombs , one upon another ? 



Amor.   Since I trod on this side the Alps , I was not so frozen in my invention ; let me see : to accost him with some choice remnant of Spanish , or Italian ? that would indifferently express my languages now , marry then , if he should fall out to be Ignorant , it were both hard , and harsh . How else ? step into some discourse of S●ate , and so make my induction ? that were above him too ; and out of his element I fear fain to have seen him in Venice ? or Milan ? or some face near his in simillitude ? 't is too pointed , and open ▪ no ; it must be a more quaint , & collateral device : As — stay ; to frame some encomiastique speech upon this our Metropolis , or the wise Magistrates thereof , in which politic number , 't is odds but his father filled up a room ? descend into a particular admiration of their justice ; for the due measuring of Coals , burning of Cans , and such like ? As also their religion , in pulling down a superstitious Cross , and advancing a Venus ; or Priapus , in place of it ? ha ? 't will do well . Or to talk of some Hospital , whose walls record his father a BENEFACTOR ? or of so many Buckets bestowed on his parish church in his life time , with his name at length ( for want of arms ) tricked upon them ; Any of these ? or to praise the cleanesse of the street wherein he dwelled , or the provident painting of his posts against he should have been Praetor , or ( leaving his parent ) come to some special ornament about himself , as his Rapier , or some other of his accoutrements ? I have it : Thanks gracious Minerva . 



Asot.   Would I had but once spoken to him , and then — 



Amor.   't is a most curious and neatly-wrought band this same , as I have seen Sir.  



Asot.   OH God Sir.  



Amor.   You forgive the humour of mine eye in observing it ? 



Asot.   OH Lord Sir , there needs no such Apology I assure you . 



Crit.   I am anticipated : they 'll make a solemn deed of gift of themselves you shall see . 



Amor   Your Rose too does most grace-fully in troth . 



Asot.   't is the most gentile and received Wear now Sir.  



Amor.   Believe me Sir ( I speak it not to humour you ) I have not seen a young gentleman ( generally ) put on his clothes with more judgement . 



Asot.   OH , 't is your pleasure to say so , Sir.  



Amor.   no , as I am virtuous ( being altogether vntraueled ) it strikes me into wonder . 



Asot.   I do purpose to travel ( Sir ) at Spring : 



Amor.   I think I shall affect you sir , this last speech of yours hath begun to make you dear to me . 



Asot.   OH God Sir , I would there were anything in me Sir , that might appear worthy the least worthiness of your worth Sir , I protest Sir , I should endeavour to show it Sir , with more than common regard Sir.  



Crit.   OH here 's rare Motley , Sir.  



Amor.   Both your desert , and your endeavours are plentiful , suspect them not : but your sweet disposition to travail ( I assure you ) hath made you another Myself in mine eye , and struck me enamoured on your beauties . 



Asot.   I would I were the fairest Lady of France for your sake Sir , and yet I would travail too . 



Amor ▪   OH you should digress from yourself else : for ( believe it ) your Travail is your only thing that rectifies , or ( as the Italian says ) virendi pronto all' Attioni , makes you fit for Action . 



Asot.   I think it be great charge though Sir.  



Amor.   Charge ? why 't is nothing for a gentleman that goes private , as yourself , or so ; my Intelligence shall quit my charge at all times : Good faith this Hat hath possessed mine eye exceedingly ; 't is so pretty , and fantastic ; what ? is (null) a Beaver . 



Asot.   I Sir. I 'll assure you 't is a Beaver , it cost me six crowns but this morning . 



Amor.   A very pretty fashion ( believe me ) and a most novel kind of trim : your Button is conceited too . 



Asot.   Sir , it is all at your service . 



Amor.   OH pardon me . 



Asot.   I beseech you Sir , if you please to wear it you shall do me a most infinite grace . 



Crit.   'Slight , will he be praised out of his clothes ? 



Asot.   By heaven Sir , I do not offer it you after the Italian manner ; I would you should conceive so of me . 



Amor.   Sir , I shall fear to appear rude in denying your courtesies , especially being invited by so proper a distinction ; may I pray your name Sir.  



Asot.   My name is Asotus Sir.  



Amor.   I take your love ( gentle Asotus ) but let me win you to receive this in exchange . — 



Crit.   ' Hart , they 'll change doublets anon . 



Amor.   And ( from this time ) esteem yourself in the first rank of those few whom I profess to love ; what make you in company of this scholar here ? I will bring you known to gallants as Anaides , Hedon the courtier , and others , whose society shall render you grac'de , and respected ; this is atriviall fellow , too mean , too corpse for you to converse with . 



Asot.   'Slid , this is not worth a crown , and minecost me six but this morning . 



Crit.   I looked when he would repent him , he has beg●nne to be sad a good while . 



Amor.   Sir , shall I say to you for that Hat ? be not so sad , be not so sad ; 't is a Relic I could not so easily have departed with , but as the Hieroglyphic of my affection ; you shall alter it to what form you please , it will take any block ; I have varied it myself to the three thousandth time , and not so few : It hath these virtues beside ; your head shall not ak● under it ; nor your brain leave you , without licence ; It will preserve your comple●ion to eternity ; for no beam of the Sun ( should you wear it under Zona Torrida ) hath force to approach it by two ells . 't is proof against thunder , and enchantment : and was given me by a great man ( in Russia ) as an especially-prized present ; and constantly affirmed to be the hat that acompanied the politic Ulysses , in his tedious , and ten years' Travails . 



Asot.   By jove I will not depart withal , whosoever would give me a Million . 



SCENA . 5.  

Cos. Prosaites . Criticus . Amorphus . Asotus . Cos.   Save you sweet bloods : does any of you want a creature , or a dependant ? 



Crit.   Beshrew me a fine blunt slave . 



Amor.   A page of good timber ; it will now be my grace to entertain him first , though I cashier him again in private : how art thou called ? 



Cos.   Cos Sir , Cos.  



Crit.   Cos ? How happily hath Fortune furnished him with a Whetstone ? 



Amor.   I do entertain you Cos : conceal your quality till we be private ; if your parts be worthy of me , I will countenance you ; if not , catechise you ; Gentles shall we go ? 



Asot.   Stay Sir ; I 'll but entertain this other fellow , and then — I have a great humour to taste of this water too , but I 'll come again alone for that mark the place ; what 's your name , youth ? 



Pros.   Prosaites ? Sir.  



Asot.   Prosaites ? A very fine name Criticus ? is (null) not ? 



Crit.   Yes , and a very ancient Sir , the Beggar ; 



Exeunt . Asot.   follow me good Prosaites : le 's talk . 



Crit.   He will rank even with you ( ere 't be long ) 
If you hold on your course : OH vanity , 
How are thy painted beauties doted on , 
By light , and empty Idiots ? how pursued 
With open , and extended appetite ? 
How they do sweat , and run themselves from breath , 
Raised on their toes , to catch thy eyrie forms , 
Still turning giddy , till they reel like drunkards , 
That buy the merry madness of one hour , 
With the long irksomeness of following time ? 
OH how despised , and base a thing is Man , 
If he not strive t' erect his grovelling thoughts 
Above the strain of flesh . ' But how more cheap 
When , even his best and understanding part , 
( The crown , and strength of all his faculties ) 
Floats like a dead drowned body , on the stream 
Of vulgar humour , mixed with commonest dregss ? 
I suffer for their guilt now , and my Soul 
( Like one that looks on ill affected eyes ) 
Is hurt with mere Intention on their follies : 
Why will I view them then ? my Sense might ask me : 
Or is (null) a Rarity , or some new Object , 
That strains my strict observance to this point ? 
OH would it were , therein I could afford 
My Spirit should draw a little near to theirs , 
To gaze on novelties : so Vice were one . 
Tut , she is stale , rank , foul , and were it not 
That those ( that woo her ) greet her with locked eyes 
( In spite of all the Impostures , paintings , drugs , 
Which her bawd Custom daubs her cheeks withal ) 
She would betray her loathed and leprous face , 
And fright th' enamoured dotards from themselves : 
But such is the perverseness of our nature , 
That if we once but fancy levity , 
( How antique and ridiculous so ere 
It suit with us ) yet will our muffled thought 
Choose rather not to see it , then avoid it : 
And if we can but banish our own sense , 
We ac●e ou● Mimic tricks with that free licence , 
That lust , that pleasure , that security , 
As if we practised in a Past-boord case , 
And no one saw the Motion , but the Motion . 
Well , check thy passion , lest it grow too loud : 
awhile fools are pitied , they wax fat , and proud . 
Exit . 

Finis Actus Primi . 

ACTUS SECUNDUS . 

SCENA . 1.  

Cupid . Mercury . Cup.   Why this was most unexpectedly followed ( my divine delicate Mercury ) by the Beard of jove , thou art a precious Deity . 



Merchant   Nay Cupid leave to speak improperly ; since we are turned cracks , le 's study to be like cracks : practise their language , and behaviours , and not with a dead Imitation . Act freely , carelessly , and capricciously , as if our veins ran with Quicksilver , and not utter a phrase , but what shall come forth steeped in the very brine of conceit , and sparkle like salt in fire . 



Cup.   that 's not every one's happiness ( Hermes ) though you can presume upon the ●asinesse and dexterity of your wit , you shall give me leave to be a little jealous of mine ; and not desperately to hazard it after your capering humour . 



Merchant   Nay then Cupid , I think we must have you hoodwinked again , for you are grown too provident , since your eyes were at liberty . 



Cup.   Not so ( Mercury ) I am still blind Cupid to thee : 



Merchant   And what to the Lady Nymph you serve ? 



Cup.   Troth Page , Boy , and Sirrah : these are all my titles . 



Merchant   then thou hast not altered thy name with thy disguise . ' 



Cup.   OH no , that had been Supererogation , you shall never hear your Courtier call but by one of these three . 



Merchant   Faith then both our Fortunes are the same . 



Cup.   Why ? what parcel of man hast thou lighted on for a Master ? 



Merchant   Such a one ( as before I begin to decipher him ) I dare not affirm him to be any thing else then a Courtier . So much he is , during this open time of Revels , & would be longer , but that his means are to leave him shortly after : his name is Hedon , a gallant wholly consecrated to his pleasures . — 



Cup.   Hedon ? he uses much to my Lady's chamber , I think . 



Merchant   How is she called , and then I can show thee ? 



Cup.   Madame Philautia . 



Merchant   OH I , he affects her very particularly indeed . These are his graces . he doth ( besides me ) keep a Barber , and a Monkey : He has a ri●ch wrought Waistcoat to entertain his vis●tantss in , with a Cap almost suitable : His Curtains and Bedding are thought to be his own ; his bathing Tub is not suspected . He loves to have a Fencer , a Pedant , and a Musician seen in his lodging a mornings . 



Cup.   And not a Poet ? 



Merchant   Fie no : himself is a Rhymer , and that 's a thought better than a Po●t : he is not lightly within to his Mercer , no , though he come when he takes Phisique , which is commonly after his play . He beats a Tailor very well , but a Stocking-seller admirably ; and so consequently any one he owes money too , that dares not resist him . He never makes general invitement , but against the publishing of a new Suit , marry then , you shall have more drawn to his lodging , then come to the launching of some three ships ; especially if he be furnished with supplies for the retiring of his old Wardrobe from pawn ; if not , he does hire a stock of Apparel , and some forty or fifty pound in Gould for that forenoon to show : he 's thought a very necessary Perfume for the Presence , and for that only cause welcome thither : six Milliners shops afford you not the like sent . He court's Ladies with how many great Horse he hath rid that morning , or how o●t he has done the whole , or the half Pommado in a seven-night before ; and sometime venter's so far upon the virtue of his Pomander , that he dares tell 'hem , how many shirts he has sweat at Tennis that week ▪ but wiselye conceals so many dozen of Balls he is on the score . Here he comes that is all this . 



SCENA . 2.  

Hedon . Anaides . Gelaia . Cupid . Mercury . Hedon .  Boy . 



Mercu.   Sir.  



Hedon .  Are any of the Ladies in the Presence ? 



Merchant   None yet Sir.  



Hedon .  Give me some Gold , more . 



Ana.   Is that thy Boy Hedon ? 



Hedo.   ay , what thinkst thou of him ? 



Ana.   'Sheart , I 'd gelde him ; I warrant he has the Philosopher's stone . 



Headsman   Well said my good Melancholy devil : Sirrah , I have devisde one or two of the pretiest Oaths ( this morning in my bed ) as ever thou heardst , to protest withal in the Presence . 



Ana.   Pray thee let's heere'hem . 



Headsman   Soft thou 'lt vse'hem afore me . 



Ana.   no ( damn me then ) I have more oaths than I know how to utter , by this air . 



Headsman   Faith'one is ; By the tip of your ●are , Sweet Lady , Is 't not pretty , and gentile ? 



Ana.   Yes for the person 't is applied to , a Lady . It should be light , and — 



Headsman   Nay the other is better , exceeds it much : The Invention is farther fet too ; By the while valley that lies between the Alpine hills of your bosom , I protest — etc.  



Ana.   Well , you travelled for that Hedon . 


Merchant   ay , in a Map , where his eyes were but blind guides to his understanding it seems . 



Headsman   And then I have a Salutation will neck all ; by this Caper : ho● 



Ana.   How is that ? 



Headsman   You know I call Madam Philautia , my Honour , & she calls me her Ambition . Now ( when I meet her in the Presence anon ) I will come to her , and say , Sweet Honour , I have hitherto con●ented my Sense with the Lilies of your hand ; but now I will taste the Roses of your lip ; and ( withal ) kiss her : to which she cannot but blushingly answer : Nay now you are too Ambitious , And then do I reply ; I cannot be too Ambitious of Honour , sweet Lady . wilt not be good ? ha ? ha ? 



Ana.   OH Assure your ●oule . 



Headsman   By heaven I think 't will be excellent , and a very politic atchivement of a kiss . 



Ana.   I have thought upon one for Moria of a sudden too if it take . 



Headsman   What is (null) , my dear mischief ? 



Ana.   Marry , I will come to her , ( and she always wears a Muff if you be remembered ) and I will tell her : Madam your whole self cannot but be perfectly wise : for your hands have wit enough to keep themselves warm . 



Headsman   Now ( before jove ) admirable : look , thy Page takes it too , by Phoebus , my sweet facetious Rascal , I could eat Water-gruel with thee a month , for this jest , OH my dear Rogue . 



Ana.   OH ( by Hercules ) 't is your only dish , above all your Potatoes , or Oyster-pies in the world . 



Headsman   I have ruminated upon a most rare Wish too , and the Prophecy to it , but I 'll have some friend to be the Prophet ; As thus : I do wish myself one of my Mistress Ciopinoes . Another demands : Why would he be one of his Mistress Ciopinos ? A third answers , Because he would make her higher . A fourth shall say , That will make her proud . And a fifth shall conclude : then do I prophesy , Pride will have a fall : and he shall give it her . 



Ana.   I 'll be your Prophet ▪ By gods so , it will be most exquisite , th●● art a fine Inventious Rogue , Sirrah . 



Headsman   Nay and I have Posies for Rings too , and Riddles , that they dream not of . 



Ana.   Tut they 'll do that , when they come to sleep on them time enough ; but were thy devices never in the Presence yet Hedon ? 



Headsman   OH no , I disdain that . 


Ana.   ' were good we went afore then , & brought th● acquainted with the room where they shall act , lest the strangeness of it put them out of countenance , when they should come forth . 



Exeunt . Cup.   Is that a Courtier too . 



Merchant   Troth no ; he has two essential parts of the Courtier , Pride and Ignorance ( I mean of such a Courtier , who is ( indeed ) but the Za●i to an exact Courtier ) marry , the rest come somewhat after the Ordinary Gallant . 't is Impudence itself Anaides ; one , that speaks all that comes in his cheeks , & will blush no more than a Sackbut . He lightly occupies the jester's room at the table , & keeps laughter , Gelai● ( a wench in page's attire ) following him in place of a Squire , whom he ( now & them ) tickles with some strange ridiculous stuff , uttered ( as his land came to him ) by chance : He will censure or discourse of any thing , but as absurdly as you would wish : His fashion is not to take knowledge of him that is beneath him in clothes ; He never drinks below the Salt : He does naturally admire his wit , that wears Goldlace , or Tissue ; Stabs any man that speaks more contemptibly of the Scholar than he . He is a great proficient in all the illiberal Sciences , as Cheating , Drinking , Swaggering , Whoring , and such like ; never kneels , but to pledge Healths nor prays , but for a Pipe of pudding Tabaco . He will blaspheme in his shirt ; The oaths which he vomits at one supper , would maintain a Town of garrison in good swearing a twelvemonth : One other genuine quality he has , which crowns all these ; and that is this ; to a Friend in want , he will not depart with the weight of a soldard Groat , lest the world might censure him prodigal , or report him a Gull : Marry , to his Cockatrice or Punquetto ; half a dozen Taffeta gowns or Satin Kirtles , in a pair or two of month 's , why they are nothing . 



Cup.   I commend him he is one of my clients . 



SCENA . 3.  

Amorphus , Asotus ; Cos ; Prosaites , Cupid , Mercury . Amor.   Come Sir. You are now within reguarde of the Presence , And see , the privacy of this room , how sweetly it offers it offers itself to our retired intendments , Page , cast a vigilant , and enquiring eye about , that we be not rudely surprised , by the approach of some ruder-stranger . 



Cos.   I warrant you Sir. I 'll tell you when the Wolf enters fear nothing . 



Merchant   OH what a mass of benefit shall we possess , in being the invisible Spectators of this strange show now to be acted ? 



Amor   Plant yourself there Sir : And observe me . You shall now , as well be the Ocular as the Earwitness , how clearly I can refel that Paradox , or rather Pseudodoxe of those , which hold the face to be the Index of the mind , which ( I assure you ) is not so , in any Politic creature ; for Instance , I will now give you the particular , and distinct face of every your most noted Species of persons ; As your Merchant , your Scholar , your Soldier , your Lawyer , Courtier , etc.  And each of these so truly , as you would swear ( but that your eye sees the variation of the lineament ) it were my most proper , and Genuine aspect : 〈…〉 for your Merchants , or City face ; 't is thus : a dull 〈…〉 face ; still looking in a direct line , forward : There is no 〈…〉 matter in this face . then have you your Students , or Academic face , which is here , an honest , simple , and Methodical face ; But somewhat more spread then the former . The third is your Soldiers face : A menacing , and astounding face , that looks broad , and big : the grace of this face consists much in a Beard . The Antigona face to this , is your Lawyer's face ; a contracted , subtle , and Intricate face : full of quirks , and turnings ; A Labyrinthaean face , now angularly , now circularly , every way aspected . Next is your Statists face , a serious , solemn , and supercilious face , full of formal , and square gravity ▪ the eye ( for the most part ) arteficially and deeply shadowed , there is great judgement required in the making of this face . But now to come to your face of faces ; or Courtiers face : 't is of three sorts : ( according to our subdivision of a Courtier ; Elementary , Practic , and Theoric : your Courtier Theoric , is he that hath arrived to his farthest , and doth now know the Court rather by speculation , than practice ; & this is his face : A fastidious , and oblique face ; that looks , as it went with a Vice , and were screwed thus . Your Courtier Practic is he that is yet in his Path , his Course , his Way , & hath not touched the Puntillio or point of hopes ; this face is here : A most promising , open , smooth , and overflowing face , that seems as it would run , and pour itself into you ; your Courtier Elementary is one but newly entered , or as it were in the Alphabet Vt-re-mi-fa-sol-la , of Courtship : Note well this face , for it is this you must practise . 



Asot.   I 'll practise 'em all , if you please Sir.  



Amor.   I ; here after you may : and it will not be altogether an ungratfull study . For let your soul be assured of this ( in any Rank or profession whatsoever ) the most general , or Mayor part of Opinion , goes with the face , & ( simply ) respects nothing else . Therefore : if that can be made , exactly , curiously , tightly , thoroughly , It is enough : But ( for the present ) you shall only apply yourself to this face of the Elementary Courtier , A light , revelling , & protesting face , now blushing , now smiling which you may help much with a wanton wagging of your head , thus ; ( a feather will teach you ) or with kissing your finger that hath the Ruby , or playing with some string of your band ▪ which is a most acquaint kind of Melancholy besides . Where is your Page ? call for your Casting Bottle , and place your Mirror in your Hat , as I told you ; so . Come , look not pale , observe me : set your face , and enter , 



Amor.   OH for some excellent Painter , to have ta'en the copy of all these faces . 



Aso.   Prosaites . 



Amor.   Fie , I premonished you of that ; In the Court , Boy , or Sirrah . 



Cos.   Master Lupus in — OH 't is Prosaites . 



Asot.   Sirrah , prepare me my Casting-bottle , I think I must be enforced to purchase me another Page , you see how at hand Cos waits here . 



Exeunt . Mor.   So will he too in time . 



Cup.   what 's he Mercury ? 



Merchant   A notable Finch . One that hath newly entertained the Beggar to follow him , but cannot get him to wait near enough . 't is Asotus the heir of Philargirus : but first I 'll give you the others Character , which may make his the clearer ? He that is with him is Amorphus , A Traveller , One so made out of the mixture and shreds of forms , that himself is truly deformed : He walks most commonly with a Clove or Picktoothe in his mouth , he 's the very Mint of Compl●ment ; All his behaviours are printed , his face is another volume of Essays ; and his beard an Aristarchus . He speaks all cream , skimmed , & more affected than a dozen of waiting women ; he 's his own promoter in every place : The wife of the Ordinary gives him his diet to maintain her table in discourse , which ( indeed ) is a mere Tyranny over her other guests : for he will usurp all the talk : Ten Constables are not so tedious . He is no great shifter ; once a year his Apparel is ready to revolt ; He doth use much to arbitrate quarrels , and fights himself exceeding well ( out at a window . ) He will lie cheaper than any Beggar , and louder than most Clocks ; for which he is right properly accommodated to the Whetstone his page . The other gallant is his Zany , & doth most of these tricks after him ; sweats to imitate him in every thing ( to a hair ) except a Beard , which is not yet extant : he doth learn to eat Anchovies , & Caviar because he loves 'em , speaks as he speaks ; looks , walks , goes so in clothes and fashion , is in all , as he were moulded of him . Mary ( before they met ) he had other very pretty sufficiencies , which yet he retains some light Impression of : As frequenting a dancing school , and grievously torturing strangers , with inquisition after his grace in his Galliard ; He buys a fresh acquaintance at any rate ; his Eye , and his Raiment confer much together as he goes in the street ; He treads nicely , like a fellow that walks upon ropes , especially the first Sunday of his Silk-stockings , and when he is most neat and new , you shall strip him with commendations . 



Cup.   Here comes another . 



Merchant   ay , but one of another strain Cupid : This fellow weighs somewhat . 



Criticus passeth by . Cup.   His name Hermes ? 



Merchant   Criticus . A creature of a most perfect and divine temper ; One , in whom the Humours & Elements are peaceably met , without emulation of Precedency : he is neither too fantastickly Melancholy ; too slowly Plegmatick , too lightly Sanguine , or too rashly Choleric , but m all , so composed and ordered ; as it is clear , Nature was about some full work , she did more than make a man when she made him ; His discourse is like his behaviour , uncommon , but not unpleasing ; he is prodigal of neither : He strives rather to be ( that which men call ) judicious , then to be thought so ; and is so truly learned that he affects not to show it : He will think , & speak his thought , both freely ; but as distant from depraving any other man's Merit , as proclaiming his own : For his valour , 't is such , that he dares as little to offer an Injury , as receive one . In sum , he hath a most Ingenious and sweet spirit , a sharp and seasoned wit , a straight judgement . and a strong mind ; constant and unshaken : Fortune could never break him , or make him less , he count's it his pleasure to despise pleasures , and is more delighted with good deeds than Goods , It is a competency to him that he can be virtuous . He doth neither covet , nor fear ; he hath too much reason to do either : and that commends all things to him . 



Cup.   Not better than Mercury commends him . 



Merchant   OH Cupid , 't is beyond my deity to give him his due praises ; I could leave my Place in heaven , to live among Mortals , so I were sure to be no other than he . 



Cup.   'Slight , I believe he is your Minion ; you seem to be so ravished with him . 



Merchant   he 's one , I would not have awry thought darted against willingly . 



Cup.   no , but a strait shaft in his bosom , I 'll promise him , if I am Citherea's son . 



Merchant   Shall we go Cupid ? 



Cup.   Stay and see the Ladies now ; they 'll come presently . I 'll help to paint them . 



Merchant   What lay Colour upon Colour ▪ that affords but an ill blazon . 



Argurion passeth by . Cup.   Here comes Mettle to help it , the Lady Arg●rion . 



Merchant   Money , money . 



Cup.   The same : A Nymph of a most wandering and giddy disposition , humourous as the Air , she 'll run from Gallant to Gallant ( as they sit at Primero in the Presence ) most strangely , and seldom stays with any ; She spreads as she goes : To day you shall have her look as clear and fresh as the morning and to morrow as Melancholy as midnight . She takes special pleasure in a close , obscure lodging , and for that cause visits the City so often , where she has many secret and true-concealing favourites . When she comes abroad she 's more loose and scattering then dust , and will fly from place to place , as she were rapt with a whirlwind . Your young Student ( for the most part ) she affects not , only salutes him ▪ and away : A Poet or a Philosopher she is hardly brought to take any notice of , no , though he be some part of an Alchemist . She loves a Player , well ; and a Lawyer infinitely : but your Fool above all . She can do much in the Court for the obtaining of any suit whatsoever , no door but fly's open to her ; her presence is above a Charm : The worst in her is want of keeping s●ate , and to much descending into inferior and base offices , she 's for any course Employment you will put upon her , as to be your Procurer or Pander . 



Mercu.   Peace Cupid ; here comes more work for you , another Character or two . 



SCENA . 4.  

Phantaste , Moria , Philautia , Mercury , Cupid . Pha.   Stay sweet Philautia ; I 'll but change my fann , and go presently . 



Mor.   Now ( in very good serious ) Ladies , I will have this order reversed , the Presence must be better maintained from you ; A quarter past eleven , & ne'er a Nymph in Prospective ; beshrew my hand , there must be a reformed Discipline . Is that your new Ruff sweet Lady Bird ? by my truth 't is most Intricately rare . 



Merchant   Good jove , what reverend gentlewoman in years might this be ? 



Cup.   This Madam Moria , Guardian of the Nymphs : One that is not now to be persuaded of her Wit , she will think herself wise against all the judgements that come . A Lady made all of voice , & Air , talks any thing of any thing : She is like one of your Ignorant Po●tasterss of the time ; who whe● the have got acquainted with a strange word , never rest t●ll they have wrong it in , though it loosen the who●e fabric of their Sense . 



Merchant   That was pretty and sharply noted Cupid . 



Cup.   She will tell you Philosophy was a fine Reveller , when she was young and a Gallant , and that then ( though she say it ) she was thought to be the Dame-dido , and Hallen of the Court ; As also , what a sweet Dog she had this time four year , and how it was called Fortune , and that ( if the fates had not cut his thread ) he had been a Dog to have given entertainment to any Gallant in this kingdom . 



Merchant   OH I pray thee no more , I am full of her . 



Cupid .  Yes ( I must needs tell you ) She composes a Sackpos●et well ; and would court a young Page sweetly , but that her breath is against it . 



Merchant   Now her breath ( or some thing more strong ) protect me from her ; th' other , th' other , Cupid . 



Cup   OH , that 's my Lady and Mistress Madam Philautia : She admires not herself for any one particularity , but for all ; She is fair , and she knows it ; She has a pretty light wit too , and she knows it ; She can dance , and she knows that too ; play at Shuttlecock , and that too : no quality she has , but she shall take a very particular knowledge of , and most Ladylike commend it to you ; you shall have her at any time read you the History of herself , and very subtly run over another Lady's sufficiences to come to her own . 

She has a good superficial judgement in Painting ; and would seem to have so in Poetry . A most complete Lady in the opinion of some three beside herself . 



Phi.   Faith , how liked you my quipp to Hedon , about the garter ? was te not witty ? 



Mor.   Exceeding witty and Integrate : you did so Aggravate the jest withal . 



Phi.   And did I not dance moovingly last night ? 



Mor.   Moovingly ; out of measure ( in troth ) Sweet Lady . 



Mor.   A happy commendation , to dance , out of measure . 



Mor.   Save only you wanted the swimi the turn ; O! when I was atfourteene — 



Phi.   Nay that 's mine own from any Nymph i the Court ) I am sure on 't ) therefore you mistake me in that Guardian ; both the swim , and the trip , are properly mine ; every body will affirm it , that has any judgement in dancing : I assure you . 



Pha ,  Come now Philautia I am for you , shall we go ? 



Phi.   I good Phantaste ; What ? ha you changed your headtire ? 



Pha.   Yes faith ; th' other was so near the common , it had no extraordinary grace ; besides , I had worn it almost a● day in good troth . 



Phi.   I 'll be sworn , this is most excellent for the device , and rare . 't is after the Italian print we looked on t'other night . 



Pha.   't is so : by this fan , I cannot abide any thing that savours the poor overworn cut , that has any kindred with it ; I must have variety , ● ▪ this mixing in fashion I hate it worse , then to burn juniper in my Chamber I protest . 



Phi.   And yet we cannot have a new peculiar Court-tyre , but these Retainers will have it ; these Suburb sunday-waiters , these Courtiers for High days , I know not what I should call ' hem . — 



Pha.   OH I , they do most pitifully Imitate ; but I have a tire a coming ( I faith ) shall — 



Mor.   In good certain , Madam , it makes you look most heavenly ; but ( lay your hand on your hart ) you never skinned a new beauty more prosperously in your life , nor more supernaturally ; look good Lady , sweet Lady look . 



Phi.   't is very clear , and well believe me . But if you had seen mine yeasterday when ' was young , you would have — who 's your Doctor Phantaste ? 



Pha.   Nay that 's counsel Philautia , you shall pardon me : yet ( I 'll assure you ) he 's the most dainty , sweet , absolute rare man , of the whole College . O! his very looks , his discourse , his behaviour , all he does is Physic I protest . 



Phi.   For heaven's sake his name ; good , dear , Phantaste — 



Pha.   no , no , no , no , no , no , ( believe me ) not for a Million of heavens : I will not make him cheap . Fie — 



Exeunt . Phi.   There is a Nymph too of a most curious and elaborate strain , light , all motion , an Ubiquitary , she is every where , Phantaste — 



Merchant   Her very name speaks her ; let her pass . But are these ( Cupid ) the stars of Cynthia's Court ? do these Nymphs attend upon Di●na ? 



Cup.   They are in her Court ( Mercury ) but not as Stars ; these never come in the presence of Cynthia : the Nymphs that make her train , are the divine Arete , Timae , Phronesis , Thauma , and others of that high sort . These are privately brought in by Moria in this licentious time , against her knowledge ; and ( like so many Meteors ) will vanish when she appears . 



SCENA . 5.  

Prosaites . Gelaia . Cos. Mercury . Cupid . Pro.   Cant.  

Come follow me my Wags , and say as I say . 
there 's no richeses but in Rags ; hey day , hey day ; 
You that profess this art . Come away ; come away : 
And help to bear a part . Hey day ; hey day . 
Bearwards , & Blackingmen . 
Corn-cutters , and Carmen . 
Sellers of mar-king stones . 
Gatherer's up o● Marow-bones 
Pedlars , and Puppitplayers . 
Sowgelder's , and Soothsaiers . 
Gipsies and ●aylerss , 
Rat-catcher's ▪ and Railers , 
Beadles , and Ballad-singers . 
Fiddlers , and Fadingers . 
Thomalins , and Tinkers . 
Scavenger's , and Skinkers . 
There goes the Hare away . 
Hey day , Hey day . 
Bawds and blind Doctors . 
Paritors , and hospital Proctors . 
Chemists , and Cuttlebungs . 
Hookers , and Horne-thums . 
With all cast commanders . 
turned Post-knights , or Panders . 
jugglers , and jesters . ●eggar● rhyme . 
Borrowers of Testers . 
And all the troop of trash 
That're allied to the lash , 
Come , and join with your ●agss 
Shake up your muscle-bags . 
For Beggary bears the sway , 
then sing cast care away , 
Hey day , hey day . 


Merchant   What ? those that were our fellow Pages but now , so soon preferred to be Yeomen of the Bottles ? the mystery , the mystery , good wags ? 



Cup.   Some diet drink , they have the guard of . 



Pro.   no Sir , we are going in quest of a strange Fountain , lately found out . 



Cup.   By whom ? 



Cos.   My Master o● the great discoverer , Amorphus . 



Merchant   thou ha●● well entitled him Cos , for he will discover all he knows . 



Gelaia .  I and a little more too , when the spirit is upon him . 



Pro●● .  OH the good travelling Gentleman yonder , has caused such a drought 〈◊〉 the Presence , wi●h reporting the wonders of this new water ; that all the Ladies , and Gallants ●●e languishing upon the Rushes , like so many pounded Ca●tle 〈◊〉 the midste of 〈◊〉 , sighing one to another , and gasping , as if each of them expected a Cock from the Fountain , to be brought into his mouth● and ( without we return quickly ) they are all ( as a youth would say ) no better than a few Trout cast a shore , or a dish of Eels in a Sand-bag . 



Merchant   Well then , you were best dispatch & have a care of them , Come Cupid , thou and I 'll go peruse this dry wonder . 



Finis Actus Secundi . 

ACTUS TERTIUS . 

SCENA . 1.  

Amorphus . Asotus . Amor.   Sir , let not this discountenance , or disgallant you a whit , you must not sink under the first disaster ; It is with your young Grammattical Courtier , as with your Neophyte-player , a thing usual to be daunted at the first presence , or interview : you saw , there was Hedon & Anaides , ( far more practised gallants then yourself ) who were both out , to comfort you : It is no disgrace , no more , then for your adventurous Reveller to fall by some inauspicious chance in his Galliard , or ●or some subtle Politician to undertake the Bastinado , that the State might think worthily of him , and respect him as a man well beaten to the world . What ? hath your Tailor provided the property ( we spoke of ) at your Chamber , or no ? 



Aso.   I think he has . 



Amor.   Nay ▪ ( I entreat you ) be not so flat , and melancholic , erect your mind : you shall redeem this with the Courtship I will teach you against afternoon : Where eat you to day ? 



Asot.   Where you please Sir , any where I  



Amor.   Come let us go and taste some light dinner , A dish of she 'd Caviar , or so , and after you shall practise an hour at your lodging , some few forms that I have remembered ; If you had but ( so f●rre ) gathered your spirits to you , as to have taken up a Rush ( when you were out ) and waged it , thus ; or clensde your tooth with it , or but turned aside , and fa●●de some business to whisper with your Page , till you had recovered yourself , or but found some slight stain in your stocking , or any other pretty Invention ( so it had been sudden , ) you might have come off with a most clear and Courtly grace . 



Asot.   A poison of all , I think I was forespoake , I  



Amor.   no , I do partly aim at the cause ( which was ominous indeed ) for as you enter at the door , there is oppos'de to you the frame of a Wolf in the hangings , which ( your eye taking suddenly ) gave a false Alarm to the heart ; and that was it called your blood out of your face , and so disordered the whole rank of your spirits : I beseech you labour to forget it . 



Exeunt . SCENA . 2.  

Hedon . Anaides . Headsman   Heart , was there ever so prosperous an Invention thus unluckely perverted , and spoilt , by a whoreson Bookworm , a Candle-waster ? 



Ana.   Nay , be not impatient , Hedon . 



Headsman   'Slight , I would fain know his name . 



Ana.   hang him poor Grogran Rascal , pray thee think not of him : I 'll send for him to my lodging , and have him blanketed when thou wilt , man  



Headsman   By gods so ; I would thou couldst . Look , here he comes . Laugh at him , laugh at him . ha , ha , ha . 



Criticus passeth by . Ana.   Fough , he smells all Lamp-oil , with studying by Candle-light . 



Hedon .  How confidently he went by us ; and carelessly ! never moved ! nor stirred at any thing ! Did you observe him ? 



Ana.   I a pox on him , let him go , Dormouse : he is in a dream now ; He has no other time , to sleep but thus when he walks abroad , to take the air . 



H●d .  God's precious , this afflicts me more than all the rest , that we should so particularly direct our Hate , and Contempt against him ; and he to carry it thus without wound or passion ! 't is insufferable . 



Anai.   'Slid , ( my dear Envy ) if , thou but sayest the word now , I 'll undo him eternally for thee . 



Hedon .  How sweet Anaides ? 



Anai.   Mary half a score of us get him in ( one night ) and make him pawn his wit for a supper . 



Headsman   Away , thou hast such unseasonable jests . By this heaven I wonder at nothing more than our Gentlemen Ushers ; that will suffer a piece of Serge , or Perpetuana , to come into the Presence : me thinks , they , should ( out of their Expe●ience ) better distinguish the silken disposition of a Courtier , then to let such terrible course Rags mix with 'em , able to fret any smooth or gentile Society to the threads , with their rubbing devices . 



Ana.   Damn me , if I should adventure on his company once more , without a suit of Buff , to defend my wit : he does nothing but stab the slave : how mischeivously he crossed thy device of the Prophecy there ? And Moria she comes without her Muff too ; and there my invention was lost . 



Headsman   Well , I am resolved , what I 'll do . 



Ana.   What , my good spirituous Spark ? 



Headsman   Mary , speak all the venom I can of him ; and poison his reputation in every place where I come . 



Ana.   Before god most Courtly . 



Headsman   And if I chance to be present where any question is made of his sufficiencies , or of any thing he hath done private or public ; I 'll censure it slightly , and ridiculously — 



Ana.   At any hand beware of that , so you may draw your own judgement , insuspect ; no , I 'll instruct thee what thou shalt do , and by a safer means : approve any thing thou hear●st of his , to the received opinion of it ; but if it be extraordinary , give it from him to some other , whom thou more particularly affectst , that 's the way to plague him , and he shall never come to defend himself : 'Sblood , I 'll give out all he do● is dictated from other men : and swear it too ( if thou 'lt have me ) and that I know the time , and place , where he stole it : though my soul be guilty of no such thing ; and that I think out of my hart , he hate's such barren shi●tss ; yet to do thee a pleasure and him a disgrace , I 'll damn myself , or do any thing . 



Headsman   Gramercies my dear Devil : we 'll put it seriously in practice , I faith . 



Exeunt . SCENA . 3.  

Criticus . Crit.   Do good Detraction , do : and I the while 
Shall shake thy spite off with a careless smile . 
Poor piteous Gallants , what lean idle sleights 
Their thoughts suggest to flatter their starved Hopes ! 
As if I knew not how to entertain 
These Straw-devises ; but of force must yield 
To the weak stroke of their calumnious tongues . 
Why should I care what every Dor doth buzz ▪ 
In credulous ears ? it is a Crown to me , 
That the best judgements can report me wronged ; 
Them Liars ; and their slanders impudent . 
Perhaps ( upon the rumour of their speeches ) 
Some grieved friend will whisper , Criticus , 
Men speak ill of thee : So they be ill men , 
If they spoke worse , ' were better : For of such 
To be dispraised , is the most perfect praise . 
What can his Censure hurt me , whom the world 
Hath censured vile before me ? If good Chre●tus , 
Euthus , or Phronimus , had spoke the words , 
They would have moved me ; & I should have called 
My thoughts and Actions to a strict account 
Upon the hearing : But when I remember 
't is Hedon and Anaides : Alas , then , 
I think but what they are , and am not stirred : 
The one , a light voluptuous Reveller , 
The other a strange arrogating Puff , 
Both impudent , and ignorant enough ; 
That talk ( as they are wont ) not as I merit ; 
Traduce by Custom , as most Dogs do bark , 
Do nothing out of judgement , but disease ; 
Speak ill , because they never could speak well : 
And who 'd be angry with this race of Creatures ? 
What wise Physician have we ever seen 
Moved with a frantic man ? the same affects 
That he doth bear to his sick Patient , 
Should a right mind carry to such as these : 
And I do count it a most rare Revenge , 
That I can thus ( with such a sweet neglect ) 
Pluck from them all the pleasure of their Malice . 
For that 's the mark of all their enginous drifts , 
To wound my Patience ( how soe'er they seem 
To aim at other objects ) which if mist , 
Their envy 's like an Arrow shot upright , 
That in the fall endangers their own heads . 


SCENA . 4.  

Arete . Criticus . Aret.   What Criticus ? where have you spent the day ▪ 
You have not visited your jealous friends ? 


Crit.   Where I have seen ( most honoured Arete , ) 
The strangest Pageant , fashioned like a Court , 
( At least I dreamed I saw it ) so diffused , 
So painted , pied , and full of Rainbow strains ; 
As never yet ( either by Time , or Place ) 
Was made the food to my distasted Sense : 
Nor can my weak imperfect Memory 
Now render half the forms unto my tongue , 
That were convolved within this thrifty Room . 
Here , stalks me by , a proud , and spangled Sir , 
That looks three handfuls higher than his foretop ; 
Savours himself alone , is only kind 
And loving to himself : One that will speak 
more dark and doubtful than six oracles ; 
Salutes a friend , as if he had a stitch , 
Is his own Chronicle , and scarce can eat 
For registering himself ; is waited on , 
By Mimiques , jesters , Panders , Parasites , 
And other such like Prodigies of men . 
He past ; there comes some subtle Proteus : One 
Can ●hange , and vary with all forms he sees ; 
Be any thing but honest ; serves the time ; 
Hovers betwixt two factions , and explores 
The drifts of both ; which ( with cross face ) he bears 
To the divided heads , and is received 
With mutual grace of either : One that dares 
Do deeds worthy the Hurdle , or the Wheel , 
To be thought some body ; and is ( in sooth ) 
Such as the Satirist points truly forth , 
Criminibus debent hortos , praetoria , mensas : 


Aret.   You tell us wonders Criticus . 


Crit.   Tut , this is nothing . 
There stands a Neophyte , glazing of his face , 
Against his Idol enters ; and repeats , 
( Like an unperfect Prologue , at third Music ) 
His part of speeches , and confederate jests 
In passion to himself ; Another swears 
His Scene of Courtship over , and then seems 
As he would kiss away his hand in kindness ; 
A third , is most in Action ; swims , and frisks , 
Plays with his mistress paps , salutes her pomps ; 
Will spend his Patrimony for a Garter , 
Or the least feather in he● bounteous Fan : 
A fourth , he only comes in for a Mute , 
Divides the Act with a dumb show , and Exit , 
then must the Ladies laugh : straight comes their Scene ; 
A sixth times worse Confusion than the Rest. 
Where you shall hear one talk of this man's Eye ; 
Another of his Lip , a third , his Nose ; 
A fourth commend his Leg , a ●ifth his Foot , 
A sixth his Hand , and every one a limb ; 
That you would think the poor distorted Gallant 
Must there expire : then fall they in discourse 
Of Tires , and Fashions ; how they must take place : 
Where they may kiss ; and whom : when to sit down ; 
And with what grace to rise : if they salute , 
What courtesy they must use ; such Cobweb stuff , 
As would enforce the commonest sense abhor 
th' Arachnean workers . 


Aret.   Patience Criticus . 
This knot of Spiders will be soon dissolved , 
And all their webs swept out of Cynthia's Court , 
When once her glorious Deity appears , 
And but presents itself in her full light : 
Till when , go in : and spend your hours with us 
Your honoured friends Timae , and Phronesis , 
In contemplation of our Goddess name : 
Think on some sweet , and choice Invention now , 
( Worthy her serious , and illustrious Eyes ) 
That from the merit of it we may take 
Desired occasion to prefer your worth , 
And make your service known to Cynthia : 
It is the pride of Arete to grace 
Her studious lovers ; and ( in scorn of Time , 
Envy , and Ignorance ) to lift their state 
Above a vulgar height . True Happiness 
Consists not in the multitude of friends , 
But in the worth , and choice ; Nor would I have 
Virtue , a popular Regard pursue ; 
Let them be good that love me , though but few . 


Crit.   I kiss thy hands , divinest Arete , 
And vow myself to thee , and Cynthia . 


Exeunt . SCENA . 5.  

Amorphus . Asotus . Amo.   A little more forward ; So Sir. Now go in , discloak yourself , and come forth . Taylor ; bestow thy absence upon us ; and be not prodigal of this secret , but to a dear Customer . 't is well entered Sir. Stay you come on too fast ; your Pace is too impetuous . Imagine this to be the Palace of your Pleasure , or Place where your Lady is pleased to be seen : First you present yourself thus ; and spying her you fall off , and walk some two turns ; in which time it is to be supposed your Passion hath sufficiently whited your Face ? then ( stifling a sigh or two , and closing your lips ) with a trembling boldness , and bold terror ; you advance yourself forward . Try thus much I pray you . 



Asot.   Yes Sir , ( pray god I can light on it ) Here I come in you say : and present myself ? 



Amor.   Good.  



Asot.   And then I spy her , and walk off ? 



Amor.   Very good . 



Asot.   Now sir I stif●le , and advance forward ? 



Amor.   Trembling . 



Asot.   Yes Sir , trembling . I shall do it better when I come to it . And what must I speak now ? 



Amor.   Marry you shall say ; Dear Beauty , or sweet Honour , or by what other title you please to remember her ) me thinks you are Melancholy . This is if she be alone now and discompanied . 



Asot.   Well Sir , I 'll enter again ; her title shall be My dear Lindabrides . 



Amor.   Lindabride's ? 



Asot.   I Sir , the Emperor Alicandro's Daughter , and the Prince M●ridians' sister ( in the Knight of the Sun ) she should have been married to him , but that the Princess Clari●iana — 



Amor.   OH you betray your reading . 



Asot.   Nay sir , I have read History : I am a little Humanitian . Interrupt me no● , good Sir. My dear Lindabrides , My dear Lindabrides , My dear Lindabrides , me thinks you are Melancholy . 



Amor.   ay , and take her by the Rosie-fingerd hand . 



Asot.   Must I so ? OH : My dear Lindabrides , me thinks you are Melancholy . 



Amor.   Or thus Sir. All variety of divine pleasures , choice sports , sweet Music , rich Fare , brave Attires , soft Beds , & silken thoughts , attend this dear Beauty . 



Asot.   Believe me that 's prerty : All variety of divino pleasures , choice sports , sweet Music , rich Fare , brave Attires , soft Beds , and silken thoughts , attend this dear Beauty . 



Amor.   And then , offering to kiss her hand , if she shall coily recoil , and signify your repulse ; you are to reinforce yourself with , more than most fair Lady ; let not the Rigour of your just disdain thus coarsely censure of your servant's zeal : and ( withal ) protest her , To be the only , and absolute un-paraeleld Creature , you do adore , and admire , and respect , and reverence , in this Court , Corner of the world , or Kingdom . 



Asot.   This is hard by my faith : I 'll begin it all again . 



Amor.   Do so , and I will Act it for your Lady . 



Asot.   Will you vouchsafe sir ? All variety of divine pleasures , choice Sports , sweet Music , rich Fare , brau● Attire , soft Beds , and silken thoughts , attend this dear Beauty . 



Amor.   So Sir , pray you a way . 



Asot.   more than most fair Lady , let not the Rigour of your just disdain , thus coarsely censure of your s●ruants' zeal . I protest you are the only and absolute un-aparailed — 



Amo.   Unparalleled . 



Asot.   Unparalleled Creature , I do adore , and admire , and respect , and reverence , in this Court , Corner of the world , or kingdom . 



Amor.   This is if she abide you : But now ; put case she should be Passant when you enter , as thus : you are to frame your Gate ther'after , and call upon her : Lady , Nymph , Sweet Refuge , Star of our Court : then if she be Guardant , here : you are to come on , and ( laterally disposing yourself , ) swear by her blushing and well coloured cheek : the bright dye of her hair , her juorie teeth , or some such white and Innocent oath , to induce you . If Regardant ; then , maintain your station , Briske , and Irpe , show the suppling motion of your pliant body : but ( in chief ) of your knee , and hand , which cannot but arride her proud Humour exceedingly . 



Asot.   I conceive you sir , I shall perform all these things in good time , I doubt not , they do so hit me . 



Amo.   Well Sir , I am your Lady ; make use of any of these beginnings , or some other out of your own invention : and prove how you can hold up , and follow it . Say , Say.  



Asot.   Yes Sir : my dear Lindabrides . 



Amo.   no , you affect that Lindabrides too much : And ( let me tell you ) it is not so Courtly . Your Pedant should provide you some parcels of French , or some pretty Commodity of Italian to commence with , if you would be exotic , and exquisite . 



Asot.   Yes Sir , he was at my lodging tother morning , I gau● him a Doublet . 



Amo.   Double your benevolence , and give him the Hose too ; clothe you his body , he will help to apparel your mind . But now , see what your proper Genius can perform alone , without adjection of any other Minerva . 



Asot.   I comprehend you sir.  



Amo.   I do stand you Sir : fall back to your first place . Good ; passing well : Very properly pursewd . 



Asot.   Beautiful , ambiguous , and sufficient Lady . What are you all alone . 



Amo.   We would be Sir , if you would leave us.  



Asot.   I am at your beauty's appointment : bright Angel ; but — 



Amo.   What but ? 



Asot.   no harm , more than most fair feature . 



Amo.   Th●t touch relished well . 



Asot.   But I protest . 



Amo.   And why should you protest ? 



Asot.   For good will ( dear esteemed Madam ) and I hope your Ladyship will so conceive of it : If ever you have seen great TAMBURLAINE . 



Amor.   OH that Blank was excellent : if you could pick out more of these Play-particles , and ( as occasion shall salute you ) embroider or damask your discourse with them ( persuade your soul ) it would iudiciouslye commend you : Come , this was a well-dischar'gd and auspicious Bout : prove the second . 



Asot.   Lady , I cannot swagger it in Black and Yellow . 



Amo.   Why if you can Revel it in White Sir , 't is sufficient . 



Asot.   Say you so Sweet Lady ? Lan , tede de , de , daunt , daunt , daunt , dante , etc.  no ( in good faith ) Madam , whosever told your Ladyship so , abused you ; but I would be glad to meet your Ladyship in a measure . 



Amor.   Me Sir ? belike you measure me by yourself then ? 



Asot.   Would I might Fair Feature . 



Amor.   And what were you the better , if you might ? 



Asot.   The better it please you to ask , Fair Lady . 



Amo.   Why this was ravishing , and most acutely continued ; Well , spend not your humour too much , you have now competently exercised your Conceit : This ( once or twice a day ( will tender you an accomplished , elaborate , and well leveled Gentleman ; convey in your Courting-stock , we will ( in the heat of this ) go visit the Nymphs Chamber . 



Finis Actus tertij . 

ACTUS QVARTUS . 

SCENA . 1.  

Phantaste . Philautia . Argurion . Moria . Cupid . Phan.   I would this water would arrive once our travayling friend so commended to us.  



Arg.   So would I , for he has left all us in travail , with expectation of it . 



Pha.   Pray jove , I never rise from this Couch , if ever I thirsted more for a thing , in my whole time of being a Courtier . 



Phi.   Nor I , I 'll be sworn ; the very mention of it sets my lips in a worse heat , then if he had sprinkled them with Mercury . Reach me the glass Sirrah . 



Cup.   here Lady . 



Mor.   They do not peel sweet charge ? do they ? 



Phi.   Yes a little Guardian . 



Mor.   OH 't is a imminent good sign . Ever when my lips do so , I am sure to have some delicious good drink or other approaching . 



Arg.   Mary & this may be good for us Ladies : for ( it seems ) 't is far-fet by their stay . 



Moria .  My palate for yours ( dear Honour ) it shall prove most elegant I warrant you : OH , I do fancy this gear that 's long a coming , with an unmeasurable strain . 



Pha.   Pray thee sit down Philautia , that Rebato beecoms thee singularly . 



Phi.   Is (null) not quaint ? 



Pha.   Yes faith : me thinks thy seru●nt Hedon is nothing so obsequious to thee , as he was wont to be ; I know not how , he 's grown out of his Garb o'late , he 's warped ▪ 



Mor.   In trueness , and so me thinks too , he 's much converted . 



Phi.   Tut ; let him be what he will , 't is an Animals I dream not of . This tire ( me thinks ) makes me look very Ingenuously , quick , and spirited : I should be some Laura , or some Delia me thinks . 



Mor.   As I am wise ( fair honours ) that title she gave him , to be her Ambition , spoilt him : Before , he was the most propitious , and observant young Novice . — 



Pha ,  no , no ; you are the whole heaven awry Guardian , 't is the swaggering tilt-horse Anaides draws with him there , has been the diverter of him . 



Phi.   For Cupid's sake speak no more of him ; would I might never dare to look in a Mirror again , if I respect ere a Marmoset of them all , otherwise , than I would a Feather , or my Shuttlecock , to make sport with , now and then . 



Pha.   Come sit down ; troth ( and you be good Beauties ) let's run over 'em all now : Which is the proper'st man amongst them ? I say the Traveller , Amorphus . 



Phi.   OH fie on him : he looks like a Dutch Trumpeter i' the battle of Lepanto , in the gallery yonder ; and speaks to the tune of a country Lady , that comes ever i' the rear ward , or train of a Fashion . 



Mor.   I should have judgement , in a feature sweet Beauties . 



Pha.   A body would think so , at these years . 



Mor.   And I prefer another now , far before him , A million at least . 



Pha.   Who might that be Guardian ? 



Mor.   Marry ( fair Charge ) Anaides . 



Pha.   Anaides ? you talked of a tune Philautia , there 's one speaks in a Key : like the opening of some justice's gate , or a Postboys horn , as if his voice feared an Arrest for some ill words it should give , and were loath to come forth . 



Phi.   ay , and he has a very imperfect face . 



Pha.   Like a squeezed Orange , sour , sour . 



Phi.   His hand 's too great to ; by at least a straw's breadth . 



Pha.   Nay he has a worse fault then that too . 



Phi.   A long heel ? 



Pha ▪   That were a fault in a Lady rather than him : no , they say he puts of the Calves of his legs with his Stockings every night . 



Phi.   Out upon him : turn to another of the Pictures for God's sake . What says Argurion ? whom does she commend afore the rest ? 



Cupid .  I hope I have instructed her sufficiently for an answer . 



Mor.   Troth I made the motion to her Ladyship for one to day i' the Presence , but it appeared she was other ways furnished before ; She would none . 



Pha.   Who was that Argurion ? 



Mor.   Marry the little , poor , plain Gentleman i' the black there . 



Pha.   Who ? Criticus ? 



Arg.   ay , I , he ; A fellow that no body so much as looked upon , or regarded , and she would have had me done him particular grace . 



Pha.   That was a true trick of yourself Moria , to persuade Argurion affect the scholar . 



Arg.   Tut ; but she shall be no chooser for me . In good faith I like the Citizen's son there Asotus , me thinks , none of them all come near him . 



Pha.   Not Hedon ? 



Arg.   Hedon , in troth no. Hedon's a pretty slight Courtier ▪ and he wears his clothes well , and sometimes in fashion ; marry his face is but indifferent , and he has no such excellent body . no ; th' other is a most delicate youth , a sweet face , a straight body , a well proportioned leg , and foot , a white hand , a tender voice . 



Phi.   How now Argurion ? 



Pha.   OH you should have let her alone , she was bestowing a Copy of him upon us.  



Phi.   Why she dotes more palpably upon him , then ere his Father did upon her . 



Pha.   Believe me , the young gentleman deserves it ; if she could dote more 't were not amiss : He is an exceeding proper youth , and would have made a most neat Barber-surgeon , if he had been put to it in time . 



Phi.   Say you so ? me thinks ▪ he looks like a Tailor already . 



Pha.   ay , that had said on one of his Customers suits . 



Arg.   Well Ladies , jest on : the best of you both would be glad of such a servant . 



Mor.   ay , I 'll be sworn would they : Go to Beauties , make much of Time , and Place , and Occasion , and Opportunity , and Favourites , and things that belong to them ; for I 'll ensure you , they will all relinquish ; they cannot endure above another year ; I know it out of future experience , and therefore take exhibition , and warning : I was once a Reveller myself , and though I speak it ( as mine own Trumpet ) I was then esteemed — 



Phi.   The very Marchpane of the Court I warrant ? 



Pha.   And all the Gallants came about you like flies , did they not ? 



Mor.   Go to ; they did somewhat , that 's no matter now . Here comes Hedon . 



SCENA . 2.  

Hedon . Anaides . Mercury . Phantaste . Philautia . Moria . Argurion . Cupid . Headsman   Save you sweet and clear beauties : By the spirit that moves in me , you are almost pleasingly bestowed Ladies . Only , I can take it for no good Omen , to find mine Honour so dejected . 



Phi.   You need not fear Sir , I did of purpose humble myself against your coming , to decline the pride of my Ambition . 



Headsman   Fair Honour , Ambition dares not stoop ; but if it be your sweet pleasure , I shall lose that Title ; I will ( as I am Hedon ) apply myself to your bounties . 



Phi.   That were the next way to distil myself of Honour : OH no , rather be still Ambitious I pray you . 



Headsman   I will be any thing that you please , whilst it pleaseth you to be yourself Lady . Sweet Phantaste , Dear Moria , most beautiful Argurion . — 



Anai.   Farewell Hedon . 



Headsman   Anaides , Stay : wether go you ? 



Anai.   'Slight , what should I do here ? and you engrose ●hem all for your own use , 't is time for me to seek out . 



Headsman   I engrose ' hem ? Away mischief , this is one of your extravagant jests now , because I began to salute 'em by their names — 



Anai.   Faith you might have spar'de us Madam Prudence the Guardian there , though you had more covetously aimed at the rest . 



Headsman   ' 'Sheart , take 'em all man ; what speak you to me of aiming or Covetous ? 



Anai.   ay , say you so ? nay then , have at 'em : Ladies , here 's one hath distinguished you by your names already ; It shall only become me , to ask ; How you do ? 



Headsman   God's so , was this the design you travelled with ? 



Pha.   Who answers the Brazen head ? it spoken to some body ? 



Anai.   Lady Wisdom , do you Interpret for these puppets ? 



Mor.   In truth , and sadness ( Honours ) you are in great offence for this ; go too , the Gentleman ( I 'll undertake with him ) is a man of fair living , and able to maintain a Lady in her two Coaches a day , besides Pages , Monkeys , and Parachitoes , with s●tch attendants as she shall think meet for her turn ; and therefore there is more respect requirable , how soever you seem to connive : Hark you Sir , let me discourse a syllable with you . I am to say to you , these Ladies are not of that close , and open behaviour , as happily you may suspend ; their Carriage is well known to be such as it should be , both gentle and extraordinary . 



M●r.   OH here comes the other Pair . 



SCENA . 3.  

Amorphus . Asotus . Hedon . Anaides . Mercury . Cupid . Phantaste . Philautia . Argurion . Moria . Amor.   That was your Father's Love , the Nymph Argurion . I would have you direct all your Courtship thither , if you could but endear yourself to her affection , you were eternally engallanted . 



Asot.   In truth Sir ? pray Phoebus I prove favorsome in her fair eyes . 



Amor.   All divine mixture , and increase of beauty , to this bright B●uy of Ladies ; and to the male - Courtiers Compliment , and Courtesy . 



Headsman   In the behalf of the Males , I gratify you Amorphus . 



Phan.   And I of the Females . 



Amor.   Succinctly spoken : I do vale to both your thanks , and kiss them ; but primarily to yours , Most ingenious , acute , and polite Lady . 



Phi.   God's my life , how he does all to be qualify her ! Ingenious , Acute , and Polite ? as if there were not others in place , as Ingenious , Acute , and Polite , as she . 



Headsman   Yes , but you must know Lady , he cannot speak out of a Dictionary method . 



Phan.   Sat down sweet Amorphus . When will this water come think you ? 



Amor.   It cannot now be long fair Lady . 



Cup.   Now observe Mercury . 



Asot.   How most Ambiguous beauty ? Love you ? that I will by this Handkerchief . 



Merchant   'Slid he draws his oaths out of his pocket . 



Arg.   But will you be constant ? 



Asotus .  Constant Madam ? I will not say for Constantness , but by this Purse ( which I would be loath to swear by , unless 't were embroidered ) I protest ( more than most fair Lady ) you are the only , absolute and unparaleld Creature , I do adore , and admire , and respect , and reverence in this Court , Corner of the world , or Kingdom , Me thinks you are Melancholy . 



Arg.   Does your heart speak all this ? 



Asot.   Say you ? 



Merchant   OH he is groping for another oath . 



Asot.   Now by this Watch ( I marl how forward the day is ) I do unfaignedly vow myself ( 'Slight 't is deeper than I took it , past five ) yours entirely addicted , Madam . 



Arg.   I require no more dearest Asotus , henceforth let me call you mine ; and in remembrance of me , vouchsafe to wear this Chain , and this Diamond . 



Asot.   OH god sweet Lady . 



Cup.   There are new oaths for him : what ? doth Hermes taste no Alteration in all this ? 



M●r.   Yes , thou hast struck Argurion enamoured on Asotus methinks ? 



Cup.   Alas no ; I am no body , I : I can do nothing in this disguise . 



M●rcu .  But thou hast not wounded any of the rest , Cupid ? 



Cup.   Not yet : it is enough that I have begun so prosperously . 



Arg.   Tut , these are nothing to the Gems I will hourly bestow upo● thee : be but faithful and kind to me , and I will lad thee with my richest bounties : behold here my Bracelets from mine Arms . 



Asot.   Not so good Lady , By this Diamond . 



Arg.   Take 'em ; wear 'em : my jewels , Chain of Pearl , Pendants , all I have . 



Asot.   Nay then , by this Pearl You make me a Wanton . 



Cup.   Shall not she answer for this , to maintain him thus in swearing ? 



Merchant   OH , no , there is away to wean him from this : the Gentleman may be reclaimed . 



Cup.   ay , if you had the airing of his apparel Cosse , I think . 



Asot.   Loving ? 't were pity I should be living else , believe me . Save you Sir. Save you sweet Lady , Save you Mounsieur Anaides ; Save you dear Madam . 



Ana.   Dost thou know him that saluted thee , Hedon ? 



Hedon .  no , some idle Fungoso I warrant you . 



Ana.   ' 'Sblood , I never saw him till this morning , and he salutes me as familiarly , as if we had known together , since the first year of the siege of Troy.  



Amor.   A most right-handed , and auspicious encounter . Confine yourself to your fortunes . 



Phi.   For god's sake le 's have some Ri●dleses or Purposes ; hough . 



Pha.   no faith , your Prophecies are best , the tother are stale . 



Phi.   Prophecies ? we cannot all ●it in at them ; we shall make a confusion : no ; what called you that we had in the forenoon ? 



Pha.   Substantives , and Adiectives . Is (null) not Hedon ? 



Phi.   I that , who begins ? 



Pha.   I have thought ; speak your Adiectives Sirs ? 



Phi.   But do not you change then . 



Pha.   Not I , Who says ? 



Mor.   Odoriferous . 



Phi.   Popular . 



Arg.   Humble . 



Anai.   White-livered . 



Hedon .  Barbarous . 



Amor.   Pythagorical . 



Hedon .  Yours Signior . 



Asot.   What must I do Sir ? 



Amor.   Give forth your adjective with the rest ; as Prosperous , Good , Fair , Sweet , Well . 



Headsman   Any thing that hath not been spoken . 



Asot.   Yes Sir : Well-spoken shall be mine . 



Pha.   What ? ha you all done . 



Omnes .  I  



Pha.   then the Substantive is Breeches . Why Odoriferous Breeches Guardian ? 



Mor.   Odoriferous , because Odoriferous : that which contains most variety of savour , and smell , we say is most Odoriferous : now Breeches I presume are incident to that variety , and therefore , Odoriferous Breeches . 



Pha.   Well , we must take it howsoever , who 's next . Philautia . 



Phi.   Popular . 



Pha.   Why Popular Breeches ? 



Phi.   Marry that is , when they are not content to be generally noted in Court ; but will press footth on common Stages , and Brokers stalls , to the public view of the world . 



Pha.   Good : why Humble Breeches ? Argurien . 



Arg.   Humble , because they use to be sat upon ; besides if you tie 'em not up , their property is to fall down about your heels . 



Merchant   She has worn the Breeches it seems which have done so . 



Phan.   But why White-livered ? 



Anai.   Why ? ' Sharte are not their linings white ? besides , when they come in swaggering company , and will pocket up any thing ; may they not properly be said to be White-livered ? 



Phan.   OH yes , we cannot deny it . And why Barbarous , Hedon ? 



Hedon .  Barbarous , because commonly when you have worn your Breeches sufficiently , you give them to your Barber . 



Amor.   that 's good : but now Pythagorical ? 



Pha.   ay , Amorphus . Why Pythagorical Breeches ? 



Amor.   OH most kindly of all , 't is a conceit of that Fortune ; I am bold to hug my brain for . 



Phan.   How is (null) , Exquisite Amorphus ? 



Amor.   OH I am rapt with it , 't is so fit , so proper , so happy . 



Phi.   Nay do not rack us thus ? 



Amor.   I never truly relished myself before . Give me your ears . Breeches Pythagorical , by reason of their transmigration into several shapes . 



Moria .  Most rare in sweet troth . Marry this young Gentleman , for his Well-spoken — 



Phan.   ay , why Well-spoken Breeches ? 



Asot.   Well-spoken : marry well-spoken , because whatsoever they speak is well taken , and whatsoever is well taken , is well-spoken . 



Moria .  Excellent : believe me . 



Asot.   Not so Ladies neither . 



Hedon .  But why Breeches now ? 



Phan.   Breeches quasi Beare-riches ; when a gallant bears all his Richeses in his Breeches . 



Phi.   In good faith these unhappy Pages , would be whipped for staying thus . 



Moria .  Beshrew my hand , and my hart else . 



Amor.   I do wonder at their protraction . 



Anai.   Pray God my whore have not discovered herself to the rascally Boys , and that be the cause of their stay . 



Asot.   I must suit myself with another Page ; this idle Prosaites will never be brought to wait well ▪ 



Mor.   Sir I have a kinsman I could willingly wish to your service , if you would deign to accept of him . 



Asot.   And I shall be glad ( most sweet Lady ) to embrace him ; where is he ? 



Mor.   I can fetch him Sir , but I would be loath to make you turn away your other Page . 



Asot.   You shall not most sufficient Lady , I will keep both : pray you le 's go see him . 



Exeunt . Arg.   Whether goes my Love ? 



Asot.   I 'll return presently ; I go but to see a Page with this Lady . 



Anaid.   As sure as Fate 't is so ; she has opened all : A pox of all Cockatrices . Damn me if she have played loose with me , I 'll cut her throat within a hair's breadth , so it may be healed again . 

Exit . 

Mercu.   What is he jealous of his Hermaphrodite ? 



Cup.   OH I , this will be excellent sport . 



Phi.   Phantaste , Argurion , what ? you are suddenly stroke me thinks ; for God's will le 's have some Music till they come . Ambition reach the Lyra I pray you . 



Hedon .  Any thing to which my Honour shall direct me . 



Phi.   Come Amorphus ; cheer up Phantaste . 



Amor.   It shall be my pride fair Lady to attempt all that is in my power . But here is an Instrument that ( alone ) is able to infuse soul in the most melancholic , and dull disposed Creature upon earth ; O! let me kiss thy fair knees : Beauteous ●aress attend it . 



Hedon .  Will you have the Kiss Honor.  



Phi.   I good Ambition . 



Ode . 

OH That joy so soon should waste ! 
or so sweet a bliss 
as a Kiss , 
Might not for ever last ! 
So sugared , so melting , so soft , so delicious , 
The dew that lies on Roses , 
When the Morn herself discloses , 
is not so precious : 
OH , rather than I would it smother , 
Were I to taste such another ; 
It should be my wishing 
That I might die kissing . 
Hedon .  I made this Ditty and the Note to it upon a kiss that my Honour gave me ; how like you it Sir.  



Amor.   A pretty Air ; in general I like it well . But in particular , your long die-note did arride me most , but it was somewhat too long : I can show one , almost of the same nature , but much before it , and not so long ; in a Composition of mine own : I think I have both the Note , and Ditty about me . 



Headsman   Pray you Sir see . 



Amor.   Yes there is the Note ; and all the parts if I misthink not . I will read the Ditty to your Beauties here , but first I am to make you familiar with the occasion , which presents itself thus . Upon a time , going to take my leave of the Emperor , and kiss his great hands ; there being then present , the Kings of France , and Arragon , the Dukes of Savoy , Florence , Orleans , Bourbon , Brunswick , the Landgrave , Count Palatine , all which had severally feasted me ; besides infinite more of inferior persons , as Earls , and others : it was my chance ( the Emperor detained by some other affair ) to wait him the fifth part of an hour , or much ne'er it ▪ In which time ( retiring myself into a Bay-window ) I encountered the Lady Annabel niece to the Empress , and ●ister to the king of Arragon ; who ( having never before ay the me , but only heard the common report of my Virtue , Learning , and Travail ) fell into that extremity of passion , for my love , that she there immediately sounded : Physicians were sent for ; she had to her chamber ; so to her bed ; where ( languishing some few days ) after many times calling upon me , with my name in her mouth , she expired . As that ( I must needs say ) is the only fault of my Fortune , that as it hath ever been my hap to be sewed to by all Ladies , and Beauties where I have come ; so , I never yet sojourned , or rested in that place , or part of the world , where some great and admirable fair Creature died not for my love . 



Merchant   OH the sweet power of travail , are you guilty of this Cupid ? 



Cup.   no Mercury ; and that his page ( Cos ) knows , and he were here present to be sworn . 



Phi.   But how doth this draw on the Ditty Sir.  


Mor.   OH she is to quick with him ; he hath not devised that yet . 



Amor.   Mary some hour before she departed , she bequeathed to me this Glou● ; which the Emperor himself took care to send after me , in six Coaches , covered all with black-veluet , attended by the state of his Empire ; all which he freely gave me , and I reciprocally ( out of the same bounty ) gave it to the Lords that brought it : only reserving , and respecting , the gift of the deceased Lady , upon which I composed this Ode , and set it to my most affected Instrument the Lyra.  



Ode . 

Thou more than most sweet Glove , 
Unto my more sweet Love ; 
Suffer me to store , with kisses 
This empty lodging , th●t now misses 
The pure Rosy hand that beware thee , 
Whiter than the Kid that bore thee : 
thou art soft , but that was softer ; 
Cupid's self hath kissed it ofter , 
then ere he did his mother's Doves , 
Supposing her the Queen of Loves 
That was thy Mistress 
Best of Gloves . 
Merchant   Blasphemy , Blasphemy Cupid . 



Cup.   ay , I 'll revenge it time enough ; Hermes . 



Phi.   Good Amorphus , let 's here it sung . 



Amor.   I care not to do that , since it pleaseth Philautia to request it . 



Headsman   here Sir.  



Amor.   Nay play it I pray you , you do well , you do well : how like you it Sir ? 



He sings . Headsman   Very well in troth . 



Amor.   But very well ? OH you are a mere Mammothrept in judgement then : why do you not observe how excellently the Ditty is affected in every place ? that I do not marry a word of short quantity , to a long Note ▪ nor an ascending Syllable to a descending Tone . Besides upon the word Best there , you see how I do enter with an odd Minnum , and drive it through the Brief , which no intelligent Musician ( I know ) but will affirm to be very rare , extraordinary , and pleasing . 



Merchant   And yet not fit to lament the death of a Lady for all this . 



Cup.   Tut here be they will swallow any thing . 



Phantast .  Pray you let me have a copy of it Amorphus . 



Phi.   And me too , in troth I like it exceedingly . 



Amor.   I have denied it to Princes , nevertheless to you ( the true Female Twins of Perfection ) I am won to depart withal . 



Headsman   I hope I shall have my Honour's copy . 



Pha.   You are Ambitious in that Hedon . Enter Anaides . 



Amor.   How now Anaides ? what is it hath conjured up this distemperature in the circle of your face ? 



Anai.   ' Sblod what have you to do ? A pox of God o' your filthy travailing Beard ; hold your tongue . 



Headsman   Nay , dost hear mischief ? 



Anai.   Away Musk-cat . 



Amor.   I say to thee : thou art rude , impudent , course , impolished ; a Frapler , and base . 



Headsman   Heart of my father , what a strange alteration has half a years haunting of Ordinaries wrought in this fellow ? that came with a Tuff-taffata jerkin to Town but th' other day , and now he is turned Hercules , he wants but a Club.  



Anai.   Sir , I will garter my hose with your guts ; and that shall be all . 

Exit . 

Mercur.   'Slid what rare fire works be here ? flash , flash . 



Pha.   what 's the matter Hedon ? can you tell ? 



Headsman   Nothing but that he lacks money , & thinks weel● lend him some to be friends . 



Enter Asot. Mor. Morus . Asot.   Come sweet Lady ▪ in good truth I 'll have it , you shall not deny me ; Morus persuade your Aunt I may have her picture , by any means . 



Morus .  Yes Sir : good Aunt now , let him have it ; he will use me the better , if you love me , do good Aunt . 



Moria .  Well , tell him he shall have it . 



Morus .  Master , you shall have it , she says ; 



Asot.   Shall I ? thank her good Page . 



Cup.   What has he entertained the Fool ? 



Merchant   ay , he 'll wait close you shall see , though the Beggar hang off . 



Morus .  Aunt my master thanks you . 



Moria .  Call him hither . 



Morus .  Yes : master . 



Moria .  Yes in very truth , and gave me this Purse , and he has promised me a most fine Dog ; which he will have drawn with my Picture , and desire's most vehemently to be known to your Ladyshipps . 



Pha.   Call him hither , 't is good groping such a Gull.  



Moria .  Master Asotus . Master Asotus . 



Asot.   For God's sake , let me go : you see , I am called to the Ladies . 



Argu.   wilt thou forsake me then ? 



Asotus ,  God's so , what would you have me do ? 



Moria .  Come hither master Asotus ; I do ensure your Ladyships , he is a Gentleman of a very worthy desert ; and of a most bountiful nature . You must show and insinuate yourself responsible , and equivalent now to my commendment . Good Honours grace him . 



Asot.   I protest ( more than most fair Ladies ) I do wish all variety of divine pleasure , choice sport , sweet Music , rich Fare , brave Attires , soft Beds , and silken Thoughts , attend these fair Beauties . Will it please your Ladyship to wear this Chain of Pearl , and this Diamond for my sake . 



Arg.   O.  



Asot.   And you Madam this jewel , and Pendants . 



Arg.   O.  



Phan.   We know not how to deserve these bounties out of so slight merit , Asotus . 



Phi.   no in faith , but there's my Glove for a favour . 



Phan.   And soon after the Revels I will bestow a Garter on you . 



Asot.   OH Lord Ladies , it is more grace than ever I could have hoped , but that it pleaseth your Ladyships to extend ; I protest it is enough that you but take knowledge of my — if your Ladyship's want embroidered Gowns , Tires of any Fashion , Rebatus , jewels , or Carcanets , any thing what soever ; if you vouchsafe to accept . 



Cup.   And for it they will help you to Shoe-ties , and devices . 



Asot.   I cannot utter myself ( Dear Beauties ) but ; you can conceive — 



Arg.   O.  



Phan.   Sir we will acknowledge your service doubt not ; henceforth you shall be no more Asotus to us , but our Goldfinch , and we your Cages . 



Hedon .  OH God Madams , how shall I deserve this ? if I were but made acquainted with Hedon now ; I 'll try : pray you away . 



Merchant   How he prays Money to go away from him . 



Asot.   Amorphus , a word with you : here 's a Watch I would bestow upon you , pray you make me known to that Gallant . 



Amor.   That I will Sir. Mounsieur Hedon I must entreat you to exchange knowledge with this Gentleman . 



Headsman   't is a thing ( next to the water we expect ) I thirst after Sir. Good Mounsieur Asotus . 



Asot.   Good Mounsieur Hedon , I would be glad to be loved of men of your Rank , and spirit , I protest . Please you to accept this pair of Bracelets Sir , they are not worth the bestowing . 



Merchant   OH Hercules ; how the Gentleman purchases ? this must needs bring Argurion to a consumption . 



Headsman   Sir , I shall never stand in the merit of such Bounty . I fear . 



Asot.   OH Lord Sir ; your acquaintance shall be sufficient . And if at any time you need my Bill or my Bond.  



Arg.   OH , O.  



Argurion 'swounds . Amor.   Help the Lady there . 



Moria .  God's dear , Argurion . Madam , how do you ? 



Arg.   Sick . 



Phan.   Have her forth and give her air . 



Asot.   I come again straight Ladies . 



Merchant   Well , I doubt all the Phisique he has , will scarce recover her ; she 's too far spent . 



Exeunt Asotus , Morus , Argurion . SCENA . 4.  

Anaides . Gelaia . Cos. Prosaites . Philautia . Phantaste . Moria . Amorphus ▪ Hedon . Phi.   OH here 's the Water come : fetch Glasses Page . 



Gelaia .  Heart of my body here 's a coil indeed with your ●ealous humours . Nothing but Whore , and Bitch , and all the villainous swaggering names you can think on ? 'Slid take your Bottle , and put it in your guts ●or me , I 'll see you poxed ere I follow you any longer ? 



Anai.   Nay good Punk , sweet Rascal ; damn me if I am jealous now . 



Gelaia .  that 's true indeed , pray le 's go . 



Moria .  what 's the matter there ? 



Gelaia .  'Slight he has me upon Intergatories , ( nay my Mother shall know how you use me ) where I have been ? and why I should stay so long ? and how is (null) possible ? and withal calls me at his pleasure ; I know not how many Cockatrices , and things . 



Moria .  In truth and sadness , these are no good Epithets 



Anaides :  to bestow upon any Gentlewoman ; and ( I 'll ensure you ) if I had known you would have dealt thus with my Daughter , she should never have fancied you so deeply , as she has done . Go too . 



Anai.   Why do you he●re Mother Moria . Heart . 



Moria .  Nay I pray you Sir do not swear . 



Anai.   Swear ? why ? 'Sblood I have sworn afore now I hope . Both you and your daughter mistake me ; I have not honoured Arete that is held the worthiest Lady in the Court ( next to Cynthia ) with half that observance and respect , as I have done her in private , howsoever outwardly I have carried myself careless and negligent . Come you are a foolish Punk , and know not when you are well employed . Kiss me . Come on . Do it I say . 



Moria .  Nay , indeed I must confess she is apt too misprision . But I must have you leave it Minion . 



Enter Asotus . Amor.   How now Asotus ? how does the Lady ? 



Asot.   Fayth ill . I have left my Page with her at her lodging . 



Headsman   OH here 's the rarest Water that ever was tasted ; fill him some . 



Prosai.   What ? has my Master a new Page ? 



Merchant   Yes a kinsman of the Lady Morias : you must wait better now , or you are cashiered Prosaites . 



Anai.   Come Gallants ; you must pardon my foolish humour , when I am angry , that any thing crosses me , I grow impatient straight . Here I drink to you . 



Phi   OH that we had five or six Bottles more of this liquor . 



Pha.   Now I commend your judgement Amorphus : who 's that knocks ? look Page . 



Moria .  OH most delicious , a little of this would make Argurion well . 



Pha.   OH no give her no cold drink by any means . 



Anai.   'Sblood , this water is the spirit of Wine , I 'll be hanged ●lse . 



Cup.   here 's the Lady Arete Madam . 



SCENA . 5.  

Arete . Phantaste . Philautia . Moria . Anaides . Gelaia . Cos. Prosaites . Amorphus . Asotus . Hedon . Mercury . Cupid . Arete .  What at your Beaver Gallants ? 



Moria .  wilt please your Ladyship drink , 't is of the new fountain water . 



Arete .  Not I , Moria ; I thank you : Gallant you must provide for some solemn Revels to night , Cynthia is minded to come forth , and grace your sports with her presence ; therefore I could wish there were some thing extraordinary to entertain her . 



Amo.   What say you to a Masque ? 



Headsman   Nothing better , if the Invention or Project were new and rare . 



Arete .  Why , I 'll send for Criticus , and have his advice ; you will be ready in your endeavours ; 



Pha.   Yes ▪ but will not your Ladyship stay ? 



Arete .  Not now Phantaste . 

Exit . 

Phi.   Let her go , I pray you ; good Lady Sobriety , I am glad we are rid of her . 



Pha.   What a set Face the gentlewoman has , as she were still going to a Sacrifice ? 



Phi.   OH she is the extraction of a dozen of Puritans , for a look . 



Moria   Of all Nymphs ' i●he Court I cannot away with her : 't is the coursest thing — 



Phi.   I wonder how Cynthia can affect her so above the rest ! here be they are every way as fair as she , and a thought , fairer , I trow . 



Pha.   ay , and as ingenious , and conceited as she . 



Moria .  I and as politic as she , for all she sets such a Forehead on 't . 



Phi.   Would I were dead if I would change to be Cynthia . 



Pha.   Or I  



Moria .  Or I  



Amor.   And there 's her Minion Criticus ; why his advice more than Amorphus ? have I not Invention , afore him ? Learning , to better that Invention , above him ? and Travail . — 



Anai.   Death , what talk you of his Learning ? he understands no more than a schoolboy ; I have put him down myself a thousand times ( by this Air ) and yet I never talked with him but twice in my life ; you never saw his like : I could never get him to argue with me , but once , and then because I could not construe a piece of Horace at first sight , he went away and laughed at me . By God's will , I scorn him , as I do the sodden Nymph that was here even now ; his mistress Arete : And I love myself for nothing else . 



Headsman   I wonder the Fellow dies not hang himself , being thus scorned , and contemned of us that are held the most accomplished Society of Gallants ! 



Merchant   By yourselves none else . 



Headsman   I protest , if I had no Music in me , no Courtship ; that I were not a Reveller and could dance , or had not those excellent qualities that give a man Life , and Perfection , but a mere poor Scholar as he is , I think I should make some desperate way with myself ; whereas now ( would I might never breathe more ) if I do know that Creature in this kingdom , with whom I would change . 



Cup.   This is excellent : well I must alter this soon . 



Merchant   Look you do Cupid . 



Asot.   OH I shall tickle it soon ; I did never appear till then . 'Slid I am the ne●tliest-made Gallant i' the company , & have the best presence ; and my dancing — I know what the Usher said to me the last time I was at the school ; would I might lead Philautia in the measure , and 'tweere gods william I am most worthy , I am sure . 



Enter Morus . Morus .  Master I can tell you news , the Lady kissed me yonder , and played with me ; and says she loved you once , as well as she does me , but that you cast her of . 



Asot.   Peace my most esteemed Page . 



Morus .  Yes . 



Amor.   Gallants , think upon your Time , and take it by the forehead ; Anaides , we must mix this gentleman with you in acquaintance . Mounsieur Asotus . 



Anai.   I am easily entreated to grace any of your friends , Amorphus . 



Asot.   Sir , and his friends shall likewise grace you Sir. Nay I begin to know myself now . 



Amor.   OH , you must continue your Bounties . 



Asot.   Must I ? why I 'll give him this Ruby on my finger . 



Headsman   Come Ladies ; but stay we shall want one to Lady it in our Masque in place of Argurion . 



Anai.   Why my page shall do it , Gelaia . 



H●d .  Troth and he'●e do it well , it shall be so . 



Exeunt . Asot.   Do you here Sir , I do heartily wish your acquaintance , and I partly know myself worthy of it ; please you Sir , to accept this poor Ruby in a Ring Sir. The Poesy is of my own device ▪ Let this blush for me Sir.  



Anai.   So it must for me , too . For I am not ashamed to take it . 

Exit . 

Morus .  Sweet man , by my troth master I love you ; will you love me to ? for my Aunt's sake ? I 'll wait well you shall see , I 'll still be here . Would I might never stir , but you are in gay clothes . 



As●t .  As for that Morus , thou shalt see more here after , in the mean time , by this Ay●e , or by this Feather , I 'll do as much for thee as any Gallant shall do for his Page whatsoever , in this Court , corner of the world , or Kingdom . 



Exeunt . Mercury .  I wonder this gentleman should affect to keep a ●oole , me thinks he makes sport enough with himself . 



Cup.   Well Prosaites tweere good you did wait closer . 



Pro.   ay , I 'll look to it ; 't is time . 



Cos.   We are like to have sumptuous Revels to night Sirs . 



Merchant   We must needs when all the choicest Singularities of the Court are up in Pantofles , ne'er a one of them , but is able to make a whole show of it sel●e . 



Headsman   Sirrah a Torch , a torch . 



Hedon within . Mercury .  OH what a call is there ? I will have a Canzonet made with nothing in it but 〈◊〉 ; and the Burden shall be . I come . 



Exeunt Omnes . SCENA . 6.  

Arete . Criticus . Crit.   — . A mask , bright Aret●● 
Why tweere a labour more for Hercules . 
Better , and sooner durst I undertake : 
To make the different seasons of the Year , 
The Winds , or Elements to sympathise ; 
then their unmeasurable vanity 
Dance truly in a measure : They agree ? 
What though all Concord's born of Contraries ? 
So many Follies will confusion prove ▪ 
And like a sort of jarring Instruments , 
All out of tune ; because ( indeed ) we see 
There is not that Analogy 'twixt Discords , 
As between things but merely opposite . 


Aret.   There is your error ; for as H●●mes wand 
Charms the disorders , of tumultuous Ghosts , 
And as the strife of Chaos than did cease , 
When better light than Natures did arrive ; 
So , what could never in itself agree , 
Forgetteth the eccentrick property , 
And at her sight turns forthwith regular , 
Whose sceptre guide's the flowing Ocean : 
And though it did not , yet the most of them 
( Being either Courtiers , or not wholly rude ) 
Respect of Majesty , the Place , and Presence , 
Will ke●pe them within Ring ; especially 
When they are not presented as themselves , 
But masqued like others : for ( in troth ) not so 
T' incorporate them , could be nothing else 
then like a State ungoverned , without laws ; or 
A body made of nothing but diseases ; 
The one , through impotency poor , and wretched ; 
The other for the Anarchy absurd . 


Crit.   But Lady , for the Revelers themselves ; 
It would be better ( in my poor conceit , ) 
That others were employed ; for such as are 
Unfit to be in Cynthia's Court , can seem 
no les●e unfit to be in Cynthia's sports . 


Aret.   That is not done ( my Criticus ) without 
Particular knowledge of the Goddess mind ; 
Who ( holding true intelligence , what Follies 
Had crept into her Palace ) she resolved , 
Of sports , and Triumphs ; under that pretext , 
To have them muster in their Pomp and Fullness : 
That so she might more strictly , and to root , 
Effect the Reformation she intends . 


Crit.   I now conceive her heavenly drift in all ; 
And will apply my spirits to serve thy will : 
OH thou , the very power by which I am ; 
And but for which , it were in vain to be ; 
Chief next Diana , Virgin , heavenly fair ▪ 
Admired Arete , ( of them admired 
Whose souls are not enkindled by the sense ) 
Disdain not my chaste fire , but feed the flame 
Devoted truly to thy gracious name . 


Arete .  Leave to suspect us : Criticus shall find 
As we are now most dear , we 'll prove most kind . 


Aret● With●● . Arete .  Hark , I am called . 
Exit . 

Crit.   I follow instantly , 
Phoebus Apollo : if with ancient Rites , 
And due Devotions , I have ever hung 
Elaborate Paeans on thy golden Shrine , 
Or sung thy Triumphs in a lofty strain ; 
Fit for a Theatre of Gods to hear : ) 
And thou the other son of mighty jo●● 
Cyllenian Mercury ( sweet Maia's joy ) 
If in the busy tumults of the mind , 
My path thou ever hast illumined : 
For which , thine Altars I have oft per●um'de , 
And decked thy Statue with discoloured flowers : 
Now thrive Invention in this glorious Court , 
That not of bounty only , but of right , 
Cynthia may grace , and give it life by sight . 
Exit . 

Finis Actus quarti . 

ACTUS QVINTUS . 

SCENA . 1.  

Hesperus . Cynthia . Arete . Time . Phronesis . Thauma . Hymnus . 

Hesp.   Queen and Huntress , chaste , and fair , 
Now the Sun is laid to sleep , 
Seated , in thy silver Chair , 
State in wont manner keep : 
Hesperus entreats thy light , 
Goddess excellently bright . 
Earth , let not thy envious shade 
Dare itself to interpose ; 
Cynthia's shining Or be was made 
Heaven to clear , when day did close : 
Bless us then with wished sight , 
Goddess excellently bright . 
Lay thy Bow of Pearl apart . 
And thy Christ all-shining Quiver ; 
Give unto the flying Hart , 
Space to breath , how short soever . 
thou , that mak'st a day of night , 
Goddess excellently Bright . 
Exit . 



C●nt● .  When hath Diana , like an envious wretch ▪ 
That glitters only to his soothed self , 
Denying to the world the precious u●e 
Of hoarded wealth , withheld her friendly aid ? 
Mon'thly we spend our still-repaired shine , 
And not forbid our Virgin-waxen torch , 
To burn , and blaze while nutriment doth last : 
That once consumed , out of jove's treasury 
Anew we take , and stick it in our Sphere 
To give the mutinous kind of wanting men , 
Their looked for light . Yet what is their desert ? 
" Bounty is wronged , interpreted as due ; 
" Mortals can challenge not a Ray but right , 
" Yet do expect the whole of Cynthia's light : 
But if that Deities withdrew their gifts , 
For human Follies , what should men deserve 
But Death and Darkness ? It behoves the high , 
For their own sakes to do things worthily . 


Arete .  Most true , most sacred goddess ; for the Heavens 
Receive no good of all the good they do : 
Nor jove , nor you , nor other heavenly Power , 
Are fed with Fumes , which do from Incense rise , 
Or Sacrifices reeking in their gore : 
Yet for the care which you of mortals have , 
( Whose proper Good it is , that they be so ; ) 
You well are pleased with Odours redolent : 
But ignorant is all the Race of men , 
Which still complains , not knowing why , or when , 


Cyn.   Else noble Arete , they would notblame , 
And tax for or unjust , or for as proud 
Thy Cynthia , in the things which are indeed 
The greatest glories in our starry crown : 
Such is our Chastity , which safely scorns , 
Not Love ( for who more fervently doth love 
Immortal Honour , and divine Renown ? ) 
But giddy Cupid , Venus' frantic son . 
Yet Arete , if by this veiled light 
We but discovered ( what we not discern ) 
Any the least of imputations , stand 
Ready to sprinkle our unspotted fame , 
With note of lightness , from these Revels near : 
Not , for the Empire of the Universe 
Should Night or Court , this whatsoever shine 
Or grace of ours , unhappely enjoy . 
" Place , and Occ●sion are two privy Thiefs ; 
" And from poor innocent Ladies , often steal 
" ( The best of things ) an honourable Name : 
" To stay with Follies , or where Faults may be , 
" Infers a Crime , although the party free . 


Aret.   How Cynthianly ( that is how worthily 
And like herself ) the matchless Cynthia speaks ! 
Infinite jealousies , infinite Regards , 
Do watch about the true virginity : 
But Phoebe lives from all not only fault , 
But as from thought , so from suspicion free , 
" Thy Presence broadseals our delights for pure , 
" what 's done in Cynthia's sight , is done secure . 


Cynt.   That then so answered ( Dearest Arete ) 
What th' Argument , or of what sort , our Sports 
Are like to be this night ; I not demand . 
Nothing which Duty , and desire to please 
Bears written in the forehead , comes amiss ; 
But unto whose Invention , must we owe , 
The compliment of this night's furniture ? 


Aret.   Excellent Goddess , to man's , whose worth , 
( Without Hyperbole , ) I thus may praise ; 
One ( at least ) studious , of deserving well : 
And ( to speak truth ) indeed deserving well , 
" Potential merit stands for actual , 
" Where only Opportunity doth want , 
" Not Will , nor Power : both which in him abound . 
One whom the Muses , and Minerva love ; 
For whom should they more love than Criticus , 
Whom Phoebus ( though not Fortune ) holdeth dear ? 
And ( which convinceth excellence in him ▪ ) 
A principal admirer of yourself : 
Even ▪ through th'vngentle injuries of Fate , 
And difficulties , which do virtue choke , 
Thus much of him appears . What other things 
Of farther note , do lie unborn in him , 
Them I do leave for cherishment to show . 
And for a Goddess graciously to judge . 


Cynt.   We have already judged him Arete : 
Nor are we ignorant , how noble minds 
Suffer too much through those indignities , 
Which Times , and vicious persons cast on them : 
Ourself have ever vowed to esteem 
( As Virtue , for itself ) so Fortune , base ; 
Who first in Worth , the same be first in Place . 
Nor farther notice ( Arete ) we crave 
then thine approvalls sovereign warranty : 
Let , be thy care , to make us known to him ; 
" Cynthia shall brighten what the World made dim ▪ 


SCENA . 2.  THE FIRST MASQVE . 

Cupid like Anteros . Ante.   Clear Pearl of Heaven , and not to be farther ambitious in titles ) Cynthia . The fame of this illustrious night , among others hath also drawn these four fair Virgins from the Palace of their Queen Perfection ( a word , which makes no sufficient difference , 'twixt hers , and thine ) to visit thy Imperial Court : for she their Sovereign Lady , not finding where to dwell among men , before her teturne to heaven : advised them wholly to consecrate themselves to thy Celestial service , as in whose clear Spirit ( the proper Element , and Sphere of virtues ) they should behold not her alone , ( their ever honoured Mistress ) but themselves ) more truly themselves ) to live enthronised . Herself would have commended them unt● thy favour more particularly , but that she knows no commendation is more available with thee than that of proper virtue : Nevertheless , she wild them to present this Crystal Mound , a note of Monarchy , and Symbol of Perfection , to thy more worthy Deity ; which as here by me they most humbly do , so amongst the Rarities thereof , that is the chief , to show whatsoever the world hath excellent , howsoever remote and various . But your irradiate judgement will soon discover the secrets of this little Crystal world . Themselves ( to appear the more plainly ) because they know nothing more odious than false pretexts : have chosen to express their several qualities thus in several colours . 

1 The first in Citron colour is natural Affection , which given us to procure our good , is sometime called Storge , and as every one is nearest to himself , so this Handmaid of Reason , allowable Self-love , as it is without harm , so are none without it : Her place in the Court of Perfection was to quicken minds in the pursuit of Honor. Her device is a Perpendicular Level upon a ▪ Cube or Square . The word , SE SVO MODULO : alluding to that true measure of ones self , which as every one ought to make , so is it most conspicuous in thy divine example . 

2 The second in Greene is Aglaia , delectable and pleasant Conversation , whose property it is to move a kindly delight , and sometime not without laughter : Her office to entertain assemblies , and keep societies together with fair familiarity . Her device within a Ring of clouds , a Heart with shine about it , the word , CURARUM NUBILA PELLO . An Allegory of Cynthia's light , which no less clears the Sky , than her ●ayre M●rthe the heart . 

3 The third , in discoul●ured Mantle spangled all over , is Euphantaste , a well conceited Wittiness , and employed in honouring the Court with the richeses of her pure Invention . Her device upon a Petasus , or Mer●nriall Hat , a Crescent . The word ; SIC LAUS INGENII : Inferring that the praise and glory of wit , doth ever increase , as doth thy growing Moon . 

4 The fourth in White is Apheleia , a Nymph as pure and s●●ple as the Soul , or as an abrase Table , and is therefore called Symplicity ; without folds , without plights , without colour , without counterfeit : and ( to speak plainly ) Plainness itself . Her device is no Device . The word under her silver Shield : OMNIS ABEST FUCUS , alluding to thy spotless self , who art as far from Impurity , as from Mortality . 

Myself ( Celestial Goddess ) more fit for the Court of Cynthia , than the Arbours of Cythere , am called Anteros , or Love's enemy ; the more welcome therefore to thy Court , and the fitter to conduct this Quaternio , who as they are thy professed Votaries , and for that cause adversaries to Love , yet thee ( Perpetual Virgin ) they both love , and vow to love eternally . 



SCENA . 3.  

Cynthia . Arete . Criticus . Cynthia .  Not without wonder , nor with out delight , 
Mine eyes have veiwd in Contemplation's depth , 
This work of wit , divine , and excellent : 
What Shape ? what Substance ? or what unknown Power 
In virgin's habit crowned with Laurel leaves 
And Olive branches woven in between , 
On Sea-girt Rock like to a Goddess shines ? 
OH front ! OH face ! OH all celestial sure 
And more than mortal ! Arete , behold 
Another Cynthia , and another Queen , 
Whose glory ( like a lasting Plenilune ) 
Seems ignorant of what it is to wane . 
Not under heaven an Object could be found 
more fit to please ; let Criticus approach , 
Bounty forbids to paul our thanks with stay , 
Or to defer our favour after view : 
" The time of Grace is , when the Cause is new . 


Arete .  Lo here the man ( celestial Delia ) 
Who ( like a Circle bounded in itself , ) 
Contains as much , as Man in fullness may . 
Lo here the man ; who , not of usual earth , 
But of that nobler , and more precious mould 
Which Phoebus' self doth temper , is composed ; 
And , who ( though all were wanting to reward , 
Yet , to himself he would not wanting be : 
Thy Favours gain is his Ambitions most , 
And labour's best ; who ( humble in his height ) 
Stands fixed silent in thy glorious sight . 


Cynthia .  With no less pleasure , than we have beheld , 
This precious Crystal , work of rarest wit , 
Our eye doth read thee , now , our Criticus ; 
Whom Learning , Virtue , and our Favour last , 
Exempteth from the gloomy Multitude . 
" With common eye the Supreme should not see . 
Hence forth be ours , the more thyself to be . 


Crit.   Heaven's purest light , whose Orb may be eclipsed , 
But not thy Praise ; ( divinest Cynthia ) 
How much too narrow for so high a grace , 
Thy ( save therein ) unworthy Criticus : 
Doth find himself ? for ever shine thy Fame ; 
thine Honours ever , as thy Beauties do ; 
In me they must , my dark world's chiefest Lights ; 
By whose propitious beams my powers are raised 
To hope some part of those most lofty points , 
Which blessed Arete hath pleased to name 
As marks , which my'ndeuors steps should bend : 
Mine , as begun at thee , in thee must end . 


SCENA . 4.  THE SECOND MASQVE . 

Mercury as a Page . Merchant   Sister of Phoebus to whose bright Orb we owe , that we not complain of his Absence ; These four brethren ( for they are Brethrens and sons of Eutaxia , a Lady known , and highly beloved of your resplendent Deity ) not able to be absent , when Cynthia held a solempnity , officiously insinuate themselves into thy presence : For as there are four Cardinal virtues , upon which the whole Frame of the Cour● doth move , so are these the four Cardinal properties without which the Body of Compliment moveth not . With those four silver javelins ( which they bear in their hands ) they support in Princes Court's the state of the Presence , as by office they are obliged ; which though here they may seem superfluous , yet for Honour's sake they thus presume to visit thee , having also been employed in the Palace of Queen Perfection . And though to them , that would make themselves gracious to a Goddess , Sacrifices were fitter than Presents or Impresses , yet they both hope thy favour , and ( in place of either ) use several Symbols containing the titles of thy imperial Dignity . 

1 The hit hermost in the changeable blue , and green Robe , is the commendably-fashionate Gallant Eucosmos ; whose Courtly Ha●it is the grace of the Presence , and delight of the surveying eye : whom Ladies understand by the names of Neat , & Elegant . His Symbol is DIVAE VIRGINI , in which he would express thy Deities principal glory , which hath ever been Virginity . 

2 The second in the rich Acoutrement , and Robe of Purple impaled with Gold , is Eupathes ; who entertains his mind with an harmless , but not incurious variety : All the Objects of his senses are Sumptuous , himself a Gallant , that without excess can make use of superfluities : go richly in Imbroyders , jewels , ( and what not ? ) without Vanity ; and fare delicately without Gluttony : and therefore ( not without cause ) is universally thought to be of fine humour . His Symbol is DIVAE OPTIMAE . An attribute to express thy Goodness in which thou so resemblest love thy father . 

3.  The third in the blush-collourd Suit is Eutolmos , as duly respecting others , as never neglecting himself ; commonly known by the title of Good Audacity , to Courts and courtly assemblies , a guest most acceptable . His Symbol is DIVAE VIRAGINI , To express thy hardy Courage , in chase of Savage beasts which harbour in Woods , and Wilderness . 

4.  The fourth in Watchet-tinsell , is the kind , and truly Benific Eucolos . Who imparteth not without respect , but yet without difficulty : and hath the happiness to make every kindness seem double , by the timely , and freely bestowing thereof , he is the chief of them who ( by the vulgar ) are said to be of Good Nature . His Symbol is DIVAE MAXIMAE . An Adjunct to signify thy greatness , which in heaven , earth , and hell is formidable . 



SCENA . 5.  THE MASQUES join . 

Cupid , Mercury . Cup.   Is not that Amorphus the Traveller ? 



Merchant   As though it were not ? do you not see how his legs are in travail with a Measure ? 



Cup.   Hedon , thy master is next . 



Merchant   What will Cupid turn Nomenclator , and cry them ? 



Cup.   no faith , but I have a Comedy toward , that would not be lost for a kingdom . 



Merchant   In good time , for Cupid will prove the Comedy . 



Cup.   Mercury , I am studying how to match them . 



Merchant   How too mismatch them , were harder . 



Cup.   It is the Nymphs must do it , I shall sport myself with their passions above measure . 



Merchant   Those Nymphs would be tamed a little indeed , but I fear thou hast not Arrows for the purpose . 



Cup.   OH yes , here be of all sorts , Flight's , Rovers , and Butshafts . But I can wound with a Brandish , and never draw Bow for the matter . 



Merchant   I cannot but believe it my invisible Archer , and yet me thinks you are tedious . 



Cup :  It behoves me to be somewhat circumspect Mercury , for if Cynthia here the twang of my Bow , sneele go near to whip me with the string ; therefore to prevent that , I thus discharge a Brandish upon — it makes no matter which of the couples : Phantaste , and Amorphus at you . 



Merchant   Will the shaking of a shaft , strike'hem into such a Fever of Affection ? 



Cup.   As well as the wink of an Eye : but I pray thee hinder me not with thy prattle . 



Merchant   jove forbid I hinder thee . Mary all that I fear is Cynthia's presence , which with the could of her Chastely , casteth such an Antiperistasis about the place , that no heat of thine will tarry with the Patient . 



Cup.   It wiltarry the rather , for the Antiperistasis will keep it in . 



Merchant   I long to see the experiment . 



Cup.   Why their marrow boils already , or they are all turned Eunuches . 



Merchant   Nay an 't be so , I 'll give overspeaking , & be a Spectator only . 



They dance the 1.  Strains . Amor.   Cynthia ( by my bright soul ) is a right exquisite , and spendidious Lady ; yet Amorphus I think hath seen more fashions , I am sure more Countries ; but whether I have or no : what need we gaze on Cynthia , that have ourself to admire ? 



Phan.   OH excellent Cynthia ; yet if Phantaste sat where she does , and had such a tire on her head ( for attire can do much ) I say no more ; but Goddesses are Goddesses , and Phantaste is as she is . I would the R●u●lss were done once , I might go to my School of Glass again , and learn to do myself right after all this Ruffling . 



Merchant   How now Cupid ? here 's a wonderful change with your Brandish ? do you not hear , how they dote ? 



Cup.   What Prodigy is this ? no Word of Love ? no Mention ? no Motion ? 



Merchant   Not a word my little Hellfire , not a word . 



Cup.   Are my Darts enchanted ? is their vigour gone ? is their virtue — 



Merchant   What ? Cupid turned jealous of himself ? ha , ha , ha . 



Cup.   Laughs Mercury ? 



Merchant   Is Cupid angry ? 



Cup.   Hath he not cause , when his purpose is so deluded ? 



Merchant   A rare Comedy , it shall be entitled ; Cupid's . 



Cup.   Do not scorn us Hermes . 



Merchant   Chollar and Cupid are two fiery things ; I scorn 'em not . But I see that come to pass which I presaged in the beginning . 



Cup.   You cannot tell : perhaps the Physic will not work so soon upon some , as upon others . It may be the Rest are not so resty . 



Merchant   Ex ungue , you know the old Adage ; as these , so are the remainder . 



Cup.   I 'll try : this is the same Shaft with which I wounded Argurion . 



Merchant   ay , but let me save you a labour Cupid : there were certain Bottles of Water fetched , and drunk off , ( since that time , ) by these Gallants . 



Cup.   jove strike me into earth : The Fountain of Self-love ? 



Merchant   Nay faint not Cupid . 



Cup.   I remembered it not . 



Merchant   Faith it was ominous to take the name of Anteros upon you , you know not what Charm or Enchantment lies in the word : you saw I durst not venture upon any device in our presentment : but was content to be no other than a simple Page . Your Arrows properties ( to keep decorum's ) Cupid , are suited ( it should seem ) to the nature of him you personate . 



Cup.   Indignity not to be born . 



M●r.   Nay rather an attempt to have been forborn . 



Cup.   How might I revenge myself on this insulting Mercury ? there 's Criticus his Minion : he has not tasted of this water ? it shall be so . 

They dance the 2. strain . Is Criticus turned Dotard on himself too ? 



Merchant   That follows not , because the venom of your shafts cannot pierce him . 



Cup.   As though there were one Antidote for these , & another for him ? 



Merchant   As though there were not ? or as if one Effect might not arise of divers causes ? what say you to Cynthia , Arete , Phronesis Tim E , and others there ? 



Cup.   They are divine . 



M●r.   And Criticus aspires to be so . 



Cup.   But that shall not serve him . 



M●r.   't is like to do prettily well at this time . But Cupid is grown too covetous , that will not spare one of a Multitude . 



Cup.   One is more than a Multitude . 



Merchant   Aretes favour makes any one shot proof against thee Cupid . 

They dance the 3. strain . I pray thee light Honey-bee , remember thou art not now in Adonis' garden , but in Cynthia's presence , where thorns 〈◊〉 garrison about the Roses . Soft Cynthia speaks . 



Cynthia .  Ladies and gallants , 
To give a timely period to our sports , 
Let us conclude them , with declining night ; 
Our Empire is but of the darker half : 
And if you judge it any recompense ▪ 
For your fair pains , t' have earned Di●●as thanks ; 
Diana grants them : and bestows their crown 
To gratify your acceptable Zeal . 
For you are they , that not ( as some have done ) 
Do censure us , as too severe , and sour , 
But as ( more rightly ) Gracious to the Good ; 
Although we not deny , unto the Proud , 
Or the Profane , perhaps indeed austere : 
For so Actaeon by presuming far , 
Did ( to our grief ) incur a fatal doom ; 
And so , swollen Niob● ( comparing more 
Than he presumed ) was trophaeed into stone . 
But are we therefore judged too extreme ? 
Seems it no Crime to ●●●er sacred Bowers , 
And hallowed Places with impure aspect 
Most lewdly to pollute ? Seems it no crime , 
To brave a Deity ? let Mortals learn 
To make Religion of offending Heaven ; 
And not at all to censure powers divine : 
To Men , this Argument should stand for firm , 
" A Goddess did it ; therefore it was good : 
" We are not cruel , nor delight in blood . 
But what have serious Repetitions 
To do with Revels , and the sports of Court ? 
We not intend to sour your late delights 
With harsh expostulation ; Let suffice 
That we take notice , and can take revenge 
Of these calumnious , and lewd Blasphemies ; 
For we are no less Cynthia , than we were , 
Nor is our Power ( but as ourself ) the same : 
Though we have now put on no tire of shine 
But mortal eyes undazled may endure . 
" Years , are beneath the Spheres ; and Time makes weak , 
" Things under Heaven ; not Powers which govern Heaven : 
And though ourself be in ourself , secure , 
Yet let not mortals challenge to themselves 
Immunity from thence ; Lo this is all : 
" Honour hath store of spleen , but wanteth Gall. 
Once more , we cast the slumber of our thanks 
On your ta'en toil , which here let take an end : 
And that we not mistake your several worths ▪ 
Nor you our Favour ; from yourselves remove , 
What makes you not yourselves ; those clouds of Masque : 
" Particular pains , particular thanks do ask . 
They Unmask . — Are we contemned ? 
Is there so little awe of our Disdain , 
That any ( under trust of their disguise ) 
Should mix themselves with others of the Court ? 
And ( without forehead ) boldly press so far ▪ 
As farther none ? 〈◊〉 apt is Lenity 
To be abused ? Seu●rity to be loathed ? 
And yet , how much more doth the s●eming Face 
Of neighbour Virtues , and their borrowed Names , 
Add of lewd Boldness to loose Vanities ? 
Who would ha●n● thought that Philautia durst , 
Or have usurped noble Storge's name ? 
Or with that theft have ventured on our eyes ? 
Who would have thought that all of them should hope , 
So much of our connivance , as to come 
To grace themselves , with Titles not their own ? 
Instead of Medicines have we Maladies ? 
And such Impostumes , as Phantaste is , 
Grow in our Palace ? we must launce these sores , 
Or all will putrify : Nor are these all , 
For we suspect a farther fraud than this ; 
Take off our veil , that shadows may depart , 
And shapes appear , beloved Arete . So. 
Another Face of things presents itself 
then did of late : what ? Feathered Cupid masqued ? 
And masqued like to Anteros ? but , more strange ! 
Dear Mercury our Brother , like a Page , 
To countenance the ambush of the Boy ? 
Nor endeth our discovery as yet ; 
Gelaia like a Nymph , that but ere while 
( In male attire , ) did serve Anaides ? 
Cupid came hither to find sport and Game , 
Who , heretofore hath been too conversant 
Among our train ; but never felt Revenge : 
And Mercury bore Cupid company : 
Cupid , we must confess this Time of mirth 
( Proclaimed by us ) gave Opportunity , 
To thy attempts , although no Privilege ; 
Tempt us no farther , we cannot endure 
Thy presence longer : Vanish , Hence , Away . 
Exit Cupid . You Mercury , we must entreat to stay , 
And hear what we determine of the rest ; 
For in this Plot , you have the deepest hand : 
But ( for we mean not a Censorian task 
And yet to launce these ulcers grown so ripe ) 
Dear Arete , and Criticus , to you 
We give the charge ; Impose what pains you please : 
Th'incurable cut of , the rest reform ; 
Remembering ever what we first decreed , 
Since Revels were proclaimed , Let now none bleed . 


Arete .  How well Diana can distinguish Times ? 
And sort her Censures ? keeping to herself 
The doom of Gods , leaving the rest to us ? 
Come , cite them Criticus and then proceed . 


Crit.   First Philautia ( for she was the first ) 
then light Gelaia , in Aglaias' name , 
Thirdly Phantaste , and Moria next , 
Main follies all , and of the Female crew ; 
Amorphus , or Eucosmos counterfeit , 
Voluptuous Hedon ta'en for Eupathes , 
Brazen Anaides , and Asotus last , 
With his too Pages Morus , and Prosaites ; 
And thou the Travellers Evil , Cos , approach , 
Impostors all , and male Deformities . 


Arete .  Nay forward , for I delegate my power , 
And will , that at thy mercy they do stand 
Whom they so oft , so plainly scorned before : 
" 't is virtue which they want , and wanting it , 
" Honour no garment to their backs can fit . 
Now Criticus , use your Discretion . 


Crit.   Adored Cynthia , and bright Arete ; 
Another might seem fitter for this task 
then Criticus , but that you judge not so : 
For I ( not to appear vindicative , 
Or mindful of Contempts , which I contemned 
As done of Impotence ) must be remiss ; 
Who as I was the Author in some sort , 
To work their knowledge into Cynthia's sight , 
So should be much severer to revenge 
The indignity , hence issuing to her Name : 
But there 's not one of these , who are unpaind , 
Or by themselves unpunished ; for Vice 
Is like a fury to the vicious mind , 
And turns Delight itself to Punishment . 
But we must forward to define their Doom ; 
You are Offenders , that must be confessed . 
Do you confess it ? 


Omnes .  We do . 


Crit.   And that you merit sharp Correction ? 


Omnes .  We do . 


Crit.   then we ( reserving unto Delias' grace , 
Her farther pleasure , and to Arete 
What Delia granteth ) thus do sentence you . 
That from this place ( for Penance known of all , 
Since you have drunk so deeply of Self-love ) 
You ( two and two ) singing a Palinode , 
March to your several homes by Nio●es' stone , 
And offer up two tears a piece thereon ; 
That it may change the name , as you must change , 
And of a stone be called Weeping Cross : 
Because it standeth cross of Cynthia's way , 
One of whose names is sacred TRIVIA . 
And after penance thus performed , you pass 
In like set order ; not as Midas did 
To wash his Gold off into Tagus' stream ; 
But to the Well of Knowledge , Helicon , 
Where , purged of your present Maladies , 
( Which are nor few , nor s●ender ) you become 
Such as you fain would seem ; and then return 
Offering your service to great Cynthia . 
This is your Sentence , if the Goddess please 
To ratefie it with her high Consent : 
" The scope of wise Mirth unto fruit is bend . 


Cyn.   We do approve thy Censure Criticu● ▪ 
Which Mercury , thy true propitious friend , 
( A D●ity , next jove , beloved of us , ) 
Will undertake to see exactly done . 
And for this service of Discovery 
Performed by thee , in honour of our name , 
We vow to guerdon it with such due grace , 
As shall become our Bounty , and thy Place . 
" Princes that would their People should do well , 
" Must at themselves begin , as at the heads ; 
" For men by their example pattern out 
" Their Imitations , and regard of Laws : 
" A virtuous Court , a world to virtue draws . 


Exeunt , Cynthia , Arete , etc.  Palinodia . 

Amo.   From Spanish shrugs , French faces , Smirks , Irps , and all affected Humours . 



Chorus .  Good Mercury defend us.  



Phan.   From secret friends , sweet Servants , Loves , Doves , and such Fantastic Humours . 



Chorus .  ●ood Mercury defend us.  



Amor.   From stabbing of Arms , Flap-dragons , Healths , Whiffs , and all such swaggering Humours . 



Chorus .  Good Mercury defend us.  



Phan.   From waving of Fans , coy Glances , Glicks , Cringes , and all such simpering Humours . 



Chorus .  Good Mercury defend us.  



Amo.   From making love by Attorney , courting of Puppets , and paying for new acquaintance . 



Chorus .  Good Mercury defend us.  



Phan.   From perfumed Dogs , Monkeys , Sparrows , Dildoes , and Parachitoes . 



Chorus .  Good Mercury defend us.  



Amo.   From wearing Bracelets of Hair , Shoe-ties , Gloves , Garters , and Rings with Poesies . 



Chorus .  Good Mercury defend us.  



Phan.   From Pargeting , Painting , Slieking , Glazing , and Renewing old riveled Faces . 



Chorus .  Good Mercury defend us.  



Amo.   From Squiring to Tilt-yards , Playhouses , Pageants , and all such Public places . 



Chorus .  Good Mercury defend us.  



Phan.   From entertaining one Gallant to gull another , and making Fools of either . 



Chorus .  Good Mercury defend us.  



Amo.   From Belying Ladies favours , Nobleman's countenance , coining counterfeit Employments , vainglorious taking to them other men's Services , and all self-loving Humours . 



Chorus .  Good Mercury defend us.  





CANT . 

Now each one dry his weeping Eyes , 
and to the Well of Knowledge hast ; 
Where purged of your Maladies , 
we may of sweeter waters taste : 
And with refined voice report , 
The Grace of Cynthia , and her Court.  
Finis Actus quinti & ultimi . 

Epilogus ▪ 

Gentles , be 't known to you , since I went in 
I am turned Rhymer ; and do thus begin : 
The Author ( jealous , how your sense doth take 
His travayles ) hath enjoined me to make 
Some short , and Ceremonious Epilogue ; 
But if I yet know what , I am a Rogue : 
He ties me to such Laws , as quite distracted 
My thoughts ; and would a Year of time exact . 
I neither must be Faint , Remiss , nor Sorry , 
Sower , Serious , Confident , nor Peremptory : 
But betwixt these . le 's see ? to lay the blame 
Upon the children's Action , that were lame . 
To crave your Favours with a begging knee , 
Were to distrust the Writers faculty ; 
To promise better at the next we bring , 
Prorogues disgrace , commends not any thing . 
Stiffly to stand on this , and proudly approve 
The Play , might tax the Maker of Self-love . 
I 'll only speak , what I have heard him say ; 
By God 't is good , and if you liked , you may , 
FINIS . 

Ecce rubet quidam , pallet , stupet , oscitat , odit . 
Hoc volo : nunc nobis carmina nostra placent . 






 Gelaia .  Moria .  Co● .  Prosaites   Morus .  Criticus . 