B. JON : HIS PART OF King james his Royal and Magnificent Entertainment through his Honourable City of London , Thursday the 15. of March. 1603.  

So much as was presented in the first and last of their Triumphal Arches . 

With his speech made to the last Presentation , in the Strand , erected by the inhabitants of the Duchy , and Westminster . 

Also , a brief Panegyre of his Majesty's first and well auspicated entrance to his high Court of Parliament , on Monday , the 19 of the same Month . 

With other Additions . 

Mart.  

Quando magis dignos licuit spectare triumphos . 

Printed at London by v. S. for Edward Blount , 1604.  

❧ The Pegma at Fenchurch 

Presented itself in a square and flat upright , like to the side of a City : the top thereof , above the Vent , and Crest , adorned with houses , towers , and steeples , set off in prospective . Upon the Battlements in a great capital Letters was inscribed , LONDINIUM : 

According to Tacitus : At Suetonius mir● constantia , medios inter hosteis Londinium perrexit , cognomento quiàem Coloniae non insigne , sed copia Negotiatorum , & commeatu maxim celebre . Beneath that , in a less and different Character , was written CAMERA REGIA 

Which Title immediately after the Norman Conquest it began to have ; and by the indulgence of succeeding Princes , hath been hitherto continued . In the Frieze over the gate , it seemeth to speak this verse : PAR DOMUS HAEC COELO , 
SED MINOR EST DOMINO . 


Taken out of Marshal , and implying , that though this City ( for the state , and magnificence ) might ( by Hyperbole ) be said to touch the stars , and reach up to heaven , yet was it far Inferior to the Master thereof , who was his Majesty ; and in that respect unworthy to receive him . The highest person advanced therein , was MONARCHIA BRITANNICA 

and fitly : applying to the above mentioned Title of the City , the King's Chamber , and therefore here placed as in the proper seat of the Empire : for , so the glory and light of our Kingdom M. Camden , speaking of London , sayeth , she is , totius Britanniae Epitome , Britannicíque imperii sedes , Regúmque Angliae Camera , tantum inter ●mneis eminet , quantum ( ut ait ille ) inter viburna Cupressus . She was a woman richly attired in cloth of gold and tissue ; a rich mantle ; over her state two Crowns hanging , with pensile shields thorough them ; the one limned with the particular Coat of England , the other of Scotland : on either side also a Crown , with the like Scutcheons , and peculiar Coats of France , & Ireland . In her hand she holds a Sceptre ; on her head a fillet of gold , inter-woven with Palm & Laurel ; her hair bound into four several points , descending from her Crowns ; & and in her lap a little Globe , inscribed upon ORBIS BRITANNICUS . 
And beneath , the word 
DIVISUS AB ORBE . 


To show , that this Empire is a world divided from the world , and alluding to that of Clau.  — Et nostro diducta Britannia mundo . 
And Virg. 
— Et penitus toto divisos orbe Britannos . 


The wreath denotes Victory and Happiness . The Sceptre & Crowns sovereignty . The Shields the precedency of the Countries and their distinctions . At her feet was set THEOSOPHIA , 

or Divine wisdom , all in white , a blue mantle seeded with Stars , a crown of Stars on her head . Her garments figured Truth , Innocence and Clearness . She was always looking up ; in her one hand she sustained a Dove , in the other a Serpent : the last to show her Subtlety , the first her Simplicity ; alluding to that text of Scripture , Estote ergo prudentes sicut serpents , & simplices sicut columbae . Her word , PER MENANDER REGES REGNANT . 



Intimating , how by her , all Kings do govern , and that she is the foundation and strength of kingdoms , to which end , she was here placed , upon a Cube , at the foot of the Monarchy , as her Base and stay . Directly beneath her stood GENIUS VRBIS . 



A person attired rich , reverend , and antique : his hair long and white , crowned with a wreath of Plane tree , which is said to be Arbour genialis ; his mantle of purple , and buskins of that colour : He held in one hand a Goblet , in the other a branch full of little twigs , to signify Increase and Indulgence : His word HIS ARMIS . 

pointing to the two that supported him , whereof the one on the right hand , was BOULEUTES . 

Figuring the Council of the City , and was suited in black and purple ; a wreath of Oak upon his head ; sustaining for his ensigns , on his left arm a scarlet robe , and in his right hand the Fasces , as tokens of Magistracy , with this inscription ; SERVARE CIVES . 



The other on the left hand . POLEMIUS 

The warlike force of the City , in an antique Coat , or Armour , with a Target and Sword ; his helm on , and crowned with Laurel , implying Strength and Conquest : in his hand he bore the Standard of the City , with this word , EXTINGVERE ET HOSTEIS . 



Expressing by those several Motts , connexed , that with those Arms of Council and Strength , the Genius was able to extinguish the King's enemies , and preserve his Citizens , alluding to those verses in Seneca , Extinguere hostem , maxima est virtus Ducis . 
Servare Cives , maior est patriae , patri . 




Underneath these , in an Aback thrust out before the rest lay TAMESIS . 



The River , as running along the side of the City ; in a skin made like flesh , naked , and blue . His mantle of seagreen or water colour , thin , and bollen out like a sail ; Bracelets about his wrists , of willow and sedge , a crown of sedge and reed upon his head , mixed with waterlillies ; alluding to Virgil's description of Tiber ; — Deus ipse loci , fluvie Tyberinus amoeno , 
Populeas inter senior se att●llere frondes 
Visus . cum tenuis glauco velabat amictu 
Carbasus . & crineis umbrosa tegebat Arundo . 




His beard , and hair long , and overgrown . He leans his arm upon an earthen pot , out of which , water , with live fishes , are seen to run forth , and play about him . His word , FLUMINA SENSERUNT IPSA . 

A Hemistich of Ovid's : The rest of the verse being , quid esset amor . 



Affirming , that Rivers themselves , and such inanimate Creatures , have heretofore been made sensible of Passions , and Affections ; and that he , now , no less partook the joy of his Majesty's grateful approach to this City , than any of those persons , to whom he pointed , which were the daughters of the Genius , and six in number : who , in a spreading ascent , upon several grices , help to beautify both the sides . The first , EUPHROSYNE , 

or Gladness : was suited in green , a mantle of diverse colours , embroidered with all variety of flowers : on her head a Garland of Myrtle , in her right hand a crystal Cruze filled with wine , in the left a Cup of gold : at her feet a Timbrel , Harp , and other Instruments , all ensigns of gladness , Natis in usum laetitiae scyphis , etc.  
And in another place , 
Nunc est bibendum , nunc pede libero 
Pulsanda Tellus , etc.  


Her word . 

HAEC AEVI MIHI PRIMA DIES . 

As if this were the first hour of her life , and the minute wherein she began to be ; beholding so long coveted , and looked for a presence . The second . SEBASIS . 

or Veneratio , was varied in an ash coloured suit , and dark mantle , a veil over her head of ash-colour : her hands crossed before her , and her eyes half closed : Her word : MIHI SEMPER DEUS . 



Implying both her office of reverence , and the dignity of her object , who being as God on earth , should never be less in her thought : The third : PROTHYMIA . 

or Promptitude , was attired in a short tucked garment of flame-colour , wings at her back ; her hair bright , & bound up with ribbons ; her breast open , virago-like ; her buskins so ribanded : She was crowned with a Chaplet of Trifoly , to express readiness , and openness every way ; in her right hand she held a squirrel , as being the creature most full of life and quickness : in the left a close round Censor , with the perfume suddenly to be vented forth at the sides . Her word : QVA DATA PORTA . 



Taken from an other place in Virgil where Aeolus at the command of juno let's forth the wind ; — ac venti velut agmine facto 
Qua data p●rta ruunt , & terras turbine perflant . 




And showed that she was no less prepared with promptitude , and alacrity , than the winds were , upon the least Gate that shall be opened to his high command . The fourth AGRIPPINA . 

or Vigilance , in yellow , a sable mantle , seeded with waking eyes , and silver fringe : her Chaplet of Heliotropium , or Turnsole ; in her one hand a Lamp , or Cresset , in her other a Bell. The Lamp signified search and sight , the Bell warning . The Heliotropium care ; and respecting her object . Her word SPECULAMUR IN OMNEIS . 



Alluding to that of Ovid , where he describes the office of Argus , — Ipse pr●cul mon●is sublime cacumen 
Occupat , unde sedens parts speculatur in omneis . 


and implying the like duty of care and vigilance in herself . The fifth AGAPE . 

Or loving Affection , in Crimson fringed with gold , a mantle of flame-colour , her Chaplet of red and white roses ; in her hand a flaming heart : The flame expressed zeal , the red and white roses , a mixture of Simplicity with Love : her robes freshness and fervency . Her word , NON SIC EXCUBIAE . 

Out of Claudian , in following — Nec circumstantia peila 
— quam tutatur amor . 


Inferring , that though her Sister before had protested watchfulness , & circumspection , yet no watch or guard could be so safe to the estate , or person of a Prince , as the love and natural affection of his Subjects : which she in the City's behalf promised . The sixth , OMOTHYMIA . 

Or Unanimity in blue , her robe blew , and buskins . A Chaplet of blue lilies , showing one truth and entireness of mind . In her lap lies a sheaf of arrows bound together , and she herself sits weaving certain small silver twists . Her word , FIRMA CONSENSUS FACIT . 
Auxilia humilia firma , etc.  




Intimating , that even the smallest and weakest aids , by consent , are made strong : herself personating the unanimity , or consent of Soul , in all inhabitants of the City to his service . 

¶ These are all the personages , or live figures , whereof only two were Speakers ( Genius and Tamesis ) the rest were Mutes . Other dumb compliments there were , as the Arms of the Kingdom on the one side , with this Inscription . HIS VIREAS . 
With these mayst thou flourish . 




On the other side the Arms of the City , with HIS VINCAS . 
With these mayst thou conquer . 




In the centre , or midst of the Pegma , there was an Aback , or Square , wherein this Elegy was written . Maximus hic Rex est , & lucc serenior ipsa 
Principe quae talem cernit in urbe Ducem ; 
Cuiu● Fortunam superat sic unica Virtus , 
Vnus ut is reliquos vincit utrâque viros . 
Praeceptis alii populos , multâque fatigant 
Lege ; sed exemplo nos rapit ille suo . 
Cuique frui totâ fas est uxore marito , 
Et sua fas simili pignora nosse pa●ri . 
Ecce ubi pignoribus circumstipata coruscis 
It comes , & tanto vix minor ANNA viro. 
Haud metus est , Regem posthac ne proximus Hares , 
Neu Successorem non amet ille suum . 




This , and the whole frame , was covered with a curtain of silk , painted like a thick cloud , and at the approach of the K. was instantly to be drawn . The Allegory being , that those clouds were gathered upon the face of the City , through their long want of his most wished fight : but now , as at the rising of the Sun , all mists were dispersed and fled . When suddenly upon silence made to the Musics , a voice was heard to utter this verse ; Totus adest oculis , aderat qui mentibus olim , 



Signifying that he now was really objected to their eyes , who before had been only , but still , present in their minds . 

¶ Thus far the complemental part of the first ; wherein was not only laboured the expression of State and Magnificence ( as proper to a triumphal Arch ) but the very Site , Fabric , Strength , Policy , Dignity and Affections of the City were all laid down to life : The nature , and property of these devices being , to present always some one entire body , or figure , consisting of distinct members and each of those expressing itself , in the own active sphere , yet all , with that general harmony so connexed , and disposed , as no one little part can be missing to the illustration of the whole : where also is to be noted , that the Symbols used , are not , neither aught to be simply Hieroglyphics , Emblems , or Impreze , but a mixed Character , partaking somewhat of all , and peculiarly apted to these more magnificent Inventions : wherein the Garments , and Ensigns deliver the nature of the person , and the Word the present office . Neither was it becoming , or could it stand with the dignity of these shows ( after the most miserable & desperate shift of the Puppets ) to require a Truchman , or ( with the ignorant Painter ) one to write . This is a Dog ; or , This is a Hare : but so to be presented , as upon the view they might without cloud , or obscurity declare themselves to the sharp and learned : And for the multitude , no doubt but their grounded judgements gazed , said it was fine , and were satisfied . 

The speeches of Gratulation . 

GENIUS .  Time , Fate , and Fortune have at length conspired , 
To give our Age the day so much desired . 
What all the minutes , hours , weeks , months , and years , 
That hang in file upon these silver hairs , 
could not produce , beneath the Britain stroke , 
The Roman , Saxon , Dane , and Norman yoke , 
This point of Time hath done . Now London rear 
Thy forehead high , and on it strive to wear 
Thy choicest Gems ; Teach thy steep Towers to rise 
Higher with people : Set with sparkling eyes 
Thy spacious windows ; and in every street , 
Let thronging joy , Love , and Amazement meet . 
Cleave all the air with show●eses , and let the cry 
Strike through as long , and universally 
As Thunder ; For , thou now art blessed to see 
That sight , for which thou didst begin to be . 
When Brutus plough first gave thee infant bounds , 
And I , thy GENIUS walked auspicious rounds 
In every furrow ; then did I forelook , 
And saw this day marked white in Clotho's book . 
The several Circles , both of change and sway , 
Within this Isle , there also figured lay : 
Of which the greatest , perfectest , and last 
Was this , whose present happiness we taste . 
Why keep you silence Daughters ? What dull peace 
Is this inhabits you ? Shall Office cease 
Upon th' aspect of him , to whom you owe 
more than you are , or can be ? Shall TIME know 
That Article , wherein your flame stood still , 
And not aspired ? Now heaven avert an ill 
Of that black look . E'er pause possess your breasts 
I wish you more of plagues : " Zeal when it rests , 
Leaves to be Zeal . Up thou tame RIVER , wake ; 
And from thy liquid limbs this slumber s●ake : 
thou drownest thyself in inofficious sleep ; 
And these thy sluggish waters seem to creep , 
Rather than flow . Up , rise , and swell with pride 
Above thy banks . " Now is not every Tide . 


TAMESIS .  TO what vain end should I contend to show 
My weaker powers , when Seas of pomp o'erflow 
The City's face : and cover all the shore 
With sands more rich than Tagus' wealth ore ? 
When in the flood of joy , that comes with him , 
He drowns the world ; yet makes it live and swim , 
And spring with gladness : Not my fishes here , 
Though they be dumb , but do express the cheer 
Of these bright streams . no less may These , and I 
Boast our delights , albeed we silent lie . 


GENIUS .  Indeed , true Gladness doth not always speak : 
joy bred , and born but in the tongue , is weak . 
Yet ( lest the fervour of so pure a flame 
As this my City bears , might lose the name , 
Without the apt eventing of her heat ) 
Know greatest JAMES ( and no less good , than great . ) 
In the behalf of all my virtuous Sons , 
Whereof my elder there , thy pomp foreruns , 
( A Man without my flattering , or his Pride , 
As worthy , as he 's blessed to be thy guide ) 
In his grave name , and all his brethren's right , 
( Who thirst to drink the Nectar of thy sight ) 
The Council , Commoners , and Multitude ; 
( Glad , that this day so long denied , is viewed ) 
I tender thee the heartiest welcome , yet 
That ever King had to his Empire's seat : 
Never came man , more longed for , more desired : 
And being come , more reverenced , loved , admired : 
Hear , and record it : In a Prince it is 
no little virtue , to know who are his . 
With like devotions , do I stoop t' embrace 
This springing glory of thy Godlike race ; 
His Country's Wonder , Hope , Love , joy and Pride : 
How well doth he become the royal side 
Of this erected , and broad spreading Tree , 
Under whose shade , may Britain ever be . 
And from this branch , may thousand branches more 
Shoot o'er the Main , and knit with every shore 
In ●ondss of Marriage , Kindred , and Increase ; 
And style this Land , the Navel of their peace . 
This is your Servants wish , your City's vow , 
Which still shall propagate itself , with you ; 
And free from spurs of Hope , that slow minds move : 
He seeks no hire , that owes his life to Love. 
And here she comes that is no less a part 
In this day's greatness , then in my glad heart . 
Glory of Queens , and Glory of your Name , 
Whose Graces do as far outspeak your Fame , 
As Fame doth silence , when her Trumpet ring's 
You Daughter , Sister , Wife of several Kings : 
Besides Alliance , and the stile of Mother , 
In which one Title you drown all your other . 
Instance , be that fair shoot , is gone before 
Your elder joy , and top of all your store , 
With those , whose sight to us is yet denied , 
But not our zeal to them , or aught beside 
This City can to you : For whose estate 
She hope's you will be still good Advocate 
To her best Lord So , whilst you mortal are , 
no taste of sour mortality once dare 
Approach your house ; nor Fortune greet your Grace 
But coming on , and with a forward face . 




THE OTHER AT TEMPLE BAR . 

Carried the frontispiece of a Temple , the Walls of which and Gates were Brass ; the Pillars Silver , their Capitals and Bases Gold : in the highest point of all was erected a janus' head , and over it written . 

JANO QVADRIFRONTI SACRUM . 

Which title of Quadrifrons is said to be given him , as he respecteth all Climates , and fills all parts of the world with his Majesty ; which Marshal would seem to allude unto in that Hendecasyllable , Et linguâ pariter locutus omni . 

Others have thought it by reason of the four Elements , which broke out of him , being Chaos : for Ovid is not afraid to make Chaos and janus the same , in those verses Me Chaos antiqui ( nam sum res prisca ) vocabant : 
Adspice , etc.  


●● PLUTUS . 

or Wealth , a little boy , bore headed , his locks curled , and spangled with gold , of a fresh aspect , his body almost naked , saving some rich robe cast over him ; in his arms a heap of gold Ingots to express riches , whereof he is the God : Beneath her feet lay ENYALIUS . 

or Mars , Grovelling , his armour scattered upon him in several pieces , and sundry sorts of weapons broken about him , her word to all was VNA TRIUMPHIS IN NUMERIS POTIOR . 

pax optima rerum 
Quas homini novisse datum est , pax una Triumphis Innumeris potior . 


signifying that peace alone was better , and more to be coveted then innumerable Triumphs , besides , upon the right hand of her , but with some little descent , in a Hemicycle was seated ESYCHIA . 

or Quie● , the first handmaid of peace ; A woman of a grave and venerable aspect , attired in black , upon her head an artificial nest , out of which appeared Storks heads to manifest a sweet repose . Her feet were placed upon a Cube , to show stability , and in her lap she held a Perpendicular or level , as the ensign of Evenness and Rest ; on the top of it sat a Haltion or Kings-fisher . She had lying at her feet TARACHE . 

or Tumult , in a garment of diverse , but dark colors , her hair wild , and disordered , a fowl and troubled face , about her say staffs , swords , ropes , chains , hammers , stones , and such like to express Turmoil . The word was PERAGIT TRANQVILLA POTESTAS . 

Claud. Quod violent a nequit : mandat aque fortius urget Imperiosa quies . 

To show the benefits of a calm and facile power , being able to effect in a state that , which no violence can . On the other , sided the second handmaid , was ELEUTHERIA . 

or Liberty , her dressing white , & somewhat antique but loose and free ; her hair flowing down her back , and shoulders : In her right hand she bore a Club , on her left a Hat , the Characters of freedom , and power : At her feet a Cat was placed , the creatrue most affecting , and expressing liberty . She trod on Raven , as the Augury of ill fortune : & the Soul was REDEUNT SATURNIA REGNA . 

Out of Virgil , to show that now those golden times were returned again , wherein Peace was with us so advannced , Rest received , Liberty restored , Safety assured , and all Blessedness appearing in every of these virtues her particular Triumph over her opposite evil . This is the dumb argument of the frame , and illustrated with this verse of Virgil , written in the under freeze . NULLA SALUS BELLO 
PACEM TE POSSIMUS OMNES.  


The speaking part was performed , as within the Temple where there was erected an Altar , to which at the approach of the K. appears the Flamen MARTIALIS . 

And to him . GENIUS VRBIS . 

The Genius we attired before : To the Flamen we appoint this habit . A long Crimson robe to witness his nobility , his tippet and sleeves white as reflecting on purity in his religion , a rich mantle of gold with a train to express the dignity of his function . Upon his head a Hat of delicate wool , whose top ended in a Cone , and was thence called Apex , according to that of Lucan . lib. 1.  Attollensque Apicem gen●roso vertice Flamen . 

This Apex was covered with a fine net of yearn which they named Apiculum , & was sustained with a bowed twig of Pomegranate tree , it was also in the hot time of Summer to be bound with Ribbons , and thrown behind them as Scaliger teacheth . In his hand he bore a golden Censor with perfume , and censing about the Altar ( having first kindled his fire on the top ) is interrupted by the Genius . 

GENIUS .  Stay , what art thou , that in this strange attire , 
Dar'st kindle stranger , and unhallowed fire 
Upon this Altar ? 


FL.   Rather what art thou 
That dar'st so rudely interrupt my vow ? 
My habit speaks my name . 


GOE   A Flamen ? 


FL.   Yes , 
And Martialis called . 


GOE   I so did guess 
By my short view , but whence didst thou ascend 
Hither ? or how ? or to what mystic end ? 


FL.   The noise , and present tumult of this Day , 
Roused me from sleep , and silence , where I lay 
Obscured from light ; which when I waked to see , 
I wondering thought what this great pomp might be . 
When ( looking in my Calendar ) I found 
The ides of March were entered , and I bound 
With these , to celebrate the Genial feast 
Of ANNA styled PERENNA , MARS his guest ; 
Who , in this Month of his , is yearly called 
To banquet at his Altars ; and in stalled ; 
A Goddess with him , since she fills the Year , 
And knits the oblique scarf that girts the sphere . 
Whilst four faced JANUS turns his vernal look 
Upon their meeting hours , as if he took . 
High pride and pleasure . 


GOE   Sure thou still dost dream , 
And both thy tongue , and thought rides on the stream 
Of Phantasy : Behold here He nor She , 
Have any Altar , Fane , or Deity . 
Stoop ; read but this inscription : and then view 
To whom the Place is consecrate . 't is true 
That this is JANUS Temple , and that now 
He turns upon the Year his freshest brow ; 
That this is MARS his month ; and these the ides , 
Wherein his ANNE was honoured ; Both the Tides , 
Titles , and Place , we know : But these dead rites 
Are long since buried , and new power excites 
more high and hearty flames . Lo , there is he , 
Who brings with him a greater ANNE than she : 
Whose strong and potent virtues have defaced 
Stern MARS his Statues , and upon them placed 
His , and the world's blessed blessings : This hath brought 
Sweet Peace to sit in that bright state she ought 
Unbloody , or untroubled ; hath forced hence 
All tumults , fears , or other dark portents 
That might invade weak minds ; hath made men see 
Once more the face of welcome Liberty : 
And doth ( in all his present acts ) restore 
That first pure world , made of the better Ore. 
Now Innocence shall cease to be the spoil 
Of ravenous Greatness , or to steep the soil 
Of raised Peasantry with tears , and blood ; 
no more shall rich men ( for their little good ) 
Suspect to be made guilty ; or vile Spies 
Enjoy the lust of their so murdering eyes : 
Men shall put off their Iron minds , and hearts ; 
The Time forget his old malicious arts 
With this new minute ; and no print remain 
Of what was thought the former age's stain . 
Back FLAMEN , with thy superstitious fumes , 
And cense not here ; Thy ignorance presumes 
Too much , in acting any Ethnic rite 
In this translated Temple : here no wight , 
To sacrifice , save my devotion comes , 
That brings instead of those thy Masculine gums . 
My City's heart ; which shall for ever burn 
Upon this Altar , and no Time shall turn 
The same to ashes : here I fix it fast , 
Flame bright , flame high , and may it ever last . 
Whilst I , before the figure of thy Peace , 
Still tend the fire ; and give it quick increase 
With prayers , wishes , vows ; whereof be these 
The least , and weakest : that no Age may lose 
The Memory of this so rich a day ; 
But rather , that it henceforth yearly may 
Begin our Spring and with our spring the prime , 
And first account of Years , of Months , of Time : 
And may these ides as fortunate appear 
To thee , as they to Caesar fatal were . 
Be all thy Thoughts born perfect , and thy Hopes 
In their events still crowned beyond their scopes . 
Let not wide Heaven that secret blessing know 
To give , which she on thee will not bestow . 
Blind Fortune be thy slave ; and may her store 
( The less thou seekest it ) follow thee the more . 
Much more I would : but see , these brazen Gates 
Make haste to close , as urged by thy Fates ; 
Here ends my City's office , here it breaks : 
Yet with my tongue , and this pure heart , she speaks 
A short farewell ; and lower than thy feet , 
With fervent thanks , thy royal pains doth greet . 
Pardon , if my abruptness breed disease ; 
He merit's not t' offend , that hastes to please . 




Over the Altar was written this Inscription : 

D. I O. M. BRITANNI ARUM . IMP. PACIS . VINDICI . MARTE . MAIORI . P. P. F. S. AUGUSTO . NOVO. GENTIUM . CONIUNCTARUM . NUMINI . TUTELARI . D. A. CONSERVATRICI . ANNAE . IPSAE . PERENNAE . DEABUSQVE . VNIVERSIS . OPTATIORI . SVI FORTUNATISSIMI . THALAMI . SOCIAE . ET CONSORTI . PULCHERIMAE . AUGUSTISSIMAE . ET H. F. P. FILIO . SVO . NOBILISSIMO . OB. ADVENTUM . AD VRBEM . HANC . SVAM . EXPECTATISSIMUM . GRATISSIMUM . CELEBRATISSIMUM . CVIUS . NON . RADII . SED SOLES . POTIUS . FUNESSIMAM . NUPER . AERIS . INTEMPERIEM . SERENARUNT S. P. Q. L. VOTIS. X. VOTIS. xx. ARDENTISSIMIS . L. M. HANC . ARAM. P.  



And upon the Gate being shut , 

IMP. JACOBUS MAX. CAESAR AUG. P. P. PACE POPULO BRITANNICO TERRA MARIQVE PARTA JANUM CLUSIT . S. C.  



Thus hath both Court-town-and Country-reader , our portion of device for the City ; neither are we ashamed to profess it , being assured well of the difference between it and Pageantry . If the Mechanic part yet standing , give it any distaste in the wry mouths of the Time , we pardon them ; for their own ambitious ignorance doth punish them enough . From hence we will turn over a new leaf with you , and lead you to the Pegma in the Strand , a work thought on , begun , and perfected in twelve days . 

The Invention was a Rainbow , the Moon , Sun , and those seven Stars , which antiquity hath styled the Pleyades , or Vergiliae , advanced between two Magnificent Pyramids of 70. foot in height , on which were drawn his Majesty's several pedigrees Eng. and Scot To which body ( being framed before ) we were to apt our soul . And finding that one of these seven lights , Electra , is rarely or not at all to be seen , ( as Ouid. lib. 4.  Fast. affirmeth . Pleyades incipient humeros relevare paternos : 
Quae septem dici , sex tamen esse solent . 


And by and by after , Sive quòd Electra Troiae spectare ruinas 
Non tulit : aute oculos opposuitque manum . 


And Festus Auien.  Fama vetus septem memor at genitore creatas 
Longaevo : sex se rutila inter cider a tantùm 
Sustollunt , etc.  


And beneath — cerni sex solas carmine Mynthes 
Asserit : Electram coelo abscessisse profundo , etc. ) 


We ventured to follow this authority ; and made her the speaker : presenting her hanging in the air , in figure of a Comet ; according to Anonymus . Electra non sustinens videre casum pronepotum sugerit ; unde & illam disso lutis crinibus proper luctum ire asserunt , et propter comas quidam Cometen appellant . 

The speech . 

Electra .  The long Laments , I spent for ruined Troy , 
Are dried ; and now mine eyes run tears of joy. 
no more shall men suppose Electra dead , 
Though from the consort of her sisters fled 
Unto the Arctic circle , here to grace , 
And gild this day with her serenest Face ▪ 
And see , my daughter Iris hasts to throw 
Her Rose at wings , in compass of a bow , 
About our state , as sign of my approch● 
Attracting to her seat from Mithras coach , 
A thousand different , and particular hues , 
Which she throughout her body doth diffuse . 
The Sun , as loath to part from this half sphere , 
Stands still ; and Phoebe labours to appear 
In all as bright ( if not as rich ) as he : 
And , for a note of more serenity , 
My six fair Sisters hither shifted their lights ; 
To do this hour the utmost of her Rites . 
Where least the captious , or profane might doubt , 
How these clear heavenly bodies come about 
All to be seen at once ; yet neither's light 
Eclipsed , or shadowed by the others sight : 
Let Ignorance know , great King , this Day is thine , 
And doth admit no Night ; but all do shine 
As well nocturnal , as diurnal fires , 
To add unto the flame of our desires . 
Which are ( now thou hast closed up JANUS gates , 
And given so general peace to all estates ) 
That no offensive mist , or cloudy stain 
May mix with splendour of thy golden reign ; 
But , as th' hast freed thy Chamber , from the noise 
Of War and Tumult ; thou wilt pour those joys 
Upon this Place , which claims to be the Seat 
Of all thy Kingly race : the Cabinet 
To all thy Counsels ; and the judging Chair 
To this thy special Kingdom . Whose so fair 
And wholesome Laws , in every Court , shall strive 
By Equity , and their first Innocence to thrive ; 
The base and guilty bribes of guiltier men 
Shall be thrown back , and justice look , as when 
She loved the earth , and feared not to be sold 
For that , which worketh all things to it , Gold.  
The Dam of other evils , Avarice 
Shall here lock down her jaws , and that rude vice 
Of ignorant , and pitied Greatness , Pride , 
Decline with shame ; Ambition now shall hide 
Her face in dust , as dedicate to sleep , 
That in great Portals wont her watch to keep . 
All ills shall fly the light : Thy Court be free 
no less from Envy , then from Flattery ; 
All Tumult , Faction , and harsh Discord cease , 
That might perturb the music of thy Peace : 
The querulous Nature shall no longer find 
Room for his Thoughts : One pure consent of mind 
Shall flow in every breast , and not the Air , 
Sun , Moon , or Stars shine more serenely fair . 
This from that loud , blessed Oracle , I sing 
Who here , and first pronounced , thee Britain's King 
Long mayst thou live , and see me thus appear , 
As ominous a Comet , from my Sphere , 
Unto thy reign ; as that did auspicate 
So lasting glory to Augustus' state . 




The end . 

B. I HIS PANEGYRE . 

On the happy entrance of JAMES our Sovereign to his first high Session of Parliament in this his Kingdom the 19 of March. 1603.  

Mart.  

Licet toto nunc Helicone frui . 

A PANEGYRE . 

Heaven now not strives , alone , our breasts to fill 
With joys : but urgeth his full favours still . 
Again , the Glory of our Western world 
Unfolds himself : and from his Eyes are hoorled , 
( To day ) a thousand radiant lights , that stream 
To every nook , and angle of his realm . 
His former rays , did only clear the sky ; 
But these his searching beams are cast , to pry 
Into those dark , and deep concealed vaults , 
Where men commit black incest with their faults ; 
And snore supinely in the stall of Sin : 
Where Murder , Rapine , Lust , do sit within 
Carousing human blood , in iron bowls , 
And make their Den the slaughter house of souls : 
From whose foul reeking caverns first arise 
Those damps , that so offend all good men's eyes ; 
And would ( if not dispersed ) infect the Crown , 
And in their vapour her bright Mettle drown . 
To this so clear , and sanctified an end , 
I saw , when reverend TH●MIS did descend 
Upon his state ; let down in that rich chain , 
That fasteneth heavenly power to earthly reign : 
Beside her , stooped on either hand , a Maid , 
Fair dice , and EUNOMIA ; who were said 
To be her daughters : and but faintly known 
On Earth , till now , they came to grace his throne . 
Her third , IRENE , helped to bear his train ; 
And in her office vowed she would remain , 
Till foreign Malice , or unnatural spite 
( Which Fates avert ) should force her from her right . 
With these he passed , and with his people's hearts 
Breathed in his way ; and Souls ( their better parts ) 
Hasting to follow forth in shouts , and cries . 
Upon his face all threw their covetous eyes , 
As on a Wonder ; Some amazed stood , 
As if they felt , but had not known their good : 
Others would fain have shown it in their words , 
But , when their speech so poor a help affords 
Unto their zeals expression ; They are mute : 
And only with red silence him salute . 
Some cry from tops of houses , thinking noise 
The fittest Herald to proclaim true joys ; 
Others on ground runs gazing by his side , 
All , as unwearied , as unsatisfied : 
And every Window grieved it could not move 
Along with him , and the same trouble prove . 
They , that had seen , but four short days before , 
His gladding look , now longed to see it more . 
And as of late , when he through London went , 
The amorous City spared no ornament , 
That might her beauties heighten ; but so dressed 
As our Ambitious Dames , when they make feast , 
And would be courted : so this Town put on 
Her brightest tire ; and in it equal shone , 
To her great Sister : save that Modesty , 
Her Place , and Years gave her precedency . 
The joy of either was alike , and full ; 
no Age , nor Sex so weak , or strongly dull , 
That did not bear a part in this consent 
Of Hearts , and Voices . All the Air was rend , 
As with the murmur of a moving wood ; 
The ground beneath did seem a moving flood 
Walls , windows , roofs , towers , steeples , all were set 
With several eyes , that in this object met . 
Old men were glad , their Fates till now did last ; 
And Infants , that the hours had made such haste 
To bring them forth : Whilst riper aged , and apt 
To understand the more , the more were raped . 
This was the People's Love , with which did strive 
The Nobles zeal , yet either kept alive 
The others flame , as doth the Wike and Wax 
That friendly tempered one pure Taper makes . 
Mean while , the reverend Themis draws aside 
The Kings obeying will , from taking pride 
In these vain stirs , and to his mind suggests 
How he may triumph in his subject's breasts , 
With better pomp . She tells him first , that Kings 
Are here on earth the most conspicuous Things : 
That they , by Heaven , are placed upon his throne , 
To rule like Heaven ; & have no more , their own , 
As they are Men , than Men. That all they do 
Though hid at home , abroad is searched into : 
And , being once found out , discovered lies 
Unto as many Envy's , there , as Eyes . 
That Princes , since they know it is their Fate , 
Ofttimes , to have the secrets of their state 
Betrayed to Fame , should take more care , and fear 
In public Acts what face and form they bear . 
She then remembered to his thought , the Place 
Where he was going ; and the upward race 
Of Kings , praeceding him in that high Court ; 
Their Laws , their Ends ; the Men she did report : 
and all so justly , as his Ear was joyed 
To hear the Truth , from spite , or flattery void . 
She showed him , who made wise , who honest Acts ; 
Who both , who neither : all the cunning tracts , 
And thriving statutes she could promptly note ; 
The bloody , base , and barbarous she did quote ; 
Where Laws were made to serve the Tyrant ' will ; 
Where sleeping they could save , and waking kill ; 
Where Acts gave Licence to impetuous lust● 
To bury Churches , in forgotten dust , 
And with their ruins raise the Panders Bowers : 
When , public justice borrowed all her Powers 
From private Chambers ; that could then create 
Laws , judges , Consellors , yea Prince , and State. 
All this she told , and more , with bleeding Eyes ; 
For Right is as compassionate as wise . 
Nor did he seem their vices so to love , 
As once defend , what THEMIS did reprove . 
For though by Right , and benefit of Times , 
He owned their Crowns , he would not so their crimes . 
He knew that Princes , who had sold their Fame 
To their voluptuous lusts , had lost their Name ; 
And that no wretch was more unblessed than he , 
Whose necessary good 't was now to be 
An evil King : And so must such be still , 
Who once have got the habit to do ill . 
One wickedness another must defend ; 
For Vice is safe , while she hath Vice to friend . 
He knew , that those , who would , with love , command , 
Must with a tender ( yet a steadfast ) hand 
Sustain the reinss , and in the check forbear 
To offer cause of Injury , or Fear . 
That Kings , by their example , more do sway 
then by their Power ; and men do more obey 
When they are lead , then when they are compelled . 
In all these knowing Arts our Prince excelled . 
And now the Dame had dried her dropping eyes , 
When , like an April Iris , flew her shine 
About the streets , as it would force a spring 
From out the stones , to gratulate the King. 
She blessed the People , that in shoals did swim 
To hear her speech ; which still began in him 
And ceased in them . She told them , what a Fate 
Was gently fallen from Heaven upon this State ; 
How dear a Father they did now enjoy 
That came to save , what Discord would destroy : 
And entering with the power of a King , 
The Temperance of a private Man did bring . 
That wan affections , ere his steps wan ground ; 
And was not hot , or covetous to be crowned 
Before men's hearts had crowned him . Who ( unlike 
Those greater bodies of the sky , that strike 
The lesser fires dim ) in his access 
Brighter than all , hath yet made no one less ; 
Though many greater : and the most , the best . 
Wherein , his Choice was happy with the rest 
Of his great actions , first to see , and do 
What all men's wishes did aspire unto . 
Hereat , the People could no longer hold 
Their bursting joys ; but through the air was rolled 
The length'ned shout , as when th' Artillery 
Of Heaven is discharged along the sky : 
And this Confession flew from every voice . 
Never had Land more reason to rejoice . 
Nor to her bliss , could aught now added be , 
Save , that she might the same perpetual see : 
Which when Time , Nature , and the Fates denied , 
With a twice louder shout aga●ne they cried . 
Yet , let blessed Britain ask ( without your wrong ) 
Still to have such a King , and this King long . 
Solus Rex , & Poëta non quotannis nascitur . 

A PARTICULAR Entertainment of the QUEEN and PRINCE their Highness to Althrope , at the Right Honourable the Lord SPENCER'S , on Saturday being the 25. of june 1603. as they came first into the Kingdom ; being written by the same Author , and not before published . 

The Invention was , to have a Satire lodged in a little Spinet , by which her Majesty , and the Prince were to come , who ( at the report of certain Cornets that were divided in several places of the Park , to signify her approach ) advanced his head above the top of the wood , wondering , and ( with his Pipe in his hand ) began as followeth . 

SATIRE .  Here ? there ? and every where ? 
Some solemnities are near , 
That these changes strike mine ear . 
My Pipe and I a part shall bear . 
And after a short strain with his Pipe ; again . 

Look , see ; ( beshrew this Tree , ) 
What may all this wonder be ? 
Pipe it , who that list for me : 
I 'll fly out abroad , and see . 
There he leapt down , and gazing the Queen and Prince in the face , went forward . 

That is Cyparissus' face ! 
And the Dame hath Syrinx grace ! 
OH that Pan were now in Place , 
Sure they are of heavenly race . 
Here he ran into the wood again , and hid himself whilst to the sound of excellent soft Music that was there concealed in the thicket ; there came tripping up the lawn , a Bevy of Fairies attending on Mab their Queen , who falling into an artificial ring , that was there cut in the path , began to dance a round , whilst their Mistress spoke as followeth . 



FAIRY .  Hail , and welcome worthiest Queen , 
joy had never perfect been , 
To the Nymphs that haunt this Green , 
Had they not this evening seen . 
Now they Print it on the Ground 
With their feet in figures round , 
Marks that will be ever found , 
To remember this glad stound . 


The Satire peeping out of the bush , said . 

Trust her not you bonny-bell , 
She will forty leasinges tell , 
I do know her pranks right well , 
FAIRY .  Satire , we must have a spell , 
For your tongue , it runs to fleet . 


SATYR .  Not so nimbly as your feet , 
When about the cream-bowls sweet . 
You , and all your Elves do meet . 


Here he came hopping forth , and mixing himself with the Fairies skipped in , out , and about their Circle , while the Elves made many offers to catch at him . 

This is Mab the mistresse-faerie , 
That doth nightly rob the Dairy , 
And can hurt , or help the cherning , 
( As she please ) without discerning . 
ELFE.   Pug , you will anon take warning ? 
She , that pinches country wenches , 
If they rub not clean their benches , 
And with sharper Nails remembers , 
When they rake not up their Emberss : 
But if so they chance to feast her 
In a shoe she drops a tester . 


ELFE.   Shall we strip the skipping jester ? 
This is she , that empties Cradles , 
Takes out Children , puts in Ladles : 
Trains forth Midwives in their slumber , 
With a sieve the holes to number . 
And then leads them , from her Borroughs 
Home through Ponds , and water furrows . 


ELFE.   Shall not all this mocking stir us ? 
She can start our Franklins daughters , 
In their sleep , with shrieks , and laughters , 
And on sweet Saint Anne's Night , 
Feed them with a promised sight , 
Some of husbands , some of Lovers , 
Which an empty dream discovers . 


ELFE.   Satire , vengeance near you hovers , 
And in hope that you would come here 
Yester-eve the Lady Summer , 
She invited to a Banpuet : 
But ( in sooth ) I con you thank yet , 
That you could so well deceive her 
Of the pride which 'gan up-heave her : 
And ( by this ) would so have blown her , 
As no wood-god should have known her . 
here he skipped into the Wood  



ELFE.   Mistress , this is only spite : 
For you would not yesternight 
Kiss him in the Cock-shoutlight : 
And came again , 



SATIRE .  By Pan , and thou hast hit it right . 
There they laid hold on him , and nipped him , 



FAERY●   Fairy's , pinch him black and blue , 
Now you have him 〈◊〉 him rue : 


SATIR●●   OH , hold , Mab : I sue . 


ELFE.   Nay , the Devil shall have his due . 


There he ran quite away and left them in a confusion while the Fairy began again , 

SATIRE .  Pardon Lady this wild strain , 
Common with the Sylvan train . 
That do skip about this plain : 
Elves , apply your Gyre again . 
And whilst some do hop the ring , 
Some shall play , and some shall sing , 
we 'll express in every thing , 
Oranas' welcoming . 


SONG . 

This is she , 
This is she , 
In whose world of Grace 
Every Season , Person , Place , 
That receive her , happy be , 
For with no less , 
then a Kingdom's happiness , 
Doth she private Lar bless , 
And ours above the rest : 
By how m●ch we deserve it least . 
Long line 〈◊〉 
To exceed ( whom she succeeds ) our late Diana . 


FAIRY .  Madame , now an end to make , 
Deign a simple gift to take : 
Only for the Fairy's sake , 
Who about you still shall wake . 
't is done only to supply , 
His suspected courtesy , 
Who ( since Thamyra did die ) 
Hath not brooked a Lady's eye , 
Nor allowed about his place , 
Any of the female race . 
Only we are free to trace 
All his grounds , as he to chase . 
For which Bounty to us lent , 
Of him unknowledgde , or unsent , 
We prepared this Compliment , 
And as far from cheap intent , 
In particular to feed , 
Any hope that should succeed . 
Or our glory by the deed , 
As yourself are from the need . 
Utter not ; we you implore , 
Who did give it , nor wherefore , 
And when ever you restore 
Yourself to us , you shall have more . 
Highest , happiest Queen farewell , 
But beware you do not tell . 
Here the Fairies hoped away in a fantastic dance , when on a sudden the Satire discovered himself again and came forth . 



SATYR .  Not tell ? ha , ha , I could smile , 
At this old , and toothless wile . 
●●dy , I have been no sleeper , 
She belies the noble Keeper . 
Say , that here he like the Groves : 
And pursue no ●●●raine loves , 
Is he therefore to be deemed , 
Rude , or savage ? or esteemed , 
But a sorry Entertainer , 
'Cause he is no common strainer : 
After painted Nymphs for savours , 
Or that in his Garb he savours 
Little of the nice●y , 
In the sprucer Courtiery ; 
As the Ros●●y of kisses , 
With the oath that never misses , 
This , Believe me on the breast , 
And then telling some man's jest , 
Thinking to prefer his wit , 
Equal with his suit by it , 
I mean his clothes : no , no , no , 
Here doth no such humour flow . 
He can neither bribe a grace , 
Nor encounter my Lord's face 
With a pliant smile , and flatter , 
Though this lately were some matter 
To the making of a Courtier . 
Now he hope's he shall resort there , 
Safer , and with more allowance ▪ 
Since a hand hath governance , 
That hath given those Customs chase , 
And hath brought his own in place . 
OH that now a wish could bring , 
The Godlike person of a King , 
then should even Enuiefinde , 
'Cause of wonder at the mind 
Of our Woodman : But lo where 
His Kingly Image doth appear , 
And is all this while neglected : 
Pardon ( Lord ) you are respected 
Deep as is the Keeper's hart , 
And as dear in every part . 
See , for instance where he sends 
His Son , his Heir ; who humbly bends 
Low , as is his Father's earth , 
To the womb that gave you birth : 
So he was directed first . 
Next to you , of whom the thirst 
Of seeing takes away the use 
Of that part , should pled excuse 
For his boldness , which is less 
By his comely shamefastness . 
Rise up Sir , I will betray , 
All I think you have to say ; 
That your Father gives you here , 
( Freely as to him you were ) 
To the service of this Prince : 
And with you these Instruments 
Of his wild and Sy●●an trade , 
Better not 〈◊〉 had . 
The Bow was Ph●ebas , and the horn , 
By Orion often worn : 
The Dog of Sparta breed , and good , 
As can ring within a Wood : 
Thence his name is : you shall try 
How he hunteth instantly . 
But perhaps the Queen your mother , 
Rather doth affect some other 
Sport , as coursing : we will prove 
Which her Highness' most doth love . 
Satyrs let the Woods refound , 
They shall have their welcome crowned , 
With abrace of 〈◊〉 to ground . 
At that , the whole Wood and place re●ounded with the noise of Cornets , Horns , and other Hunting Music , and a brace of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 p●t out ; and as fortunately killed , as they were meant to be ; even in the sight of her Maiesti● . 

This was the first Night's show . Where the next day being Sunday , she rested , and on Monday , till after dinuer ; where there was a speech suddenly thought on , to induce a Morris of the Clowns there about , who most officiouslie presented themselves , but by reason of the throng of the Country that came in , their Speaker could not be hard , who was in the person of Nobody , to deliver this following speech and attired in a pair of Breeches which were made to come up to his neck , with his arms out at his pockets , and a Cap drowning his face . 

If my outside move your Laughter , 
Pray jove , my inside be thereafter . 
Queen , Prince , Duke , Earles , 
Countesses ; you courtly Pearls : 
( And , I hope no mortal sin , 
If I put less Ladies in ) 
Fair saluted be you all . 
At this time it doth befall , 
We are the Usher to a Morris , 
( A kind of Masque ) whereof good store is 
In the Country here about , 
But this , the choice of all the rout . 
Who because that no man sent them , 
Have got Nobody to present them . 
These are Things have no suspicion 
Of their ill doing : nor Ambition , 
Of their well : but as the Pipe 
Shall inspire them , mean to skip . 
They come to see , and to be seen , 
And though they dance afore the Queen , 
there 's none of these doth hope to come by 
Wealth , to build another Holmby : 
All those dancing days are done , 
Men must now have more than one 
Grace , to build their fortunes on , 
Else our souls would sure have gone , 
All by this time to our feet . 
I not deny where Graces meet 
In a man , that quality 
Is a graceful Property ? 
But when dancing is his best , 
( Beshrew me ) I suspect the rest . 
But I am Nobody , and my Breath 
( Soon as it is born ) hath death . 
Come on Clowns forsake your dumps , 
And bestir your Ho●naild stumps , 
Do your worst , I 'll undertake , 
Not a jerk you have shall make 
Any Lady here in Love. 
Perhaps your Fool , or so , may move 
Some Lady's woman with a Trick , 
And upon it she may pick 
A pair of revelling legs or two , 
Out of you with much a do . 
But see the Hobby-horse is forgot . 
Fool it must be your lot , 
To supply his want with faces 
And some other Busson graces 
You know how ; Piper play , 
And let no body hence away . 
There was also another parting speech , which was to have been presented in the person of a youth , and accompanied with divers Gentleman's younger sons of the Country , but by reason of the Multitudinous press , was also hindered . And which we have here adjoined . 

And will you then Mirror of Queen's depart ? 
Shall nothing stay you ? not my Master's heart 
That pants to lose the comfort of your light , 
And see his Day e●e it be old grow Night ? 
You are a Goddess , and your will be done ; 
Yet this our last hope is , that as the Sun 
Cheers objects far removed , as well as near , 
So where soe'er you shine , you 'll sparkle here . 
And you dear Lord , on whom my covetous eye 
Doth feed itself but cannot satisfy , 
OH shoot up fast in spirit , as in years ; 
That when upon her head proud Europe wears 
Her stateliest tire , you may appear thereon 
The richest Gem without a paragon . 
Shine bright and fixed as the Artic●● star : 
And when flow Time hath made you fit for war , 
Look over the strict Ocean , and think where 
You may but lead us forth , that grow up here 
Against a day , when our officious swords 
Shall speak our action better than our words . 
Till then , all good event conspire to crown 
Your Parents hopes , our zeal , and your renown . 
Peace , usher now your steps , and where you come , 
Be Envy still struck blind , and Flattery dumb . 
Thus much ( which was the least of the Entertainment in respect of the reality , abondance , delicacy , and order of all things else ) to do that serviceable right , to his noble Friend , which his affection owes , and his Lordship's merit may challenge , the Author hath suffered to come out , and encounter Censure : and not here unnecessarily adjoined , being performed to the same Queen & Prince ; who were no little part of these more laboured and triumphal shows . And to whose greatest part , he knows the Ho. L. ( had he been so blessed as to have seen him at his Lodge ) would have stretched in observance , though he could not in Love or zeal . 



FINIS . 





Annal. lib. 14.  Camd. Bri● . 374.  Lib. 8.  Epig. 36  Brit. 367.  De mallij Theodor. cons. Panegyri . Eclog. 1.  Matth. 10. 16.  Prou. 8. 15.  Antiqui Genium omnium gignendarum rerum existimarunt Deum : et urbib . quam hominib . vel caeteris rebus natum . Lil. Gre. Gy. in Synt. dear . 15.  & Rosin . Antiq. Ro. lib. 2. cap. 14.  Civica corona fit è frond querna , quoniam cibus , victusque antiquissimus querceus capisolitus sit . Ros. libr. 10. cap. ●7 .   ●ascicul● u●●garum , intra quas obligata securis erat , sic , ut ferrum in summo fasce extaret , Ros. lib. 7. cap. 3. ubi notandum est , non debere precipitem , & solutam iram esse magistratus . Mora enim allata , & cunctatio , dum sensim virgae solvuntur , identidem consilium mutavit deplect●ndo . Quando autem vitia quaedam sunt corrigibilia , deplorata alia ; castigant virgae , quod revocari valet , immendabile secures praecidunt . Plut. Prob. Rom. 82.  Octa : Act : 2  Aen. lib. 8.  Amor. lib. 3. el. 5.  Hor. car . ● . ode 27.  & Ode . 37  Stat. Syl. 4.  Epu . Domit.  Virg. Ecl. ● . Aene. 1.  Aene. 1.  Met. 1.  De 4.  Cons. Honor. Panegyri  Pub. Sir Mi.  Clau. de laud. Still . lib. 3.    As being the first , free , and natural government of this Island , after it came to civility .   In respect they were all Conquests & the obedience of the subject more enforced .   Rather than the City should want a Founder , we choose to follow the received story of Brutus , whether fabulous , or true , and not altogether unwarranted in Poetry : since it is a favour of Antiquity to few cities , to let them know their first Authors . Besides , a learned Poet of our time , in a most elegant work of his Con. Tam. & ISIS , celebrating London hath this verse of her : 

Aemula maternae tollens sua lumina Troiae . Here is also an ancient rite alluded to in the building of Cities , which was to give them their bounds with a plough , according to Vir. Aen. li. 10.  Interea Aeneas urbem designat Aratro . And Isidore li. 15. cap. 2.  Vrbs vocata ab orbe , quod antiquae civitates in orbem fiebant ; vel ab urbe parte ●●ratri , quo muri designabantur , unde est illud . Optavitque locum regno & concludere sulco . 

  Primigenius sulcus dicitur , qui in condenda nova urbe , taure & vacca designationis causa imprimitur ; Hitherto respects that of Camd. Brit. 368. speaking of this City , Quicunque autem condiderit , vitali genio , constructam fuisse ipsius fortuna docuit .   For so all happy days were . Plin. cap. 40. lib. 7.  Nat. Hist. To which Horace alludes , lib. 1. ode . 36.  Cressa ne careat pulchra dies nota . And the other Plin. epist. 11. lib. 6.  OH diem laetum , not and umque mihi candidissimo calculo . With many other in many places . Mart. lib. 8. epi. 45. lib. 9 epi. 53. lib. 10. 38. lib. 11. 37.  Stat. lib. 4.  Syl. 6.  Pers , sat . 2.  Catull. epig. 69. etc.    The Parcaes , or Fates , Martianus calls them scribas ac librarias superûm ; whereof Clotho is said to be the elder , signifying in Latin Euocatio .   Those before mentioned of the Britain , Roman , Saxon , etc. and to this Register of the Fates allude those verses of Ovid Met. 15 — Cernes illic molimine vasto . Exaere , & solido rerum tabularia ferro : Quae neque concussum coeli , neque fulminis Iram , Nec metuunt ullas tuta atque aeternaruinas . Inuenies illic incisa adamant peren●● Fata etc. —   A river dividing Spain and Portugal , and by the consent of Poets styled aurifer .   Understanding Euphrosyne , Sebasis , 〈◊〉 , etc    The Lord Maior who for his year , hath Signior place of the rest , and for the day was chief Sergeant to the King.    Above the blessing of his present office , the word had some particular allusion to his name , which is Benet , and hath ( no doubt ) in time been the contraction of Benedict .   The City , which title is touched before .   To the Prince .   An attribute given to great persons , fitly above other , Humanity , & in frequent use with all the Greek Poets , especially Homer . Iliad . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 — 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . And in the same Book . — 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 .   As Lactant. calls Parnass● , Vmbilicum terra . To the Queen .   An emphatical speech , & well reenforcing her greatness ; being by this match , more than either her Brother , Father , etc.    Daughter to Frederik second kind of Denmark , & Norway , sister to Christian the fourth now there reigning , & wife to james our Sovereign .   The Prince Henry Fredrick . 

Bassus apud Macro ▪ lib. 1.  Satur. ca 9  li. 8.  Epi. 2.  Fast. lib. 1.  So Cephisiodotus hath feigned him See Paus. in Boeoti . & Phil. in Imag. contrary to Aristop. Theogn . Lucian and others , that make him blind and deformed . Si● ▪ Ital ▪  De Malii Theo. cons . Panegy . Eclog. 4.  Aeneid . lib. 11.    One of the three Flamines that as some think Numa Pompilius first instituted , ●ut we ra●her with Varr● take him of Romulus' institution , whereof there were only two , He , and Dialis : to whom he was next in dignity . He was always created out of the Nobility , & did perform the rites to Mars , who was thought the Father of Romulus .   Scaliger in coniect. in Varr : saith Totus Pileus , vel potius velamenta , Flamm●um dicebatur . unde Flamines dicti .   To this looks that other conjecture of Varro . lib. 4. de lingua Latina Flamines , quòd licio in Capite vel●ti erant semper , ac caput cinctum hab●bant filo , Flamines dicti    Whichin their attire was called Stroppus , in their wives Inarculum .   Scal. Ibid : in con . Pone enim regerebant apicem , ne gravis esset summis aestatis caloribus . Amentis enim , quae offendices dicebantur sub mentum adductis , religabant ; ut cum vellent , regererent , & pone pen●ere permitterent .   Of Mars , whose rites ( as we have touch● before ) this Flamen did specially celebrate .   With 〈◊〉 the 15. of March , which was the present day of this Triumph ; and on which the great feast of Anna Perenna ( among the Romans ) was yearly and with such solemnity remembered . Oui. Fast. 3.  Idibus est Annae festum geniale Perennae , Haud procul a ripis , etc.    Who this Anna should be ( with the Romans themselves ) hath been no trifling controversy . Some have thought her fabulously the sister of Dido , some a Nymph of Numicius ; some Io ; some Themis . others an old woman of Bovillaes , that fed the seditious multitude , in Mont● sacr● , with Wafers , and fine Cakes , in time of their penury : so whom , afterwards ( in memory of the benefit ) their peace being made with the Nobles , they ordained this feast . Yet , they that have thought nearest , have missed all these , and directly imagined her the Moon . And that she was called Anna , Quia mensibus impleat annum . O●●d . ibid. To which , the vow that they used in her Rites , somewhat confirmingly alludes ; which was . ut Annare , & Perenn●re commodè liceret . Maor . Sat. lib. 1. cap. 1● .   So Ouid. ibid. Fast. makes Mars speaking to her , Mense meo coleris , iunxi mea tempora tecum .   Nuper e●at dea facta , etc. ibid. Ouid.    Where is understood the meeting of the Zodiac in March , the month wherein she is celebrated .   That face wherewith he beholds the Spring .   Written upon the Altar , for which we refer you to the Page . D. 3.    The Queen . to answer which in our inscription we spoke to the King MARTE MAIORI .   The Temple of janus we apprehend to be both the house of War , & Peace ; of War , when it is open ; of Peace when it is shut : And that there , each over the other is interchangeably placed , to the vicissitude of Times .   Which are Peace , Rest , Liberty , Safety , etc ▪ and were his actively , but the world's passively .   Somewhat a strange Epithet , in our tongue , but proper to the thing ; for they were only Masculine Odours , which were offered to the Altars . Vir. Ecl. 8.  Verbenasque adole pingueis , et mascula Tura . And Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 12. cap. 14. speaking of these , hath Quod ex eo rotunditate gutt●● pependit , Masculum vocamus , cum alias non fere mas vocetur , ubi non sit femina : religioni tributum ne sexus alter usurparetur . Masculum aliqui putant a specie testium dictum . See him also , lib. 34. cap. 11.  And A●nob . lib. 7. advers. Gent. Non si mille ●upondera masculi Turis ince●das , etc.    According to Romulu●'s his institution , who made March the first Month and consecrated it to his Father , of whom it was called Martius : Varr. Fest. in Frag. Martius mensis in●tium anni fuit , et in La●io , & post Romam conditam etc. And Ouid. Fast. 3.  A te principium Romano dicimus anno : Primus de patri● nomine mensis erit . Vox ratafit ; etc. See Macro lib. 1.  Sat. cap. 12. and Solin . in Poly . hist. cap. 3 Quòd hoc mense mercedes e●oluerint magistris , quas completus annus deberi fecisset , etc.    Some , to whom we have read this , have taken it for a Tautology , thinking Time enough expressed before , in Years , and Months . For whose ignorant sakes we must confess to have taken the better part of this travale in noting , a thing not usual , neither affected of us , but where there is necessity , as here , to avoid their dull censures : where in Years and Months we alluded to that is observed in our former note ; but by Time we understand the present , & that from this instant , we should begin to reckon , and make this the first , of our Time. Which is also to be helped by Emphasis .   In which he wa● slain in the Senate . 

Paraph. in Arat Phaen●m .   Fest. Aui . paraph. Pars ait Idea def●entem incendia Troiae , ●t numerosa suae lugentem funerae gentis , Electram tetris moestum dare nubibus orbem . Besides the reference to antiquity , this speech might be understood by Allegory of the Town here , that had been so ruined with sickness , etc.    Hygi●us . Sed postquam Troia f●it capta , & Progenies cius quae à Dardano fuit eversa , dolore permotam ab his se removisse , & in circ●●o qui A●cticus dicitur constitisse , etc.    Electra signifies Serenity itself , and is compounded of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 which is the Sun , and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 that signifies serene . She is mentioned to be Anim● sphaerae solis , by Proclus . Com. in Hesiod .   She is also feigned to be the Mother of the Rainbow . Nascitur enim I●is ex aqua et serenitate , è refraction radiorum scilicet : Arist. in Meteorol .   Val. Flac. Argonaut . 1. makes the Rainbow indic●m serenitatis . Emicuit res●rata di●s , coelumque resoluit . Arcus , & in summos readier unt nubila montes .   A name of the Sun . Stat. The. lib. 1. torquentem corn●a Mithra● . And Martian . Capel . lib. 3. de nup. Merchant & Phil. To Serapim Nilus , Memphis vener●tur Osirin ; Dissona sacra Mithran , etc.    Alcyone , . Celaeno , Taygete , Asterope , Merope , Maia . which are also said to be the souls of the other spheres , as Electra of the S●nne . Proclus . ibi . in come . Alcyone Veneris . Celaeno Saturni . Taygete Lunae . Asterop . jovis . Merope Martis . Maia Mercurij .   Alluding back to that of our Temple .   London .   His City of Westminster , in whose name , and at whose charge , together with the Duchy of Lancaster this Arch was erected .   Since here , they not only sat being Crowned , but also first received their Crowns .   Hor. Car. lib. 4.  Ode . 9  Ducentis ad se cun●ta pecuniae .   For our more authority to induce her thus , See Fest. Auien. paraph. in Arat. speaking of Electra , Nonnumquam Oceani tamen istam surgere ab undis , In convexa poli , sed sede career sororum ; Atque os discretum procul edere , detestatam Germanosque , choros sobolis lachrym●re ruin●s , Diffusamque comas c●rni , crinisque soluti Monstrari effigy , etc.    All Comets were not fatal , some were fortunatly ominous , as this to which we allude ; and wherefore we have Pliny's testimony . Nat. Histo. lib. 2. cap. 25.  Comets in uno totius orbis loco colitur in templo Romae , admodum faustus Divo Augusto iudicatus ab ipso : qui incipiente eo , apparuit ludis quos faciebat Veneri Genetrici , non multo ●ost obitum patris Caesaris , in Collegio ab eo instituto . Namque his verbis id gaudium prodidit . jisipsis ludorum meorum diebus , sydus crinitum per septem dies in regione Coeli , quae sub septentrionibus est , conspectum . Id oriebatur circa undecimam horam di●i , clarumque & omnibus terris conspicuum fuit . Eo sydere significari vulgus credidit , Caesaris animam inter Deorum immortalium numina receptam : quo nomine id insigne simulacro capitis eius , quod mox in foro consecravimus adiectum est . Hec Ill● in publicum , interiore gaudio sibi illum natum , seque in conasci inter pretatus est . Et si verum fatemur , salutare id terris fuit . 

  For she was expected there on Midsummer day at night , but came not till the day following . Quasi Oriens Anna.    Bringing with her the Prince , which is the greatest felicity of Kingdoms .   For households .   A jewel was give● her . Here the Satire fetched out of the Wood , the Lord Spécers' elder son attired and appointed like a Huntsman . 