TO THE RIGHT Honourable Lord , the Lord GORING , Baron of Hurster-point , and Mr. of the Horse to the Queen's Highness . 

Right Honourable : 

Your Brother's real worth showed to me in the Wars abroad , emboldened me to present this new born babe to your Protection , not doubting but to find the same Reality of worth in yourself in the Court at home , as I found in Him in foreign Leaguers : The Subject is new & Merry , the fitter either for Court or Field . It was conceived and perfected in ten daves space ; and how desire's tuition under your Lordship . It is the Emblem of my affection , and so hope's to be loved & liked the better & sooner ; it is the first , but not perhaps to be the last . I had thought to have presented it unto your Lordship , before this time in Print , as I did in the Manuscript , had not either some malevolent spirit , or envious Planet crossed me in my designs . I wish that it may be esteemed ne'er the worse , though from so mean a hand , and so unworthy a person as myself . Lend it a favourable sm●le to comfort and cherish it , and it shall be the height of my desires ; thus presenting myself , it , and what is , or shall be mine , to your Honor. I humbly take my leave . 

your Honours Obliged : D. Lupton . 

To the Reader . 

IF Courteous , I love thee ; if otherwise , I fear not , deal by me , as thou wouldst have others do to thyself : if the matter prove as pleasant , as the Subject is New , I doubt not thy approbation : 't is one comfort , thou canst not say , I am the first Fool in Print , nor as I think , shall be the last . Friend's persuasions prevail much , had they not , I had not showed myself in this kind : I am in Press , do not overpresse me with prejudicate Opinions . I desire thy smile and benign aspect ; yet fear not much thy frown . If thou sayest , 't is idle , know it came not into the World to work much ; Like it and Love it if thou Please , leave it is thou wilt ; 't is all I say , if thou Lovest me , and my Child , I love thee , and 

thine as thou art mine . D. Lupton . 

In Commendation of the Author . 

Take in good part what here I offer , 
T is my maiden loving proffer ; 
I wonder at thy strange device , 
That thus thou shouldst Charactize : 
And how alone that thou shouldst find , 
These two new Subjects to thy mind . 
Brave Ouerbury , Earl , nay none 
Found out this Plot but thou alone . 
But most of all , I wonder yet , 
How in ten dates thou finished it , 
The Mirth , the Wit , the Style , the phrase , 
All give thee a sufficient praise . 
He that thy Book shall buy and read , 
Shall find i  spoken truth indeed . 
thine john Barker . 

To his loving Friend , D. Lupton . 

Fear not Momus , though he Carp , 
Nor Zoylus though he snarl or Bark ; 
Mirth is the Subject of thy Book , 
City and Country here may look , 
Wonder at thee , and praise thy pain , 
That laboured haste Sans hope of gain ? 
Thy Wit and Learning I Commend , 
To thee Applause , I freely lend : 
The wise will like , I wish the rest 
To spare their Censure , it is best : 
they 'll hurt themselves with their own tongue , 
Their Snarling can do thee no wrong . 
Per Samuel Perkings , Philomath . 

The Table . 

OF London . 1.  
The Tower. 2.  
St. Paul's Church . 3.  
The Bridge . 4.  
Of the Thames . 5.  
Exchanges Old and New. 6.  
Cheapside . 7.  
Inns of Court , and Chancery . 8.  
Smithfield 9  
Bridewell . 10.  
Ludgate and Counters . 11.  
Newgate . 12.  
Turnebull-streete . 13.  
Hounsditch and Long-lane . 14.  
Charterhouse . 15.  
Christs-hospitall . 16.  
Paris-garden . 17.  
Artillery Garden . 18.  
Bedlam . 19  
Playhouses . 20.  
Fencing-schooles . 21.  
Dancing-schools . 22.  
Fisher-woemen . 23.  
Scavenger's and Goldefinders . 24.  
OF the Country . 1.  
Hospitality . 2.  
Enclosures . 3.  
Tenants by Lease . 4.  
Tenants at william 5.  
Country School masters 6.  
Country Ushers . 7.  
Country Chaplains . 8.  
Alehouses . 9  
Apparators . 10.  
Constables . 11.  
〈◊〉 or weekly News . 12.  
London and the Country Carbonadoed and Quartered into several Characters . 

SHE is grown so Great , I am almost afraid to meddle with Her ; she 's certainly ● great World , there are so many little worlds in Her : She is the great Beehive of Christendom , I am sure of England : She swarms four times in a year , with people of all Ages , Natures , Sexes , Callings : Decay of Trade , the Pestiletice , and a long Vacation , are threescar-crowes to her ; She seems to be a Glutton , for she desire's always to be Full : She may pray for the Establishing of Churches , for at the first view , they are Her chiefest Grace : she seems contrary to all other things , for the older she is , the newer and more beautiful . Her Citizens should love one another , for they are joined together ; only this seems to make them differ ; they live one above another : most commonly he that is accounted richest lives worst . I am sure I may call her a gally-mophrey of all Sciences , Arts , & Trades : She may be said to be always with child , for she ●owes greater every day than other ; she is a Mother well stored with daughters , ●t none equal to Her for greatness , Beauty , wealth : she is somewhat politic , ●r she enlarges her bounds ●ceedingly , in giving way 〈◊〉 make Cities of Common ●ardenss ; and it 's thought ●r greatness doth dimi●sh her Beauty . Certaine● she is no Puritan , for ●er buildings are now Conformitant ; nor she 〈◊〉 no Separatist , for they ●re united together : she ●ath a very great desire 't is ●ought to be good , for she is always mending : she may be called a great Book fair Printed , Cum Privilegio Regis : She is the Countryman's Labyrinth , he can find many things in it , but many times loses himself ; he thinks Her to be bigger than Heaven , for there are but 12.  Celestial signs there , and he knows them all very well , but here are thousands that he wonders at : well , she is a glory to her Prince , a common gain to her Inhabitants , a wonder to Strangers , an Head to the Kingdom , the nursery of Sciences , and ● wish her to be as Good 〈◊〉 Great . 

2.  The Tower.  

Four things make it to be remarkable . Ma● , Antiquity , Situation , Strength , an head fitting so great a body , a Royal residence hath graced it : it stands principally , now for Defence , Offence , and punishment of Offenders . Anger it , and you shall hear it thunder farther than you can see it . Time seems to be a little angry with her , for she strive to ruin her beauty , ●ere it not supported by 〈◊〉 hand of Majesty . Gold ●nd Silver the 〈◊〉 of our Land receive their a● lowed forms from hencel A Coronation day is brau● lie exemplified here . It i● faithful , for what is put i● here is surely safe : they tha● are within need not muc● fear , for they are sure t● be kept well , I cannot say● they shall presently be● forth coming . The me● that keep it are no slug● guards , but are very ready for they Watch and War● continually . I wish it may be my prospective for pleasure , but not my abode by compulsion , I had rather be an honest poor man without it , than otherwise never so Great , and 〈◊〉 in it : I think it to be 〈◊〉 Changeling , for she still ●epes the old fashion , It ●ay be said to be the School of Moral Philosophy , for it civilizes Lions and other Wild beasts : the Officers ought to be faithful Stewards , for they are much trusted , they had ●eed be wise , for they do ●ot only keep themselves but others too . Those that are in it are reserved , still , and well stayed men : those that keep it , are well paid , for it keeps them : Those that come to see it , rather admire at every thing 〈◊〉 ●eight any object . It is th●●ublick Megazine for warlike provision , it doth seem terrible to those that do offend her Prince , for her own part she hath taken Allegiance , and withal Loyalty intends to keep it . This Land hath afforded this place many brethren , strong fortified Castles ; but through rebellion , through times malice , and the frowns of Princes , they cannot be known almost but by their ruins , this kept her obedience to her Rulers , and so escaped as yet destruction . To conclude she is the glory & strength both of City and Kingdom . 

3.  Of S. Paul's Church . 

O Domus Antiquae , a fit object for pity , for Charity ; further Reported of then known , it is a complete Body , for it hath the ●hree dimensions of Longitude , Latitude , and Profundity , and as an excellent O●er-plus famous for height . It was a main point of Wisdom to ground Her ●ppon Faith , for She is the more likely to stand ●ure : the great Cross in the middle , certainly hath been , and is yet ominous to this Church's Reparation . S. Paul called the Church , the pillar of Truth , and surely had they not been sound , they had fallen before thi● time . The Head of this Church hath been twice troubled with aburning Fever , and so the City to keep it from a third danger , let it stand without an head . I can but admire the Charity of former times , to Build such famous temples , when as these Ages cannot find Repair to them , but then the World was all Church , and now the Church is all World : then Charity went before , and exceeded Preaching ; now there is much Preaching , nay more the● ever , yet less Charity ; o● forefather's advanced the Church , and kept their Land : These times lose their Lands , and yet decay the Churches : I honour Antiquity so much the more , because it so much loved the Church . There is more Reason to suspect the precise Puritan devoid of Charity , than the simple Ignorant fraught withgood Works . I think truly in this one point , the ends of their Actions were for good , and what they aimed at was God's glory , & their own happiness . They builded Temples , but our degenerating Age can say ▪ Come , let us take them into our hands and possess them : amongst many others , this cannot be said to be the Rarest , though the greatest . Puritans are blown out of the Church with the loud voice of the Organs , their zealous Spirits cannot endure the Music , nor the multitude of the Surplices ; because they are Relics , ( they say , ) of Rome's Superstition . Here is that famous place for Ser mons , not by this Sect frequented , because of the Title , the Crosse. The middle I 'll is much frequented at noon with a Company of Hungarians , not walking so much for Recreation , a● need ; ( and if any of these meet with a younker , that hath his pockets well lined with silver , they will relate to him the meaning of Tycho Brach , or the Northstar : and never leave flattering him in his own words and stick as close to him , as a Burr upon a Travellers cloak ; and never leave him till he and they have saluted the green Dragon , or the Swan behind the shambles , where I leave them . ) Well , there is some hope of Restoring this Church to its former glory ; the great sums of money bequeathed , are some probabilitles , & the charity of some good men already , in clothing and Repairing the inside , is a great encouragement ; and there is a speech that the Houses that are about it , must be pulled down , for Paul's Church is old enough to stand alone . Here are prayers often , but sinister suspicion doubts more formal than zealous ; they should not be worldly , because all Churchmen ; there are none dumb , for they can speak loud enough . I leave it and them , wishing all might be amended . 

4.  The Bridge . 

IT is almost Arts wonder , for strength , length , beauty , wideness , height : It may be said to be Polypus , because it is so well furnished with legs : Every Mouth is four times filled in eight and forty hours , and then as a Child it is still , but as soon as they be empty , like a Lion it roars , and is wondrous Impatient : It is made of Iron , Wood , and Stone , and therefore it is a wondrous hardy Fellow . It hath changed the form , but as few do now a days , from worse to better : certainly it is full of Patience , because it bears so much , and continually : it 's no Prison , for any one goes through it : It is something addicted to pride , for many a Great man goes under it ; and yet it seems something humble too , for the poorest Peasant tread upon it : It hath more Wonders than Arches , the houses here built are wondrous strong , yet they neither stand on Land or Water : It is some prejudice to the Waterman's gains ; many go over here , which otherwise should row or sail : It helps many a Penniless Purse to pass the water without danger or charges : nothing affrights it more , than Springtides or violent inundations : It is chargeable to keep , for it must be continually Repaired : it is the only chief crosser of the water , his Arches outface the water , and like judges in the Parliament are placed upon wool sacks : one that lives here need not buy strong Water , for here is enough for nothing : it seems to hinder the Water-bearers profit , for the Inhabitants easily supply their Wants by Buckets : He is a settled fellow , and a main upholder of houses ; he is meanly placed , for there are divers above him , and many under him , & his houses may well be called None-such , for there is none like them , and to conclude , he partakes of two Elements , his nether parts are all for Water , his upper for Land ; in a word , it is without Compare , being a dainty street , and a strong and most stately Bridge . 

5.  Thames . 

This is a long , broad , slippery Fellow ; Rest he affects not , for he is always in motion : he seems something like a Carrier , for he is still either going or coming , and once in six or eight hours , salutes the Sea his Mother , and then brings Tidings from her : He follows the disposition of the Wind , if that be Rough , so is the Water ; if that calm , so is this : and he loves it , because when the Wind is at highest , than the Water will best show her strength and anger : it is altogether unsteedy , for it commonly is sliding away . Man's unconstant state , and Uncertain frail condition , is truly Resembled by this , always either ebbing or flowing , being in a trice high and low : he will not be a Martyr , for he will turn , but never burn : Resolution is absolutely his Guide and Counsellor , for he will run his course ; he cannot be said to be a Welford or Spring without Water , for he is puteus in exhaustus . Merchandise he likes and loves ; and therefore sends forth Ships of Traffic to most parts of the Earth : his Subjects and Inhabitants line by oppresion like hard Landlords at Land , the greater rule & many times devour the less : the City is wondrously beholden to it , for she is furnished with almost all necessaries by it : He is wondrously crossed , he is the maintainer of a great company of Watermens ; he is a great 〈◊〉 , for he works as much in the night as the day . He is led by an unconstant Guide , the Moon : he is clean contrary to Smithfield , because that is all for Flesh , but this for Fish ; his inhabitants are different from those upon Land , for they are most without legs : Fishermen seem to off●r him much wrong , for th●y rob him of many of his Subjects ; he is seldom without company , but in the night , o●●ough weather : H● meets the Sun but follows the Moon : ●e seems to complain a● the Bridge , because it hath intruded into his bowels , and that makes him Roar at that place : to speak truth of him , he is the privileged place , for Fish and Ships ▪ the glory and wealth of the City , the high way to the Sea , the bringer in of wealth and Strangers , and his business is all for water , yet he deals much with the Land too : he is a little Sea , and a great River . 

6.  Exchanges Old and Neu● 

The one of these came from Antwerp , the other from a Stable ; the one was Dutch , yet made Denison ; the other was not lo at the beginning , but did Exchange his name and nature . The Merchants are men generally of good habit , their words are usually better than their Consciences ; their Discourse ordinarily begins in Water , but ends in Wine : the frequenting of the Walks twice a day , and a careless laughter , argues that they are sound : if they visit not once a day , 't is suspected they are cracking , or broken : their Countenance is ordinarily shaped by their success at Sea , either merry , sad , or desperate : they are like ships at sea , top and top gallant this day , to morrow sinking : the ●ea is a Tennis-court , their State● are Balls , the Wind is the Racket , and doth strike many for lost under Line , and many in the hazard : They may seem to be acquainted with Athens , for they all desire News : Some of them do keep two brittle Vessels , their Ships and their Wives : the latter is less ballast , and that makes them so light : the Merchants Respect the former most , for if that sink or be overthrown , they fall , but the fall of the latter , is oftentimes the advancing of their heads : Conscience is sold here for naught ; because it is as old Sermons , a dead Commodity : they will dissemble with , and cozen one another , though all the Kings that ever were ●nce the Conquest , overlooked them . Here are usually more Coaches attendant , then at Church-doores : The Merchants should keep their Wives from visiting the upper Rooms too often , lest they tyre their purses by attyring themselves . Rough Seas , Rocks , and Pirates , treacherous Factors , and leaking ships affright them : they are strange politicians , for they bring Turkey and Spain into London , & carry London thither . Ladies surely love them , for they have that which is good for them , far feucht , & dear● bought : they may proou● stable men , but they must first leave the Exchange . It is a great House full of goods ; though it be almost in the middle of the City , yet it Stands by the Sea. there 's many Gentlewomen come hither , that to help their faces and Complexions , breaks their husband's backs , who play foul in the Country with their Land , to be fair ; and play false in the City : the place to conclude , is thought to be a great Formalist , and an hazardable Temporizer , and is like a beautiful Woman , absolutely good , if not too common . 

7.  Cheapside . 

't is thought the Way through this street is not good , because so broad , and so many go in it ; yet though it be broad , it 's very straight , because without any turnings : it is suspected here are not many sufficient able men , because they would sell all : and but little honesty , for they show all , and some think , more some time than their own : they are very affable , for they 'll speak to most that pass by : they care not how few be● in the streets , so their shop● be full : they that bring them money , seem to bused worst , for they are sure to pay sound : their Books of accounts are not like to their estates ; for the latter are best without , but the other with long crosses ▪ there are a great company of honest men in this place , if all be gold that glisters : their parcell-gilt plate is thought to Resemble them selves , most of them have better faces , than hearts ; their monies and coins are used as prisoners at Sea , kept under hatches . One would think them to be good men , for they deal with the purest and best metals , & every one strives to work best , and stout too , for they get much by knocking , & especially by leaning on their Elbows . Puritans do hold it for a fine street , but something addicted to Popery , for adorning the Cross too much . The inhabitants seem not ●o affect the Standard ; the Kings and Queens would be offended with , and punish them , knew they how these batter their faces on their coins . Some of their Wives would be ill prisoner's , for they cannot in●re to be shut up ; and as bad Nuns , the life is so solitary : there are many virtuous and honest Women , some truly so , others are so for want of opportunity ▪ they hold that a harsh place of Scripture , That women must be no goers or gadders abroad in going to a lecture many use to visit a Tavern : the young attendant must want his eyes , and change his tongue , according as hi● mistress shall direct , though many times they do mistake the place , yet they will remember the time an hour and half , to avoid suspicion . Some of the men are cunning Launderers of plat● and get much by washing that plate they handle , and it hath come from some of them , like a man from the Brokers that hath cashiered his cloak , a great deal the lighter . Well , if all the men be Rich and true , and the women all fair and honest , then Cheapside shall stand by Charingcross for a wonder , and I will make no more Characters . But I proceed . 

8.  Inns of Court , and Chancery . 

These were builded for Profit , Grace , Pleasure , justice : the buildings grace City , the Men grace the Buildings , justice & Learning grace the Men : These places furnish our Land with Law : Here Nobility , Learning , Law , Gentrey , have their Residence ; here are Students and Professors ; here are Students that will not be Professors ▪ here are Professors & Students : here are Professors yet not Students ; & here be some that are neither Students nor Professors : Many hold , that for an excellent Custom , in the Temple , immunity , from danger of Sergeants or such like proling Vermin . Some live here for profit , others for Grace , some for pleasure , some for all , yet most for profit and pleasure : They that mean to live by Law , desire not so much the Theory as the Practice part : though many here follows the Law , yet all keep it not , but some transgress : They are the Seminaries of judge meant and justice ; he that is most expert in the Law , is the most fitting for public employment , and the Magistracy ; these cause Caesar to have his due , and give the Subject his Right : that Land is likely to flourish where Religion and justice are honoured and practised : take away justice , and Religion will halt ; remove Religion , and justice will degenerate into tyranny ; let Moses and Aaron Rule , and our Israel will prospero : these places Moralise , Civilize the younger , advance the Learned : their Founders intended the stablishing of Peace , and confirming of Religion : many things that begin with blows , & would end in blood , are by these Professors mediated , and Christian agreement made ▪ their number , Unity , great employment , makes the● admired , to conclude , the● are Rich Megazines for Law , storehouses for policy , Bulwarks of Equity , let them ever flourish , as long as they are Deo , Regi , Patria ; for God , their King and Country . 

9  Smithfield . 

You may have a fair prospect of this square Fellow , as you pass from the straits of Pie Corner ; this place is well stored with good harbours for Passengers to put into for flesh & drink , and fish it is admirable ; but fish harbour appears now but two days in seven above water : here thrice in a week one may see more beasts than men . Butchers that have money make this their Haven , or Rendezvouz : Men that are downe-fled , and better fed then taught , may see many like themselves , boght here for the slaughter : Butchers surely cannot endure Cuckolds , because they kill so many horned beasts . Some I suppose , may be said to buy themselves , such as traffic for Calves : though the place besquare , yet here is much cheating in it : here Land-pirates use to sell that which is none of their own : here comes many Horses , ( like Frenchmen ) rotten in the joints , which by tricks are made to leap , though they can scarce go ; he that lights upon a Horse in this place , from an old Horse-courser , sound both in wind and limb , may light of an honest Wife in the Stews : here 's many an old ja●e , that trots hard for 't , that uses his legs sore against his will , for he had rather have a Stable than a Market , or a Race : I am persuaded that this place was paved without the consent of the Horse-courses company : this place affords those leather blacke-coates , which run so fast upon Wheels , they shake many a young Heir out of his stock and means : the men that live here , may be said to be well fed , for here 's meat enough ; this place 〈◊〉 what Rich Country England is ▪ and how well it breeds Beasts , a man that considers their number and greatness and how soon Consumed ▪ may think there are a World of mouths , or else that Englishmen are great eaters . Well , I will speak this of Smithfield , it is the greatest , fairest , richest , squarest market place of this great City or Kingdom . 

10.  Bridewell . 

Here comes many that have been at many a Dance , but never affected the Bridewell ; here 's a Palace strangely Metamorphosed into a prison : in the outward Court were Carts not for the Husbandman , but for those that have used the unlawful game of Venery ; it seems to be contrary to nature , to make those draw which were made to bear , a strange invention to have such a new punishment , for such an old sin . Me thinks the house complains , O quam a dispari Domino : It may be said of it , that it hath been Eminent , Great , and Majestical , so much may be said of it yet , that the Court is where it was : It should maintain Virtue , for it punishes vice , they are severe Governors , for they are most upon correction : when men have here done their work , they are sure of their wages , a whip : they are temperate here , for they eat not over much ; for their drink , if all were to follow their course , it would make Male cheap , for its water . It may be said of this , as of the Palatinate , would it was restored In statu qu● prius : some say there are many idle persons in it ; strange ! yet work so hard : It ' is thought there 's scarce a true fellow in it , for they all lie hard : there 's none can say he works for nothing , for they are all s●e of payment . it 's the only Remembrancer of Egypt's slavery , they have task●maisterss to hold them to their work : their whippemaister is like a Country Pedagouge , they many times whip better , than himself , and both take a pride in their office , they inflict that upon others , which they deserve themselves : they that come out of it need not fear Purgatory , for its thought to be a place of more ease . This is a two fold comfort unto them , that they may once come out , and then they can scarce light of an harder master , or a worse service : they may be Papists , for they fast often , have their bodies afflicted , are shut up from the World , seem wondrous penitent , only they pray not so often . I leave the place , wishing they may come out , amend , and never more come into it . 

11.  Ludgate and Counters . 

I 'll join all these together , because their natures are not much diferent , some of the Officers make the places worse than they would be , if a man cannot by monies or good security pay his debts , yet he may l●e for them here ▪ the Prisoners are like Apprentices , desire heartily to be Freemen : Certainly , they have been men of great credit , for they have been much trusted : they hate three persons , an extreme Creditor , a cunning Lawyer , and a biting Sergeant : these three are all fishers of men , the Creditor owns the Net , the Lawyer places and spreads it , the Sergeant ●als and draws it to a purse : the Sergeant seems to be most of trust , for he hath the Whole business put into his hands , and if he can , concludes it : the Lawyer next to him , for he is trusted with the Bonds : the Creditor himself is of least note , for he will not be seen in his own business : yet the Creditor is Lord of the Game , the Lawyer is his Hunsman , the Sergeant his blood Hound , the Yeoman his Beagle , and the Debtor is the wild Hare ; if he be taken , most commonly he is tamed in one of these M●seses : a Sergeant is worst when most employed , & a Lawyer when most trusted , the Credit ditor when without pity , and the Debtor when prodigality and ill courses have procured this Cage . The Attorney and Sergeant may be termed Hangmen , they procure and serve so many Executions : These places are fullest when men break their bonds , & make forfeitures ; they may be called Dens , the Sergeant Lions , and the Debtor the Prey . It is a● ancient Gate , yet not affected by Citizens , though a closet for safety . For the Counters , they teach wander Nitingals the way unto their Nests , and learn them to sing the Counter-tenor : the Counters seem very courteous , for they will open almost at any hour in the night , they would not have men lie in the streets : well , they are places that are too full , the more pity that men either have not better Estates , Consciences , or manners , to pay their Debts , & li●e uprightly and orderly . 

12.  Newgate . 

IT may well answer to the name , and thank the City for her care and charges : It is now well faced and heanded , Charity helps much to a decayed Estate : but that Saint Paul's is a Church , and so to bear no anger or grudge , it would envy the prosperity of the Gates , and be angry with the Citizens for not thinking upon her old age and poverty . Newgate is generally a place of safety , and few comes hither , but by merit : the captives are men that once would not , now must live within compass , they should be men of worth , for the Keeper will not , dare not loose one of them . When they are forsaken every where , than this place takes them in , for fear their heels should be as quick as their Hands have been : He lays them in irons , that he may be the surer of them : they are , or may be supposed to be sound men , for they seldom break out : as long as they stay here , they cannot be said to be unstayd fellows or Vagrants , for they are sure of a place of stay : they are quicksighted , for they can see through iron grates : some of them seem to be Eminent men , for they are highly advanced ; they are like Fish , have a long time nibbled away the bait , but are now caught : Certainly they are no Libertines , and are convicted of Free will : they are uncharitable , for they seldom love their Keeper ; they have the power of life and death in their own hands , and put many to be pressed to death . By seeking others goods they procured their own hurt . They lived without any thought of judgement , now it is the only thing they feat : They hold a Triangle to be a dangerous Figure . Of all places they hold Holborne-hill an unfortunate place to ride up . It seems they go that way unwillingly , for they are drawn : They cannot miss their way to their journeys end , they are so guarded and guided . Lice seem to be their most constant Companions , for they 'll hang with them for company : It seems these men were not made for Examples , for at their Confession they wish all men not to follow their courses : and most are easily persuaded , for there 's very few dare do as they have done . Well , I pass from them , thus much you may be sure of , once a Month you may hear , know , and see if you please ; whether they live , or die 

13.  Turnebull-streete . 

IT is in an ill name , and therefore halfe-hanged : here may be some Probability of Honesty , little or no demonstration , especially a Priory . here are Lasses that seem to hate Enclosures , for they would lay all open , they may seem good Subjects , for they love standing or lying for the Common : They hold it was a good Age , when Women practised Astronomy . They seem to be Puritans , for they love private Conventicles : They are not altogether vnpractifed in the Law , for they know and love Feelings : The Aspect here is the Conjunction , and they hold a noun Substantive , a Preposition , an Interjection & Conjunction the best parts of speech . They have learned thus far in their Ac●idenceses , that femin● ludificantur viros . They seem to be no whit addicted to pride , for they desire to be below : they love not Lent , because they delight more in flesh : they seem to be wellwishers to Lawyers , and to the City , for they love Term-times , and pray against the decay of trading . Their chiefest desire is to be well manned , they keep open houses : It is hazardable to trust them because they are much addicted to Lying : They affect a Cannoneire well , because he will force a breach , and enter the passage . They jove not to wrestle , they had rather take a fall , then give one . When this Street was builded , surely Mars and Venus were in a Conjunction . Here are very few men , but they are well armed : Nay the Women have received press-money , & have performed the Service : women though the colder vessels by Nature , yet these are the hotter by Art : they may be thought to be great Scholars , for they partake of all the liberal Sciences , for Grammar they know the Syntax●s , and the Figure called Apollo P. For Logics they have skill in the Antepraedicaments & the Fallacies ; for Music they a● not affected with Vnisons ▪ but are skilful in Chroches and quavers , & love Ela● because the highest Note and makes them squeak for Rhetoric , they kno● the Metonomia adiuncti , and Apostrophe ; for Arethmeticke , the love addition , and division ; for Astronomy , they know the motion of Venus , and are observers of Mars ; for their skill in Geography , they know the Tropickes and the Torrid Zone , and ●o being thus experienced in these Sciences , they are much frequented and sought too . I wish all in this Street to take heed of their Cellars , lest they fire first , and to lay their Trading down , or else it will lay them down . 

14.  Hounsditch and Long-lane . 

These two are twins , they have both set up one Profession ; they will buy a man's Suit out of his hands , but it shall be hanged or pressed for 't . A man that comes here as a stranger would think that there had been some great death of men and women , here about's he sees so many suits & no men for them . Here are Suits enough for all the Lawyers in London to deal withal : the Inhabitants are men of many outsides , their faults are not seen easily , because they have so many cloaks for them : they should be well affected to the Roman Church , for they keep , & lay up old Relics : They are beholden to the Hangman , for he furnishes their Shops : And most of their Creditors wish that they may furnish his three cornered shop , which often comes to p●sse ; and as many say , the oftener the better : broke Curs they are in two respects , most of them were broke before they set up , & Curs for biting so sore ever since they set up : his shop is a Hell , he the Devil in 't , & torments poor souls : the jailer & Broker are Birds of a feather , the one Imprisons the Body , the other the Clotheses , both make men pay dear for their lodging : The Broker seems somewhat the kinder , for he lays the clotheses in Lavender : he is much of a Serving man's nature , lives much upon the Reversion of cast clothes : the Servingman hath them the cheaper , but the other keeps them the better , they many times do make a bargain : He loves those birds best , that oftenest cast their Feathers : to conclude , he is no Tradesman , if the whole bunch of them be weighed , you shall not scarce find a dram of honesty , for a pound of craft . 

15.  Charterhouse . 

This place is well described by three things , Magnificence , Munificence , and Religious government : Magnificence is the ●erminus a quo , good Orders the Terminus mediari , Munificence and Charity the Terminus ad quem : the first shows the wealth of both Founder and Establisher : the second shows the ●eaness to make the good thing done , durable : the third demonstrates his in●ent that thus Established it : had it been great without good government , it had long ere this time come to ruin : or had it been great & yet devoid of Charity , it would have been laughed at & derided ; but now Charity shows it is well governed , and the good Government keeps it firm , and make● it famous : Soldiers and Scholars , I think , begin their love here , that they continue hereafter firm & solid , by living together ▪ callings both honourable , & here bountifully maintained : It is a Relief for decayed Gentlemen , old Soldiers , and ancient Servingmen : 't is to be pitied , that such Religious , Charitable houses , increase not in number : this one place hath sent many a famous member to the Universities , and not a few to the Wars : I will not censure as some do , that many places are here sold for monies , nay the reversions also : I 'll rather ex●ort the Governors to discharge a good conscience , ( and not to suffer their men , or any other whom they affect , to get thirty or forty pounds for the promise of the next vacant place for a youth to come in , ) and to observe their first Institutions ; and those that so suppose , I wish them that they speak not that with their mouths , which they know not in their hearts . The deed of this man that so ordered this House , is much spoken of , and commended : but there 's none ( except only one ) that as yet , hath either striven to equal or imitate that , and I fear never will : there 's many that will not do any such good Works , and give out that they smell something of Popery , and therefore not to be imitated : well , I durst warrant thus much , let the Overseers live Religiously , govern Civility , avoid Bribery , keep their Cannons directly , and this House shall stand to upbraid this Iron Age , and see many brought to beggary for prodigality , when they shall be satisfied , and have enough : Well , this is my opinion of it , that the Founder is happy , and so are all his Children that live here ; if they degenerate not , and ●rne from fearing God , obeying their Prince , and from living in love amongst themselves . 

16.  Christs-hospitall . 

The former place and this are much of one nature , yet some difference there is ; Charterhouse is the younger for time , but exceeds for revenues : It was erected by one , this by many Citizens . Christs-hospitall is principally for children's education , that are fatherless and motherless , the other for Mens and children's too . The former is for any , as well as Citizens , the latter not , that only , it is for Children ; seems to be conformable to Christ's will , Suffer little Children to come unto me : None that are in this place can be said to be without portions , for they have Education : the City's Charity is the less , for she Relicues but her own . it 's a good means to empty their streets of young beggars , and fatherless Children : She doth no more than the Laws of the Land seem to enjoin , to keep those that were born within her : it 's a good policy to p● them young to this place , because they may learn Virtue before Vice : And ordinarily , if youth be well seasoned , it is the more hopeful to be good in age . The City doth deserve very great commendation for this action , because it 's rare to see so great a Company join together , for the good of the poor , and last out . You may easily know the Children that belong unto this place , by their Azure liveries , and their Sable head-pieces : This House may be termed the children's Commonwealth , and to speak truth , it 's well governed by good Laws , I wish the City not to be proud for her Charity , nor to be weary of well doing ; and the Hospital to remember their Benefactors , and the Children to live and learn well , for fear of Correction . 

17.  Paris-garden . 

This may better be termed a foul Den than a fair Garden . it 's pity so good a piece of ground is no better employed : here are cruel Beasts in it , and as badly used ; here are foul beasts come to it , and as bad or worse keep it , they are fitter for a Wilderness then a City : idle base persons ( most commonly ) that want employment , or else will not be otherwise employed , frequent this place ; and that money which was got basely here , to maintain as bad as themselves , or spent lewdly ; here come few that either regard their credit , or loss of time : the swaggering Roarer , the cunning Cheater , the rotten Bawd , the swearing Drunkard , and the bloody Butcher have their Rendezvouz here , and are of chief place and respect . There are as many civil religious men here , as they 're Saints in Hell. Here these are made to fight by Art , which would agree by Nature : They thrive most when the poor beasts fight oftenest : their employment is all upon quarrels as unlawful , as unseemly , they cause the Beasts first to fight , and then they put in first to part them : it 's pity such beastly Fellows should be so well maintained , they torment poor creatures , & make a gains and game of it . The Beasts come forth with as ill a will , as Bears to the stake . A Bearward and an Attorney are not much unlike , the Attorney seems the more cruel , for these bait but Beasts ; but these men , their Clients : The Bearward strives to recover the hurts of his Beasts , but the Attorney regards not the damages of any , and they both follow the Trade for profit . Well , I leave the place , and when I intent to spend an hour , or two , to see an Ass and an Ape , to loss and charges , I may perhaps come hither : But as long as I can have any employment elsewhere , I will not come to see such a great Company so ill occupied , in so bad a place . 

18.  Artillery . 

This place is the City's Camp , and Mars his School : Here are four brave Flowers in this Garden , Manhood , Courage , Activity , Arms . The use and expert skill of War may be seen here in peace : Decency , Nimbleness , Skill , Uniform order , and Experience , the five qualifications gracing Military Discipline , are usually here to be viewed . In their exercising how many little bodies may you see , that by their proportionable motion make a great body ? and that suddenly alterede into any Form : Here are brave Martial Blades , that at three words , and three motions will give fire : here are more arms than heads or feet : Yet when one moves , like Wheels in a jack they all move . They are men that must not encroach into one another's ground , but as they are come manders , so they must keep distance ; & they seem not affect Confusions , for they all strive to keep order : ●is no marvel why Soldiers desire so to fight , for they are always in Divisions . You may know by their Marching where ever either the best Gentleman , or the ancienest Soldier is placed , for he is ever in the Right before , or Left behind : They are strange men ; for in ten yard's space of ground they can all turn their faces about : there 's thought to be no steadiness in them , for like Fortune's wheel , they many times suddenly alter & turn : they are generally men of good Order and Ranke , they then are at compleatest view , when their length and breadth agree , ten every way . They are most disliked , when they are either out , or off their Files . They use to put their worst Pieces in the midst . They seem to be suddenly angry , for one word moves them all . Obedience and Silence they must practise , to do as they are commanded , and to hearken unto their charge . A good Soldier must be like a true Maid , seen but not heard : he 's more for actions than words . The City did well to provide Mars a Garden , as well as Venus an House . no question , but when these meet , they will be at push of Pike , and often discharge . Before I leave this honourable place , I may speak this of it : that 's excellent the oftener used , the best when 't is fullest , and most Eminent Wisdom , Courage , Experience , Policy , be the four Colonels ; and the four Regiments consist of Patience , Obedience , Valour , and Constancy ; and their Colours Deo , Regi , Gregi , Legi , for God , their King , Law , and Country , flourishing all in the field of Honour and Victory . 

19  Bedlam . 

Here live many , that are called men , but seldom at home , for they are gone out of themselves : Nature hath been a Steppemother to some , and misery and crosses have caused this strange change in others : they seem to live here , either to rectify Nature , or forget Miseries : they are put to Learn that Lesson which many , nay all that will be happy , must learn to know , and be acquainted with themselves : this House would be too little , if all that are beside themselves should be put in here : it seems strange that any one should recover here , the cry , screeching , roar , brawling , shaking of chains , swear , fretting , chaffing , are so many , so hideous , so great , that they are more able to drive a man that hath his wits , rather out of them , then to help one that never had them , or hath lost them , to find them again . A Drunkard is mad for the present , but a Mad man is drunk always . You shall scarce find a place that hath so many men & women so strangely altered either from what they once were , or should have been : The men are all like a Ship that either wants a Stern , or a Steersman , or Ballast ; they are all Heteroclites from Nature , either having too much Wildness , or being defective in judgement . Here Art strives to mend or cure Nature's imperfections and defects . Certainly , he that keeps the House may be said to live among wild Creatures : it 's thought many are kept here , not so much in hope of recovery , as to keep them from further and more desperate Inconveniences . Their Faculties and Powers of their Souls and Bodies being by an ill cause vitiated and depraved , or defective . The men may be said to be fair Instruments of Music , but either they want strings , or else though being strung are out of tune , or otherwise want an expert Artist to order them : Many live here that know not where they are , or how they got in , never think of getting out : there 's many that are so well or ill in their wits , that they can say they have been out of them , & gain much by dissembling in this kind : desperate 〈◊〉 that dare make a mock of judgement : well , if the Devil was not so strong to delude , & men so easily to be drawn , this house would stand empty , and for my part , I am sorry it hath any in it . 

20.  Playhouses . 

Time , Place , Subject , Actors , and clothes , either make or mar a play : the Prologue and Epilogue are like to an Host and Hostess , one bidding their Guests welcome , the other bidding them farewell : the Actors are like Servingmen , that bring in the Scenes and Acts as their Meat , which are liked or disliked , according to every man's judgement , the neatest dressed , and fairest delivered , doth please most . They are as crafty with an old play , as Bawds with old faces ; the one puts one a new fresh colour , the other a new face and Name : they practise a strange Order , for most commonly the wisest man is the Fool : They are much beholden to Scholars that are out of means , for they sell them beware the cheapest : they have no great reason to love Puritan , for they hold their Calling unlawful . New Plays and new clothes , many times help bad actions : they pray the Company that 's in , to hear them patiently , yet they would not suffer them to come in without payment : they say as Scholars now use to say , there are so many , that one Fox could find in his heart to eat his fellow : A player often changes , now he acts a Monarch , tomorrow a Beggar : now a Soldier , next a Tailor : their speech is loud , but never extempore , he seldom speaks his own mind , or in his own name : when men are here , and when at Church , they are of contrary minds , there they think the time too long , but here too short : most commonly when the play is done , you shall have a lig or dance of all trads , they mean to put their legs to it , as well as their tongs : they make men wonder when they have done , for they all clap their hands . Sometimes they fly into the Country ; but 't is a suspicion , that they are either poor , or want clotheses , or else Company , or a new Play : Or do as some wand'ring Sermonists , make one Sermon travail and serve twenty Churches . All their care is to be like Apes , to imitate and express other men's actions in their own persons : they love not the company of Geese or Serpents , because of their hissing : they are many times lousy , it 's strange , and yet shifted so often : As an Alehouse in the Country is beholden to a wild Schoolmaster , so an whore-house to some of these , for they both spend all they get . Well , I like them well , if when they Act vice they will leave it , and when virtue , they will follow . I speak no more of them , but when I please , I will come and see them . 

21.  Fencing-schooles . 

here 's many a man comes hither , which had rather work then play , though very few can hit these men , yet any one may know where to have them , upon his guard : his Scholars seem to be strangely taught , for they do nothing but play ; his care seems to be good , for he learns men to keep their bodies in safety . Usually they that set up this Science have been some Low-countries Soldier , who to keep himself honest from further inconveniences , as also to maintain himself , thought up on this course , and practise it : the worst part of his Science is , he learns men to falsify : he is glad to see any Novice that reads his Orders with his hat on , for than he hope's for a forfeiture ; there are many blows given and taken , yet little or no blood spilt , the more he beats , the better man he is held to be , he will make many dance about his School , as a Bear about a stake . A little touch upon your elbow , is commonly his first acquaintance and salutation : he hath his Discourse ordinarily of single Combats , and then will show you his Wounds , and cause you to hear his oaths which are his familiar Rhetoric : He is for the most part a potter and piper and if he be well in age or not , you may know by the sanguine complexion of his nose , and the number of pearls that are usually about it , accompanied with Rubies and Saphires , show that he is some jeweller . His School is an introduction to blows , and he makes many man's head to ●ee the pillow of his Cudgel : one must not trust to his looks , for he looks at one place , and strikes at another : you must be sure to keep him off , for he is most dangerous when nearest to you : he seldom strikes down right , but either back● - wards or forward : He that loves fight in earnest , let him go to the Wars ; he that loves to fight in jest , let him come hither . 

22.  Dancing-schools . 

They seem to be places Consecrated , for they that use to practise here , put off their shoes , & dance single-soled ; they are not exceeding men , for they teach and delight in Measures : they seem to be men of spare diet , for they live upon Capers : their trade is not chargeable to begin withal , for one treble viol sets it up : they should be good players at Cards , for for they teach men to Cut and shuffle well : their scholar's arms are like pinioned Prisoners , not to reach too or above their heads : their heels seem to hinder their preferment , & that makes them to rise upon their roes : whatsoever their actions be , they must carry their bodies upright : The Scholars are like Courtiers , full of Cringes : And their Master seems to be a man of great Respect , for they all salute him with hat in hand , and knees to the ground : the number of five is the dancing A , B , C , both Master and Scholars seem to love News , for they both consist much of Currantoes : their eyes must not see what their feet do , they must when they Dance , be like men that have the French disease , stiff in the Hams ; they are guided by the Music , and therefore should be merry men . What they may seem to intend , is that they hope to dance before Gentlewomen : But in the next jig you shall be sure to have them turn like Globes all round . They like a Fiddle better than a Drum , and hold Venus to be a more auspicious Planet than Mars . When they are in the Schools they are Antics , when they are out , I think you will judge as I do , they love the Feminine gender more than the Masculine : Generally , these Schools learn men to begin merrily , leave off sighing , and therefore they are players of Tragedies , not Comedies ; I think he that seldom dances , lives well ; but he that never , lives best . When I intent to show my body's strength , and my mind's weakness , I will be one of their Proficients : I had rather have my body not dance here , for fear my Soul should not like the Music : Give me that place whereall is Music , but no Dancing . 

23.  Fisher-woemen . 

These Crying , Wand'ring , and Travailing Creatures carry their shops on their heads , and their Storehouse is ordinarily . Biling gate or the Bridge-foot , and their habitation Turnagaine-lane , they set up every morning their Trade afresh . They are easily set up and furnished , get something , and spend it jovially and merrily : Five shillings a Basket , and a good cry , is a large stock for one of them . They are merriest when all their Ware is gone : in the morning they delight to have their shop full , at Even they desire to have it empty : their Shoppe's but little , some two yard's compass , yet it holds all sorts of Fish , or Herbs , or Roots , Strawberries , Apples , or Plums , Cucumbers , and such like ware : Nay , it is not destitute some times of Nuts , and Oranges , a●d Lemmons . They are fre● in all places , and pay nothing for shop-rent , but only find repairs to it . If they drink ou● their whole Stock , it 's but pawning a Petticoat in Long - 〈◊〉 or themselves in Turnebull-streete for to set up again . They change every day almost , for She that was this day for Fish , may be to morrow for Fruit ; next day for Herbs , another for Roots : so that you must hear them cry before you know what they are furnished withal , when they hau● done their Fair , they meet in mirth , singing , dancing , & in the middle as a Parenthesis , they use scolding , but they do use to take & put up words , & end not till either their money or wit , or credit be clean spent out . Well , when in an evening they are not merry in an drinking-house , it is suspected they have had bad return , or else have paid some old score , or else they are bankerupts : they are creatures soon up , & soon down . 

24.  Scavenger's and Goldfinders . 

These two keep all clean , the one the streets , the other the backesides , but they are seldom clean themselves , the one like the hang man doth his work all by day , the other like a thief , doth theirs in the night : the Gold-finders hold the sense of smelling the least of use , and do not much care for touching the business they have in hand , they both carry their burdens out into the ●ieldess , yet sometimes the Tha●es carries away their loads : they are something like the Trade of the Barbers , for both do rid away superfluous excrements The Barber's profession is held chief , because that deals with the head and face , but these with the excrements of the posteriorums . The Barber's trade & these have both very strong smells , but the Gold-finders is the greatest for strength , the others is safest & sweetest : the Barber useth washing when he hath done , to cleanse all , and so do these : the Barber useth a looking glass , that men may see how he hath done his work , and these use a candle : they are all necessary in the City : as our faces would be foul without the Barber , so our streets without the Scavenger , and our backsides with out the Gold-finder : The Scavenger seems not to be so great an Officer , as the Gold-finder , for he deals with the excrements chiefly of Beasts , but this latter of his own Species : well , had they been sweeter fellows I would have stood longer on them , but they may answer , they keep all clean , and do that work which scarce any one but themselves would meddle withal . 

The Country Carbonadoed and Quartered into Characters . 

1.  Of the Country . 

This is the Circumference of London : It is the Emblem of the City in Folio , and the City of it in Decimo sexto : the Country justifies that Verse to be true , that Anglia , Mons , Pons , Fons , Ecclesia , Faemina , Luna . It doth now of late begin to complain that the City offers her wrong in harboring her chief members of Nobility , and Gentry : her Gentry for the most part of late are grown wondrously undutiful that will scarce otherwise then upon compulsion , come and live with their mother & maintainer : She allows these more means a great deal , than she did their Grandfathers ; yet these young Storks fly from her ; the other always lived with her , and loved her : she doth much suspect their Faith & Love towards her , because she being as beautiful , as bountiful , as healthy , and as rich , as ever , should be thus fleighted of her younger sons , yet three times or four in a year , perhaps they will vouchsafe their mother their presence , but it is to be suspected , that either a public proclamation , or a violent plague , or to gather up their rackerents moovethem from the City , or else the pleasure of Hawkin or Hunting , or perhaps it is to show his new Madam some pretty London bird , the credit of his father's house , but his own discredit to let it stand for jackdaws to domineer in : well , this Country is the Map of the world , the bea● ty of Lands , and may well be called the rich Diamond gloriously Placed ●t may be emblemed by these 9 particulars , a fair great Church , a learned College , a strong rich ship , a beautiful Woman , a golden fleece , a delightful spring , a great mountain , a fair bridge , & a goodly m●n , to conclude , it is the life of the City , & the store-house of all Christendom , for peace , War , Wealth , or Religion : they that will know more , must either travail to see , or read the desription of it by Geographers . 

2.  Hospitality . 

This true noble hearted fellow is to be dignified and honoured , wheresoever he keeps house : it 's thought that pride , puritans , coache● and covetousness hath caused him to leave our Land : there are six upstart tricks come up in great Houses of late which he cannot brook Peeping windows for the Ladies to view what doings there are in the Hall , a Buttery hatch that 's kept locked , clean Tables , & a French Cook in the Kitchen , a Porter that lo●kes the gates in dinner time , the decay of Blacke-iackes in the Cellar , and blue coats in the Hall : he always kept his greatness by his Charity : he loved three things , an open Cellar , a full Hall , and a sweeting Cook : he always provided for three dinners , one for himself , another for his Servants , the third for the poor : any one may know where he kept house , other by the Chimney's smoke , by the freedom at gate , by want of whirligige jacks in the Kitchen , by the fire in the Hall , or by the full furnished tables ▪ he affects not London , Lent , Lackays , or Bailifeses , there are four sorts that pray for him , the poor , the passenger , his Tenants , and Servants : he is one that will not hou●d up all , nor lavishly spend all , he neither racks or rakes his Neighbours , they are sure of his Company at Church as well as at home , and gives his bounty as well to the Preacher , as to others whom he loves for his good life and doctrine ●hee had his wine came to him by full Butts , but this Age keeps her Wine-celler in little bottles . Lusty able men well maintained were his delight , with whom he would be familiar : his Tenants knew when they saw him , for he kept the old fashion , good , commendable , plain : the poor about him wore him upon their backs ; but now since his death , Landlords wear and waste their Tenants upon their backs in French , or Spanish fashions . Well , we can say that once such a charitable Practitioner there was , but now he 's dead , to the grief of all England : And 't is shroudly suspected that he will never rise again in our Climate . 

3.  Enclosures . 

The Landlords that enclose their Villages , are afraid that either the Townc , or the Land would run away , or rebel against them . Therefore they beleaguer it with deep Trenches and Thorn-roots for Palliz●doeses : they could not make th●ir Trenches so easily , if all wer●●ue within : But the person he is like a false Canoniere , that came by his place by Simoniacke means , and perhaps is sworn , either not to molest the enemy at all : or else if he doth give fire , either to shoot over , or short , or upon the side , never direct : or else he is poor , covetous , hope's to have some cracked chambermaid , or some by preferment , and so gives leave to the exacting Landlord to do as he pleases . In this business the Landlord he is as Lord-general , the Person is as his Horse that he rides , galls , spurs on , and curuetts with as h● pleases : turns him and rules him any way , by a golden Bit , a strong hand , and ticking Spurs . The Bailiff is his Intelligencer , which if he was either strapt , or hanged outright it was no great matter for his news . The Surveyor is his Quartermaster , which goes like a Bear with a Chain at his side , his two or three of the Parishioners , who walk with him , and help him to undo themselves . The poor of the Parish and other places are his chief Pioneres , who like mouldy Worps cast up earth ▪ the Parish he either wins by Composition , or famishes by length of time , or batters down by force of his lawless Engines : Most of the Inhabitants are miserably pillaged and undone , he loves to see the bounds of his boundless desires ; he is like the Devil , for they both compass the earth about : Enclosures make fat Beasts , & lean poor people ; there are three annoyancers of his Flock , the Scab , Thiefs , and a long Rot : Husbandmen he loves not , fot he maintains a few sheph●ards with their Curs . He holds those that plough the land cr●ell oppressors , for they wound it he thinks too much , & therefore he intends to lay it down to rest : Well , this I say of him , that when he keeps a good house constantly , surely the World will not last long : there 's many one that prays for the end of the one , and I wish it may be so . 

4.  Tenants by Lease . 

There compass ordinarily is three Prentishippes in length , one and twenty years . Once in half a year they must be sure to prepare for payment . New-year's day must not pass over without a presentation of a gift : If the Landlord be either rich , good , religious , or charitable , he feasts their bodies ere Christmas run away . If they see the Ladies or Gentlewomen , or my Lady's Parrot , Baboon , or Monkey , you may know what their talk is of with wonder when they come home again : many fill their Tenants bodies once , but empty their purses all the year long . They take it for no small grace , when the Groom , or the Vnder-cooke , or some such great Officer convey them to the Buttery to drink , they have done Knights service , if they have drunk to the uppermost Gentlewoman : And it 's a marvel if they they stand not up to perform this point of Service , or else blush a quarter of an hour after ; they ●eeme merry , for most eat simpering : They dare not dislike any meat , nor scarce venture upon a dish that hath not lost the best face or piece before it come thither , many of them Sup better at home , than they Dine here : it 's their own folly . He seems to be a Courtier complete , that hath the wit or the face to call for Beer at the Table : their Landlord fetches their Charges out of them ere half the year pass , by getting them to fetch Coal , Wood , or Stone , or other burdens to his House . The Landlord , Bayly , and other Informers are so cunning , that the Tenants shall but live to keep Life and Soul together , if through Poverty and hard Rents they forfeit not their Leases . You may know where they live ordinarily , for Leases run now with this clause usually i● them , they must not let or sell away their right to another . Well , he that hath a good Landlord , a firm Lease , and good ground , prays for his own life , and Landlords ▪ and wishes he had had a longer time in his Lease . 

5.  Tenants at william  

These are Continuers only upon their Master's pleasure ▪ their own behaviour , or ability . They are men that will take short warning a quarter of a year , they are like poor Curates in the Country that stand at the old Parson's Liber●m arbitrium . They must study how to please before they speak ; when they are discharged , they are like Soldiers cashiered , both want a place of stay or preferment , as they departed suddenly , so they are sure to pay extremely : they are not unlike courtiers , for they often change places : their Landlords love to be upon a sure ground with them , for usually they 'll have their Rents before hand , if they come not to be censured for inmates they may abide the longer , they must always bring security where they intent to stay : London is one of the freest places for their abode , without questioning them what they are , for if they pay for their lodging and other charges , they need not remove : they are like unto Servants gone upon a discharge , and they should reckon their places of abode , no heritage : If they be employed in work , and if they will stay at it , they are then most likely to hold their house the longer : they are a degree above a beggar , and one under a Tenant by Lease : many of them will not stay too long in a place , lest they should being ▪ ill , be too well known : upon their journeys many prove true Carriers , for they bear their goods , Children and some household stuff : well , they are Tenants at will , but whither good or bad , you that would know must ask their Landlord or them . I wish that yet they may come to be Snails , have an house of their own , over their heads . winter 's the worst quarter to them to shifted in . 

6.  Country Schoolmasters . 

IF they be well Gound & Bearded , they have two good Apologies ready made ; but they are beholden to the Tailor and Barber for both : if they can provide for two pottles of Wine against the next Lectu●e-day , the School being void , there are great hopes of preferment : if he gets the place , his care next must be for the demeanour of his Countenance ; he looks over his Scholars with as great and grave a countenance , ( as the Emperor over his Army : ) He will not at first be overbusy to examine his V●her , for fear he should prove as many Curates , better Scholars than the chief master . As he sits in his seat , he must with a grace turn his Moustaches up ; his Sceptre lies not far from him , the Rod : He uses Marshal law most , and the day of execution ordinarily is the Friday : at ●ixe a clock his army all begin to march ; at eleven they keep Rendezvouz , and at five or six at night , they take up their quarters : There are many set in Authority to teach youth , which never had much learning themselves ; therefore if he cannot teach them , yet his looks and correction shall affright them : But there are some who deserve the place by their worth , and wisdom , who stayed with their Mother the University , until Learning , Discretion , and judgement had ripened them , for the well managing of a School : these I love , respect , and wish that they may have good means either here , or somewhere else : These come from the Sea of Learning , well furnished with rich prizes of Knowledge , and excellent qualities , ballasted they are well with gravity and judgement , well stered by Religion & a good conscience ; and these abilities make them the only fit men to govern and instruct tender age ; he learns the Cradle to 〈◊〉 several languages & ●its them for places of public note : being thus qualified , 't is pity he should either want means or employment . 

7.  Country Ushers . 

THEY are under the Head-maister , equal with the chief Scholars , and above the lesser boys : he is likely to stay two years before he can furnish himself with a good cloak : They are like unto Lapwings run away from the University , their Nest , w●th their shells on their heads . Metriculation was an hard term for him to understand : and if he proceeded it was in Tenebris : the Chancellor's Seal and Licence for the place , is a great grace to him : At a Sermon you shall see him writing , but if the division of the Text be expressed in Latin terms , than he could not either hear , or not understand , and só oftentimes loses the division of the Text : it 's no small credit for him to sit at the nether end of the Table with the Ministers ; he seldom speaks there amongst them , unless like a novice he be first asked , and then he expresses his weakness boldly : he goes very far , if he dare stay to drink a cup of Ale when one hour is past : His discourse ordinarily is of his exploits when he went to School : he hath learned enough in the University , if he knows the Figures , and can Repeat the Logical Moods : usually he makes his Sillogismes in Baralipton , if he can make any : He holds Greek for a Heathen language , and therefore never intends to learn it : for Lative , his black clothes are sufficient proofs to the Country-fellowes , that he is well furnished : For Hebrew it would pose him hard to make a difference in writing betwixt Hebraeus and Ebrius ; in a word , he is but a great School boy with a little Beard and blackecloathes , and knows better how to whip a Scholar then learn him : if he had been fit for any thing in the University , he had not left her so soon : Yet I confess there are some that deserve better preferment than this , yet accept of it ; but its pity that Virtue and Learning are so slightly regarded , and that so rich a jewel should be no better placed . 

8.  Country Chaplains . 

They must do as Marygolds , imitate their Master , as these do the Sun : they are men of Grace before and after Dinner and Supper ; they are men that seem desirous of preferment , for they rise before their Lord and Master : their habit is neat , cleanly , if not too curious it 's well . In a well governed house , they perform prayer twice a day , to be commended for , because it shows and teaches Zeal , Godliness . Their Sermons are not long , but generally good & pithy ▪ their Lord's Respect and favour , makes the Servants to Respect and love them ; grave modesty and Learning , with an affable carriage , wins them regard and Reverence : the more private their persons be , the mo●e public their praise : Their Studies generally are their best Closets , and their Books their best Counsellors : Such as these deserve to be made o● ▪ but there are others of the same profession , yet much different in Nature , who strive to satisfy and please , even by smothering , counterfeiting , or imitating , their Master's faults , and love the strong Beer Cellar , or a Wine-taverne more than their Studies : whose ambition is to be conversant with the Gentle women , and now and then to let an oath slip with a grace ; whose acquaintance and familiarity is most with the Butler , and their care to slip to an Alehouse unseen , with the Servants . Their allowance is good if it be 20.  Mark , and their Diet . If they be Married they must be more obsequious and industrious to please , if they come ●ingle , it 's a thousand to one but they either be in Love or Married before they go away : I honour both Lord and Chaplain , when they are Godly , and Religious ; but I dislike , when either the Lord will not be told of his faults , or the Chaplain will not , or dare not : I love the life when Zeal , Learning and Gravity are the gifts of the Preacher . But I dislike it , when by respects Connivency or Ignorance with Pride keep the Chapel . If they be wise , they will keep close , till they have the Aduouson of a Living , the better they are liked of their Master , and the more store he hath of livings , they have the more hopes of a presentation . it 's a great Virtue in their Patron if he do not geld it , or lessen it before they handle it . 

9  Alehouses . 

IF these houses have a Boxe-bush , or an old Post , it is enough to show their Profeshion . But if they be graced with a Sign complete , it 's a sign of good custom : In these houses you shall see the History of judeth , Susan●a , Daniel in the Lion's Den , or Dives & Laz●rus painted upon the Wall ▪ It may be reckoned a wonder to see , or find the house empty , for either the Parson , Churchwarden , or Clark , or all ; are doing some Church or Court-businesse usually in this place . They thrive best where there are fewest ; It is the Host's chiefest pride to be speaking of such a Gentleman , or such a Gallant that was here , and will be again ere long : Hot weather and Thunder , and want of company are the Hostess' grief , for then her Ale sours : Your drink usually is very young , two days old : her chiefest wealth is seen , if she can have one brewing 〈◊〉 another : if ei●her the Hostess , or her D●ughter , or Maid will kiss handsomely at parting , it is a good shooing-horn or Birdlime to draw the Company thither again the sooner . She must be Courteous to all , though not by Nature , yet by her Profession ; for she must entertain all , good and bad ; Tag , and Rag ; Cut , and Long-tail : She suspects Tinkers and poor Soldiers most , not that they will not drink sound , but that they will not pay lustily . She must keep touch with three sorts of men , that is ; the Maltman , the Baker , and the justice's Clerks . She is merry , and half made , upon Shrove-tuesday , May-days , Feast-dayes , and Morris dances : A good Ring of Bells in the Parish helps her to many a Tester , she prays the Parson may not be a Puritan : a Bagpiper , and a Puppet-play brings her in Birds that are flush , she defies a Wine-taverne as an upstart outlandish fellow , and suspects the Wine to be poisoned . Her Ale , if new , looks like a misty Morning , all thick ; well , if her Ale be strong , her reckoning right , her house clean , her fire good , her face fair , and the Town great or rich ; she shall seldom or neversit without Chirping Birds to bear her Company , and at the next Churching or Christening , she is sure to be rid of two or three dozen of Cakes and Ale by Gossipping Neighbours . 

10.  Apparators . 

Spiritual business is their Profession , but Carnal matters are their gain and revenues . The sins of the Laity holds them up , Ember-weeks , Visitations and Court-dayes show their Calling and Employment , then shall you see them as quick as Bees in a Summer day : Surrogates , the Archdeacon , and the Chancellor , they dare not offend : they live upon Intelligence ; they have much business with the Churchwardens and Sides-men , they ride well furnished with Citations , and sometime Excommunications : They are glad if they can hear of any one that teaches School , or read Prayers in that Diocese without a special Licence , they are to Peccant Wenches , as bad Scarecrows , as Bailiffs be to desperate Debtors . The Curate must read Prayers on Wednesdays and Friday's formaliter , sub paena of a further Charge : they are sworn to their Office before admitted , but being admitted , oftentimes they dispense with the Oath : sometimes they have eyes , and are tongue-tied ; sometimes they have tongues , and are blind : But without Fees they will see too much , and speak more ; and fetch men into their Courts with a Coram nomine . Yet though they do much abuse their office , they make many afraid to sin , either for fear o● shame , punishment , or charges : Whatsoever shift a man or woman make for monies , yet they are sure to pay for their faults here . And if he be any thing in Age , th●n in the Court he wears a furred Gown , and ordinarily cries Peace , peace there , when in his heart he means no such matter . 〈◊〉 are like a company of straggling Sheep , or unruly Goats , for they will never agree , or be under one Shepherd . Most commonly when they go to the Visitation , they Ride on poor jades , and their accoutrements an old Saddle , one Stirrup , a Spur without a Rowel , a black box , and an Office Seal : if the Wench that 's in fault , want monies to pay her Fees , they 'll take their pennyworths in flesh : Well , their Office is none of the best , and yet is it oftentimes too good for the Master . When all Wenches prove Honest , they may beg , but as long as Venus' Rules , they will be sure to find employment . 

11.  Constables . 

There names imply that they should be constant and able for the discharge of their Office : They have the command of four places of note , the Stocks , the Cage , the Whipping post , and the Cucking-stool : they appoint & command the Watchmen with their rusty Bills to walk Circuit ; and do also send hue and cries af●er Male ▪ factors . They are much employed in four occasions ; at Musters , at pressing forth of Soldiers , at quarter Sessions , and Assizes : their Office many times make them proud and crafty : if they be angry with a poor man , he is sure to be preferred upon the next Service : The Ale houses had best hold correspondency with them : they are Bugbears to them that wander without a Pass . Poor Soldiers are now and then helped to a Lodging by their means : they 'll visit an Alehouse under colour of Search , but their desire is to get Beer of the Company , and then if they be but mean men , they Master them ; and they answer them , Come pay , with this usual Phrase , yo● ●re not the men wee ▪ 〈◊〉 for ; and demand of the Hostess if she have 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 in her having got their de●re , they 〈◊〉 with this Compliment ▪ 〈◊〉 if 〈◊〉 business 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , we would 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 we must 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 places up● 〈◊〉 , it is ▪ 〈◊〉 ▪ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 King ▪ and so 〈◊〉 with the 〈◊〉 of the hone● Com●ny , & laughter 〈◊〉 them● . it 's a 〈◊〉 to one if they 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ▪ but they will 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Bills 〈◊〉 sixed ▪ and 〈◊〉 down laid 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 such matter ; a fine trick to get money by their place . They should seem to be either very poor , or covetous , or crafty men ; for they put their Charges always upon the Parish : If an account hap to be among the Parishioners when such a thing , or such a thing was done ; they 'll answer , in the same year , o● there about's , I was Constable , in thinking thereby to set forth their own Credit . I lea●e them , wishing them to be good in their Offic● , it is not long they h●ue to stay in it . 

12.  Currantoes ●r ●eekly News . 

These commonly begin with Vienna and end wi●h Antwerpt : The Spanish & French affairs must not be left out : The three names that grace their Letters , are the Swedes , Tilly's , or Imperialists : ordinarily they have as many Leyes as Lines , they use to lie ( as weatherbeaten Soldiers ) upon a Bookbinder's stall , they are new and old in si●e days : they are busy fellows , for they meddle with other men's Affairs : no Pope , Emp●rour , or King , but must be touched by their pen : Nay they use to interline some great exploit at Sea betwixt the Hollander and D●nkerker , or else betwixt the Hollander and Spaniard , at the Cape or the straits of Magellan , and usually they conclude with this Phrase , The Admiral or Vice-admiral of our side , gave a ●road side to the utter over throw of the Spaniard , with so many men hurt , such a Rich prize taken , such a Ship sunk , or fired : Being faithfully translated out of the Dutch copy , with the first and second Part , like Ballads . And these are all conceits ordinarily , which their own idle brain , or busy fancies , upon the blocks in Paul's , or in their Chambers invented : They have used this trade so long , that now every one can say , it 's even as true as a Currantoe , meaning that it 's all false . Now Swedens' and the Emperor's War in Germany , is their Storehouse , with how 〈◊〉 , Hamburgh , Leipsich , Breame , and the other Hans-townes affect the King's Majesty's procee-●dings : If a Town be Beleaguered , or taken , than they never take care , but how they may send thei● Leyes fast enough , and far enough : Well , they are politic , not to be descried , for they are ashamed to put their names to their Books . If they write good News of our side , it is seldom true ; but if it be bad , it 's always almost too true . I wish them either to write not at all , or less , or more true ; the best news is when we hear no News . 

FINIS . 





Lieutenant Colonel Goring . 

The lash . Lice . Zion Col ledg ner● Criplegat● . 