THE SOLDIERS ACCIDENCE OR AN INTRODUCTION Into MILITARY DISCIPLINE , Containing the first Principles and necessary knowledge meet for Captains , Muster Masters , and all young Soldiers of the Infantrie , or Foot Bands . 

ALSO , The Cavallarie or Forms of Trayning of Horse-troopes , as it hath been received from the latest and best experienced ARMIES . 

A Work fit for all Noble , Generous , and good spirits , that love Honour , or Honourable Action . 

VIRG. AENEI . 

— At nunc Horrentia Martis . 


G. M.  

LONDON Printed by I D. for JOHN BELLAMY , and are to be sold at his Shop at the three golden Lions near the Royal Exchange . 1625.  

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE , and THRICE Worthy Lords , Oliver , Lord Viscount Grandison ; George , Lord Carew ; Fulke , Lord Brooke ; Arthur , Lord Chichester : And to the right Honourable , Sir Edward Conway , Knight , Sir Horace Vere , Knight , Sir Edward Cecil , Knight , Sir Robert Mansell , Knight , Sir john Oagle , Knight , and Sir Thomas Button , Knight ; Being the Lords and others of his Majesty's most Honourable Council of War . 

I Do not presume ( Right Honourable ) to offer this poor Tribute of mine Experience , as a Model whereby your Goodnesses might shape any thing to add strength to your own uncontrollable knowledges ; God forbid there should be in me such an impudent daring : But I humbly desire it may kiss your hands , as a sacrifice offered from your servant , or as a weakness that stands in need of your protections : Virtue I know measureth every thing by its own goodness , in which is expressed an infinite Charity , and you are that large Fountain of virtue , that I cannot fear ( how ever imperfection may persuade me ) but I shall touch of your noble waters ; In your Honours I know is power to judge of my labour , and in you is authority to exercise mercy : and though you find nothing written in it , but what you may read ten thousand times better in your own breasts , yet be pleased to think there be many puny scollars in our Kingdom ( to which I have ever desired to be a servant ) that from these brief Rules may gather more abler judgements . Therefore it is only your noble favour and allowance , that must make it acceptable to those which need it , and profitable to our Empire , which I wish to be served by it . OH then let these Graces fly from your Noble Natures , with that mildness that as I have ever lived , I may die 

Your Honour's poor servant and Soldier , G. M.  

¶ To the Reader . 

Knowledge , which is the divine Mother of certain Goodness , never came unwellcome to an industrious Nature , for she ever maketh a smooth way and a strait path ; no more ( I hope ) shall this my labour to thee ( Worthy Reader ) since doubtless thou shalt find in it many things New , ( which is apt to catch covetous Spirits ) somethings Necessary ( which are ever imbracst of Solid and Substantial judgements ) . And I hope nothing erring from Sense or Truth ( which is such a Crown , both to the work , and thine own satisfaction , that if thou be'st any Master of Charity , thou canst not give me less alms than thanks for my pains taking , ) I have not laboured mine own , but thy profit , neither have I measured any thing in this Work by any other Rule , than those wants which I found in my self when I first betook me to the Wars , and had no other companions in my Bosom but Desire and Ignorance , the one being so contrary to the other , that had I had million , I would have given it for half the knowledge in this Book , to have reconciled , or at least expulsed that ignorance which was so offensive unto me . This for thine Industry sake I have performed , which if thou please to accept with that goodness of heart which it is meant , I have got my desire , and will ever rest at thy service : 

G. M.  

¶ A Table of all the Material things contained in this Book . 

And first of the Infantrie . 

Pag.  
Two things referred to Commanders . 1 
Sorting of Arms . 1 
Election of man  2 
Arming of Pikes . 2 
Arming of Musquetiers . 3 
Arming of Hargobussiers . 4 
Arming of Halberdiers . 4 
Arming of the Ensign . 4 
Arming of the Lieutenant . 4 
Arming of the Captain . 5 
The Forms of Trayning . 5 
Imbattayling of men . 5 
What a Rank or File is . 5 
Of Flanks and Fronts . 6 
The Continent of Rank and File , and the reason thereof . 6 
The Division of Companies . 7 
The duties of the Corporal and the Lanspresado . 7 
Four things to be taught in Trayning . 8 
The Carriage of Arms . 8 
The use of the Pike . 9 
The use of Shott . 9 
How to give Volleys . 9 
Volleys Marching . 9 
Volleys Standing . 10 
Volleys upon Advancement . 10 
Volleys upon a swift Retrayt . 11 
Distance of place . 11 
What distance is . 11 
The use of distances . 12 
The names of distances , and the variation of names . 12 
The measure of distances . 13 
Of Marches . 14 
The several places of Officers . 14 
Of Motions . 15 
Diversity of Motions . 15 
Of the Sounds of the Drum . 16 
Use of words . 17 
The words of proper directions . 17 
Of motions in distance or in form . 17 
Of motion in distance of Fyles . 17 
Of motion in distance of Ranks . 18 
Of motion in distance both in Fyles and Ranks . 18 
Of motion in Form of Fyles . 18 
Of motion in Form of Ranks . 19 
Of motion in Form both in Fyles and Ranks . 20 
Of charging of Pikes . 21 
Giving of Fire by the Flank . 21 
Of Constancy in words giving . 21 
What March and Motion is . 22 
Word of particular Motions . 22 
What Postures are . 22 
The Postures of the Pike . 23 
Postures Standing . 23 
Postures Marching . 23 
Postures Charging . 23 
The Postures of the Musket . 23 
The Postures in Skirmish . 24 
Postures in exercise . 24 
Postures Standing . 24 
Postures Marching . 24 
Postures Charging . 25 
Postures Discharging . 25 
The Postures of the Hargobu● . 26 
A repetition by way of advice . 26 
The dignity of places . 27 
A Table expressing Dignities . 27 
The use of the Table . 27 
Leaders of Middle Fyles . 27 
Middlemen to the Front and Rear . 28 
Subdevision men . 28 
The first six parts of Martial discipline . 29 
Carriage , Election , and Composition of Colours . 29 
Mixture of Colours . 29 
Captains Colours . 29 
Colonels Colours . 29 
Superior Officers Colours . 30 
Where Gentlemen may find their Colours . 30 
The liberty that Captains take . 30 
Of several Metals and Colours . 31 
The signification of Metals and Colours . 31 
Of Bastard Colours , and their significations . 32 
Offences in Colours . 32 
Of Obedience and the virtue thereof . 33 
The end of the first Table . 

The second Table of the Cavallarie , or Trayning of Horse-troopes . 

The difficulty in this Art  37 
The things considerable in this Art  37 
The election of men and horses . 38 
The arming of Gentlemen at Arms . 38 
Arming for Triumph . 39 
Arming of Lanciers . 40 
Arming of Light Horse . 40 
Arming of Cuiraissiers . 41 
Arming of Hargobussiers . 42 
Arming of Dragons . 42 
Arming of Captain's Cuirassiers . 43 
Arming of Lieutenants . 44 
Arming of Cornets . 44 
Arming of the Trumpet . 44 
Arming of Corporals . 45 
Arming of Captain's Hargobussiers . 45 
Arming of Captains of Dragons . 46 
Difference betwixt the Cornet and Guydon . 46 
Advancement of Captains of Horse . 46 
The Forms of Trayning . 47 
The Imbattayling of Horsemen . 47 
The extent of a File . 47 
The extent of a Rank . 48 
The division of a Horse-troop . 48 
Five things to be taught . 48 
Manage of the Horse . 49 
Words of Command . 49 
The performance . 49 
The words and the performance . 50.51.52 
Carriage and use of Arms . 53 
The Postures of the Pistol . 53 
Postures Standing . 53 
Postures Charging or Marching . 53 
Postures Discharging . 54 
Postures in Skirmish . 54 
The best way to Teach . 55 
Of distance of place . 55 
Of Motion . 55 
Of Marches . 56 
Words of especial direction 56 
The manner of Opening or Closing Ranks or Files . 57 
Of doubling Ranks or Files . 57 
Of doubling the Front diverse ways . 57 
The turning of Faces . 58 
Of Countermarching or Wheeling . 58 
Observations in Countermarching . 58 
Observations in Wheeling . 59 
Observations in doubling the Front.  59 
Of the Trumpet . 60 
The first point of War , and its use . 60 
The second point of War , and its use . 60 
The third , and its use . 61 
The fourth , and its use . 61 
The fifth , and its use . 61 
The sixth , and its use . 61 
Special Notes . 62 
The chief Officers in an Horse Armie● 62 
Wherein the justice consisteth . 62 
The places of great Officers . 62 
The Composition of Regiments . 63 
Whence directions are received . 63 
The end of the second Table . 

ERRATA . 

Page 14. line 28. for before read between . p. 18. l. 24. for Forms r. Form . p. 31. l. 30. for lenity r. levity . p. 32. l. 11. for not r. at . p. 33. l. 18. for yea r. yet . p. 41. l. 28. for Rooes read Races . 

THE SOLDIERS ACCIDENCE . 

The Captains of the men to be Trained for the Wars ( whether they be Mustermasters , or other private Commanders ) have two things to be referred unto them , that is , sorting of Arms , and the Forms or true Manners of Trayning . 

For the Sorting of Arms , it is a good proportion to have a Company equally compounded of Armed men and Shot , the Armed men to be all Pikes ( except the Officers . ) The Shot to be at least half Muskets , the other half Harquebusses , but if the Shot could be two parts Muskets , it were better , but if all Muskets , than best of all . 

Also care is to be had what men are put to every find of Arms , the strong , tall ; and best persons to be P●keses , the squarest and broadest will be fit to carry Muskets , and the least and nimblest may ( if necessity compel ) be turned to the Harquebus ; But above all other respects , it is to be considered to what Arms every man doth best frame himself , for which cause it is not amiss , that the Captain see the same men to use several Arms before he do appoint them certainly to carry any one . 

Next he shall see that every man be well and sufficiently Armed with good and allowable Arms ; That is to say , all his Pikemen shall have good Spanish Morions , or else Steel Caps for their heads , well lined with quilted Caps , Cuirasses for their bodies of nimble and good ●ould , being ( at the least ) high pike proo●e● large and well ●ompa●t Gordgets for their Necks ; Fair and close joined . Taces , to arm to the mid-thigh , as for the Pouldron , or the Vant●●●●e , they may be spared , because they are but 〈…〉 . All this Armour is to be rather of Russet , Sanguine or Black colour● then White , or Milld , for it will keep the longer from rust . 

They shall have strong strait , yet nimble Pikes of Ash-wood , well headed with Steel , and armed with plates downward from the head at least four foot , and the full size or length of every Pike shall be fifte one foot , beside the head . 

These Pikemen shall also have good , sharp , and broad Swords ( of which the Turkey or Bilbo are best ) strong Scabards , chapt with Iron , Girdle , Hangers , or Bautricke of strong Leather ; and lastly , if to the Pikemans' Headpiece be fastened a small ring of Iron , and to the right side of his Backpeece ( below his Girdle ) an Iron hook , to hang his Steele-cap upon , it will be a great ease to the Soldier , and a nimble carriage in the time of long Marches . 

All his Musquetiers shall be armed in good Spanish Marian's upon their Heads . About their bodies Bautrickwise from the left shoulder under the right arm , they shall carry Bandiliers of broad Leather , having made fast● unto them at least twelve or thirteen charges of wood or horn , well covered with Leather , and hanging by large long strings , that with ease they may be brought to the mouth of the Piece . And these Charges must contain Powder according to the bore and bigness of the Piece by due measure . 

They shall also have Swords , Girdles , Hangers , or Bautrickes , and Bullet bags , in which they shall carry their Moulds , Bullets , Worms , Screwes , Rammer , and Pryming Iron . 

Also they shall have good and sufficient Muskets , of true size and bore , with clean Barrels , and strait scouring sticks , headed at the one end with Rammers of horn , suitable to the bore of the Piece , and at the other , with boxes of iron in which to screw their Worms , iron Rammers , and the like . The Cocks and Trickers of the Piece ( for Seares are not good ) shall be nimble to go and come , and the Stocks shall be strait , & of very sound wood . 

Lastly , for their right hands they shall have Rests of Ash wood , or other tough wood , with iron Pikes in the nether end , and half hoops of Iron above to rest the Musket on , and double strong strings fastened near thereunto , to hang about the arm of the Soldier when at any time he shall have occasion to trail the same ; And the length of these Rests shall be suitable to the stature of the man , bearing his Piece so , as he may discharge it without stooping . 

The Harquebusses shall be armed like the Muskets ; The Rest only excepted , and the quantity of the Piece , and the Charges duly considered . 

Your Halberdier shall be armed in all points like your Pike , only in stead of the Pike he shall carry a fair Halberd , that is strong , sharp , and well armed with plates of iron , from the Blade at least two foot downward upon the Staff , and fringed or adorned according to pleasure ; And these Halberds do properly belong unto the Sergeants of Companies , who by reason of their much employment are excused from Arms ; Otherwise in the day of Battle , or in the Battle they are for guard of the Ensign , or matter of execution , and then to be armed as is aforesaid . 

The Ensign , or Bearer of the Captain's colours , shall be armed at all pieces to the mid thigh , as as Head-piece , Gorget , Cuirasses , Pouldrons , Vantbranes , and Taces , with a fair Sword by his side , and his Captain's Colours or Ensign in his hand . The Lieutenants of Companies shall be armed like the Ensign-bearer , and his weapon shall be a fair guilt Partisan . 

The Captains shall be armed as the Lieutenants , only as much richer as they please , and their weapons to lead with , shall be Feather staffs ; But their weapons to serve or encounter the enemy with , shall be fair Partisans of strong and short blades , well guilt and adorned , according to their own pleasures . 

For the Forms or manner of Trayning ; That form is only to be followed , which shall be soon and easiest learned , and of most use for all kind of service whatsoever , and which I take to be this Form following . 

First you shall draw your Company into two Battalions , or square Bodies ( the Pikes by themselves , and the Shot by themselves ) which Bodies shall consist of Ranks and Files , and you shall draw them forth by Files or ten , man after man , or if they be much disorderly and uncapable , then draw them forth by half Files or five , and when they are so placed , by doubling those half Files , you may bring them to whole Files ; which done , then placing the Pikes in the midst , wing them on either hand with your Shot , wherein if you have Harquebusses ( which are now out of use with us ) you shall then give to your Musquetiers the priority of place , that is , they shall make the outmost Files both of the right and the left hand . 

Now for a Rank , you shall understand it is a Row of men placed Pouldron to Pouldron , or Shoulder to Shoulder , their faces being directed all one way ; And a File is a Sequence of men standing one behind another , Back to Belly , extending from the first to the last man ; And it is taken from the French word la Fila signifying a Thridd , because men stand long wise and strait like a third , and the Files consist of single men downward , as the Ranks consist of single men overthwart . 

Now these Files in some discipline are called Flanks , because they do flanker , or wall in the Battalions , and the Ranks are called Fronts , because they stand foremost and do as it were affronted the Battles , and look upon the Enemy , but in truth none can properly be called the Front but the Rank which standeth foremost , nor any File be called a ●lanke , but those which stand outmost , yet all are Ranks , and all are Files , and therefore those two names are without contradiction . Now lastly you shall understand , that a Rank may consist of as many men as you please ( according to the number of your Company ) But a File ( however the Spaniards and Italians use it in uncertain depth ) ought never to be above ten persons deep ( except it be in marching or in most especial service , where advantage of ground requireth the contrary ) The reason thereof , being that the first man having done his duty in discharging his piece , may in the space that nine other men shall do their duties , and discharge their pieces distinctly one after another , be again in readiness & make his first place good , there to discharge his piece a-againe . Besides it is the readiest and best way for the drawing of Grosses and great numbers , into any form that you please , because according to this discipline , every hundred men make a full Square , that is to say , iustren every way . 

This done you shall divide one hundred men into four Corporal ships or Squadrons , and every Squadron , into as many Files as the number will bear , and every File into Fellowships or Camera-does , Th● Corporal of every Squadron , shall be the leader of the chiefest file of the Squadron , and the Lanspresado : ( who in the Corporals absence , as upon a guard or otherwise , doth all the Corporals duties ) shall lead another file , and the most sufficient Gentlemen of every Squadron shall be the leaders of the roast . 

Now for the especial duties of these two Officers ( which is the Corporal , and the Lanspresadoe ) you shall understand that the Corporals chiefest duty is upon guards at night , after the Watch is set , and the Sentinels placed where so soon as the Sentinel shall call upon any approach , lie shall immediately go with his Sword drawn , or in especial cases ( where the Enemy lodgeth near ) with a guard of two at least ( being a Pike and a Shot ) unto the Sentinel , and making his Guard stand upon their guard he shall place the point of his sword to the breast of him that is to give the Word , whether he be Rounder , or other private passenger , and so with his ear to his mouth very closely receiveth● Word , which if it be right he shall give the party pass ; if otherwise he shall take him prisoner , and disarm him , and either keep him upon his guard , or else deliver him to his superior Officer : But if any resistance shall be offered than it shall be lawful for him to kill him . 

Also the Corporal shall in the time of service fee that every Soldier in his Squadron have his Arms neat , clean , and handsome ; that they be not unfurnished of Powder , Match , and Bullet ; and the Lanspresadoe ( as was before said ) shall in the absence of the Corporal do all the Corporals duties , and in the time of rest he shall call upon his Squadron , and see them dress , trim , and scour their Arms and Weapons , and teach them how best to do the same . And also he shall see them cast their Bullets , if need require , and to such as are ignorant , teach them how to do the same , and show them how to scour their Pieces , and oil them , and in time of necessity , or upon Cloying , how to unbreetch them . 

The Company being thus divided , In the Training four principal things are to be taught . 

1.  First , the carriage and use of Arms , contained in diverse Postures or Stations , expressing the forms of men in Arms . 
2.  Secondly , Distance or proportion of place in Files and Ranks . 
3.  Thirdly , March and Malion , contained in words of most especial directions . 
4.  And fourthly , all the sounds or beat of the Drum , and ordinary words of direction ( which are our Vocabula artis ) and how by the Drum , or the voice of a Commander , to move and obey the direction . 
1.  The carriage of Arms must be comely and readiest for use . 

The use of Pikes is either in receiving or giving a Charge ; By being t●ught the first● the Soldier learns to withstand Horse ; By the second , to encounter with the enemy's Pikes , in which the use of Arms is most in knowing when and how every man , and so every Rank should give his push . 

In teaching the use of Shot the Soldier must first learn how to carry his Piece , then how to present it , and to take his level , and how and when to give his volley with those in his Rank . All which shall be more plainly described when we come to speak of Postures● ● And this part of Instruction is the proper office of the Sergeants of Companies , for they should both teach the Shot the use of their Arms , and be their Leaders in Service , if by an especial commandment , a superior Officer be not appointed . 

In teaching to give volleys , the ancient and vulgar manner of discipline ( which is that the whole volley shall be given of all the Shot in one Battalions , or Troop , at one instant , as well of them behind as before ) is utterly to be condemned ; For either the hind most must venture to shoot their fellows before through the heads , or else will overshoot , and so spend their Shot unprofitably . Besides , the volley being once given , the Enemy comes on without impeachment or annoyances But in stead of this kind of volley at once ( which only serves to make a great crack ) let the first Rank only give their volley , and if the Battalions ma●ch , than that Rank which hath given their volley to stand , and the second to pass through it , and so give their volley , and then to stand , and the third to come up , and so consequently all the Ranks . 

But if the Battalions stand , than the first Rank having given their volley , shall fall back to the Rear , either in Wheel , or in Countermarch ( according to the number of persons in the Rank . ) And the second Rank come into their places , and so the third , and fourth , till the first Rank be come to their places again , and so to continue to the end of commandment . 

But if the Battalions shall fall back or retire , and loose ground ; then shall all the Shot stand still , and no man advance a foot of ground ; But the first Rank in its due place shall give their volley , and then fall back behind the last Rank , and then the second Rank shall give their volley in their due place , and so fall behind the first , and in the same manner all the rest , till they have lost so much ground as to the Commander shall seem convenient : And so the volley shall be still continued , whether in Marching , Standing , or Retiring , and the enemy never free from annoyance ; All which is easily performed , if before the Motion you do make all your Shot open their Files well , either to one or the other hand . 

There are two other ways of giving fire , the one upon advancement , the other , upon a swift and speedy retrayt : That upon advancement towards an enemy when your men skirmish loose and disbanded , must be done by Ranks in this manner ; Two Ranks must always make ready together , and advance ten paces forwards before the body , at which distance a Sergeant ( or when the body is great ) some other officer must stand , to whom the Musquetiers are to come up before they present and give fire ; first , the first Rank , and whilst the first gives fire , the second Rank keep their Muskets close to their Rests , and their pans guarded ; and as soon as the first are fallen away , the second presently present and give fire , and fall after them : Now as soon as the two first Ranks do move from their places in the Front , the two Ranks next it must unshoulder their Muskets , and make ready , so as they may advance forward ten paces , as before ; as soon as the two first Ranks are fallen away , and are to do in all points as the former ; so all the other Ranks through the whole division must do the same by twoe one after another . 

The manner of giving fire in a swift retrayt is as the division marcheth away , the hinder most 〈◊〉 of all ( keeping still with the division ) maketh ready , and being ready , the Soldiers in that rank turn altogether to the right hand , and give fire , Marching presently away a good round pace to the Front , and there place themselves in Rank together , just before the Front ; As soon as the first Rank turns to give fire , the Rank next it makes ready , and doth as the former , and so the rest . 

Next to the Carriage of Arms , you shall teach the knowledge of Distance or Separation of places , being accounted a certain orderly space between File and File , Ranke and Ranke , in such order and measure as the Gaptaine shall be disposed to nominate , which not being obeyed , the whole body of the Battalions is put out of order , and neither carrying proportioned nor true shape , are as men in rout or disorders Therefore it ought carefully ( of all things ) to be observed and used according to the limitation or fitness of every Motion ; For the Stations of all Military persons , and the Motions in Arms , are not always certain , or in one steadie role● but do● continually interchange and alter agree a●y one with another ; And the use of this Distance is both in Ranks and Files , in Marches , and in Motions ; In Files , as when they stand or march at the first Distance , which is called Closest , that is to say , Pouldron to Pouldron , or Shoulder to Shoulder , or when they stand or march at the second Distance , which is called Close , and is a foot and a half distance man from man ; or when they stand or march at the third distance , which is called Order , which is three foot man from man ; or when they stand or march at the fourth and last Distance , which is called Open Order , and is six foot between person and person . 

So likewise in Ranks to stand or march Closest , is to be at the Sword's point , to stand or march Close ; is three foot , to stand or march at Order , is six foot , and to stand or march at Open Order , is ever twelve foot . 

Now there be some Commanders which vary in the nomination of these terms , though not in Quantity or Distance , for they will have Close in Files to be Pouldron to Pouldron ; Order , a foot and an half ; Open-order three foot , and Double-distance six foote● and so omit the word Closest . 

And so like wise in Ranks , Close they will have to the Swords point , Order three foot , Open Order six foot , and Double-distance twelve foot , and so not the word Closest at all . 

Others vary it another way , and will have but three Distances , that is to say ; Open Order , which they will have to be six foot both between rank and file , Order three foot between Rank and File , and Close-order a foot and an half between Fyle● and File , and three foot between Rank and Ranke , and when they come to open Ranks , than they command Double-distance also , which they make twelve foot , and so by steps come to the fourth Distance also , but I prefer the first discipline , and hold the words fully as significant and most in use , which above all things are to be esteemed and imitated . 

Now to take the true measure of these Distances , because the eye is but an uncertain judge , you shall take the distance of six foot between file and file , by commanding the Soldiers ( as they stand ) to stretch forth their arme● , and stand so removed one from another , that their hands may meet . To take the distance of three foot between file and file , you shall make the Soldiers set their arms a kenbowe , and put themselves so close that their elbows may meet , and to take the distance of a foot and an half , every other Soldier in the Rank shall set one arm a kenbowe , and his fellow shall near touch it ; And thus likewise in Ranks we take the distance of six foot , when the but ends of the Pikes do almost reach their heels that march before . Three foot in Rank is when they come almost to the Swords point ; and twelve foot is the length of a Pike charged ever . 

Next unto distance of place , is to be taught Marches and Motions , and in teaching of Marches , after every man knows his place , and is willed to observe his file and rank ; In a plain March , there is no hardness , nor yet in a Countermarch , if the Leaders of the files be well chosen , and that every man observe well him that goes next before him . Besides , if there be any little disorder , the Officers keeping a good eye , and being every one of them in their due place , will easily reform it . 

Now for the places of the Officers , they are these : 

The head of the Troop or Band is for the Captain , and the Rear for the Lieutenant , except it be in a Retrayt , and then the Captain should be in the Rear , and the Lieutenant at the Head. The Ensign ( in an ordinary Battalions ) upon the head behind the Captain , or within a Rank thereof . But marching in an extended Battle , then in the heart or midst of the Pikes . The Drums are in a square Battalions to beat before the right and left wings . But in an extended Battle , the elder Drum shall beat before the third and fourth rank of Shot , which followeth next after the Captain . The second Drum shall attend the Ensign ; and the third ( if there be so many in one Company ) shall beat between the third and fourth Rank of Shot , which marcheth in the Rear next before the Lieutenant . The Phiphes' ( if there be more than one ) the elder shall march with the elder Drum ; and the second shall attend on the Ensign . The Sergeants are extravagantly to march on each side the Company , and to see the Soldiers keep their Ranks and Files , according to the Captain's appointment ; as also to listen and perform any direction that shall come from the Captain , or other Officer in chief : as also ( upon any occasion ) to lead loose and disbanded files of Shot in Skirmish , or else devisions of Pikes or Shot in ordinary Marches , where superior Officers are absent . 

Now to these Marches , are added the teaching of Motions , because there are many such that are not Marches at all : As some without changing of place , in only turning of their faces to the right hand , or the left , or about ( that is to say ) the mere contrary way , to that they were at the Command given ; which is necessary if the enemy should charge of either side or behind . 

Some motions there are which change place ; But yet no more than a removing from one Rank to another , or from one File to another , when as ( commonly ) though some do remove , yet others stand still ; and these kind of Motions are doubling of Ranks or Files , whereby the Battalions is made broader or longer , as the Enemy or the ground you have , causeth you to make your Flanks , Fronts , Ranks , or Files greater or lesser . And here is to be noted in this doubling of Ranks or Files , that Ranks when they double to the right hand , must ever turn to the left hand to come to their former places again , and if they be doubled to the left hand , they must turn on the right hand to come to their first places again ; And Fyles when they are doubled to any hand , by the doubling of Ranks to the contrary hand , they are brought to their first places again . And so having doubled your Ranks to any hand , by the doubling of Files to the contrary hand , you also bring them to their first places again . 

There is also to be taught another Motion , in which all do move , and yet none do march , which is the Opening and Closing either of Ranks or Files , and is of us● not only when you would have one Rank pass through another , or the whole Body of the Battalions make a countermarch , but when we would draw the Battle quickly , and in order , more of one hand or other . 

In teaching the Soldier how to know the sounds or Beat of the Drum , you must make them observe not only what the Drum doth beaten , as whether it be a Call , a March , a Troop , a Battalions , a Charge , a Retreat , a Battery , a Relief , and so forth , but also what time he keeps , for ever according to the measure of time , the Soldier is to march slower or faster , to charge with greater violence , or to come off with greater speed , also he shall know when by the Drum to attend his Captain's directions , when to repair to his Colour's , and when to do other duties . And many other beat as occasion shall administer , and as by the sound of the Drum , you do teach your Soldiers to march , so by the voice ( at their first instruction ) you shall teach them all other motions . 

To make them therefore perfect in these and all other Motions , it is good to use them to some certain words , which being once learned● will serve for direction , and they must be the wordes● now most in use in our English Armies . 

The words which are now in use , both here and in the Netherlands , are these and such like 〈◊〉 following . 

First for all Motions in general , they must either be in Distance , or in Form . 

If in Distance , it must either be in File , or Rank , or in both together . 

If the motion be in distance o● Files , it must either be in closing or in opening ; If in closing , than your words of proper directions are th●se . 

First having drawn your Battle in order you shall say — 

Leaders stand forward with your Files . 

then Close your Files . 
Close your Files to the right hand . 
Close your Files to the left . 


And all these three motions you shall do either closest , close , to Order , or to open Order . Open your Files . 
Open to the right hand . 
Open to the left . 
Or to any order as aforesaid . 

If in distance of Ranks , than also in closing or opening , if in closing — then Close your Ranks . 
Close your Ranks , from the front to the rear . 
Close your Ranks , from the rear to the front . 


And any of th●se to any order as aforesaid , and if in opening — then Open your Ranks . 
Open your Ranks , from the front rearward . 
Open your Ranks from the rear forward . 


And any of th●se to any order aforesaid , 

And herein is to be noted that Ranks when they open , ought ( for the most part ) to open downward , turning to the Rear , and if they close , it m●st ever be upward to the Front.  

Lastly if motion in distance , be both of Ranks and File● at one instant , than you shall say — Files and Ranks close . 
Files and Ranks open . 


And both these to any order aforesaid . 

Now if it be motion in form , it is also in files , in ranks , and in files and ranks both together . 

If it be motion in form of files , the words of direction are — Double your Files to the right hand . 
Double your Files to the left . 
Advance 〈◊〉 Files to the right hand . 
Advance your Files to the left . 
Advance by division to the right hand . 
Advance by division to the left . 
Files rank by conversion to the right hand . 
Files rank by conversion to the left . 
Files rank 3.5.7 . etc.  
Shorten your Files to 5.8 . etc.  
Lengthen your Files to 10.12.16 . etc.  
Files countermarch to the right hand . 
Files countermarch to the left . 
Files countermarch to both by division . 


And this countermarch may be done diverse ways and manners , as after the manner of the Macedonians , the Lacedæmonians , the Persians , or out late and more modern use and fashion , & all these motions must be done to some one or other order as aforesaid . 

If it be motion in form of ranks , than the words are — Double your ranks to the right hand . 
Double your ranks to the left . 
Ranks file by conversion to the right hand . 
Ranks file by conversion to the left . 
Ranks rank . 5.7 . etc.  
Midlemen double the front to the right hand . 
Midlemen double the front to the left . 
Midlemen double to both by division , to the right entire , and to the left entire . 
Ranks countermarch from the right hand to the left . 
Ranks countermarch from the left hand to the right . 


In the manner as formerly in files , according to several Nations , & when you will Countermarch to the right hand , the first rank of Leaders only must advance one step forward with the right leg , and then turn , and all the other ranks must march first up to the place from whence the first rank did countermarch before they turn ; So likewise , if you will countermarch to the left hand , the first ranks must step forward , one step with the left leg , and then turn , and all the other ranks behind , must come up to that place before they turn as before ; The same order is to be observed , when you will countermarch your Files ; Also in counter-marching , though both are here set down for distinction sake , you are to name neither Ranks nor Files , but are only to say — 

To the right hand countermarch , or To the left hand countermarch . 

Now if it be Motion in form , both in Files and Ranks jointly together , than the words of direction are Faces to the right hand . 
Faces to the left . 
Faces to both by division . 
Faces about , or all one . 
Faces to the Rear . all one . 
Wheel by conversion to the right hand . 
Wheel by conversion to the left . 
Wheel to both by division . 
Charge to the right hand . 
Charge to the left . 
Charge to both by division . 
Charge to the Front.  
Charge to the Rear . 
Charge to both front and rear by division . 


Now to reduce any of these words of direction to the same order or station in which the Soldier stood before they were spoken , you shall say — As you were . 

Now in these words of general directions , this is principally to be regarded , that in charging with Pikes , half the Ranks are but to charge their Pikes , and the other half to carry them advanced , or ported , so near the heads of the foremost as they may do them no annoyance , either in Charging or Retiring ; and they must also observe when they do Charge standing , to fall back with the right foot , and Marching to step forward with the left . 

There is also another motion in form , which is the giving of fire by the Flank , or by whole Files one after another , which are strange to the Dutch , or Spanish , yet exceeding frequent with the Irish , and therefore necessary for our English use . And that is for the beating or Clayring of Paces ( which are narrow straight ways through Woods and Bogs ) and the words for direction are — Cast of your files to the right hand . 
Cast of your files to the left . 
Cast of your files to both by division . 


Now for the most of these words there can be hardly better chosen . But it is not so material what words you first choose to train by ; as it is to use some words constantly : and yet the same words should be used generally through the Troops of an Army , or else it will breed confusion . And if it were also generally in the discipline of one Kingdom , it were better and more absolute . And thus much touching March and Motion ; which is nothing else but an actual working of the body , contained in four several circumstances : The first being a marching forward ( as charging to the Front ) the second backward ( as by retrayt ) the third sideways ( as by closing , opening or doubling of files to either hand ) : and the last Wheeling ( as by conversion or turning to either hand ) all which must be performed as occasion shall be offered to the understanding of the Commander , observing every motion in true order , place , distance , and posture . All other motions in the main body of a Battalions being nothing but the parents of disorder and confession ; 〈…〉 Art , by the opinions of the Auncients● is o●●ly the true Science of Warlike Motion , of the Imperial Art of comely and well ordering of Battles , Arms , Gestures , and Motions , any of which will not endure monstrous shape● 〈…〉 . 

Next unto these words of general Motions , we will place the words of particular Motions , which only concern the manage , use , and carriage of weapons . And these kind of Motions are called in one present discipline Postures , that is , The true 〈◊〉 of men in Arms , carrying all manner of mar●●all weapons ( in every Motion whatsoever ) in the comeliest , ●●ad i● 〈◊〉 , and easiest way both to 〈…〉 , and not only making everything 〈…〉 very delightful to the eye , but also taking away all dangers and disorders which might otherwise happen , either through ignorance or rudeness . 

To speak then first of those Postures which belong unto the Pike , and are published by the most excellent Prince , the Count Ma●rice of 〈◊〉 , Prince of Orange ; they are in number ●●●●one ; That is to say , three which are expressed standing●●ixe ma●ching , and seven charging . 

The three which are expressed standing , are — Lay down your Pike . 
Take up your Pike . 
Order your Pike . 


The six which are to be done marching are — Advance your Pike . 
Shoulders your Pike . 
Level your Pike . 
Slope your Pike . 
Cheek your Pike . 
Trail your Pike . 


The seven which are done charging , are — Port over hand . 
Port underhand . 
Charge over-hand . 
Charge underhand . 
Couch over-hand . 
Couch underhand . 
Charge against the right foot , and thraw yo●●●●ord over-arme . 


As touching the Postures which belong to the Musket , they are forty in n●mber , and are to be done ; Five standing ; three marching ; eightteene charging ; and fourteen discharging : And are only for Military Instruction in the time of Trayning , and to make the Soldier most exquisite and perfect . But in the time of present Service before the face of the enemy , or in fight , than all this great number of Postures , the Captain shall reduce into three only and no more . 

The three Postures or words of Command , which are used for the Musket in the face of the enemy , in Fight , or in Skirmish , are these — 1.  Make ready . 
2.  Present . 
3.  Give fire . 


The Postures or words of Command which are used in ordinary Trayning , or daily exercising of the Soldiers , are these following — 

First there are five to be performed standing . — That is to say — Put on your Arms . 
Prepare your Skirmish . 
Rest your Musket . 
Your Sentinel Posture . 
Your Saluting Posture . 


The Postures which are to be performed in Marching are these — Shoulder your Musket , and carry your Rest in the right hand . 
Level your Musket . 
Slope your Musket . 


The Postures which are to be performed in Charging , are these — Clear your Pann . 
Prime your Pann . 
Shut your Pann . 
Cast off your loose Corns . 
Blow your Pann . 
Cast about your Musket , with both your hands , and trail your Rest.  
Open your Charges . 
Charge your Musket with Powder . 
Draw out your Scouring stick . 
Shorten your stick . 
Ram in your powder . 
Draw out your stick . 
Charge with Bullet . 
Ram in your Bullet . 
Draw out your stick . 
Shorten your stick and put it up . 
Bring your Musket forward with your left hand . 
Hold it up with your right hand , and recover your Rest.  


The Postures which are to be performed in Discharging , are these — Carry your Rest in your left hand , preparing to give fire . 
Slope your Musket , and let the Rest sink . 
In the right hand poise your Musket . 
In the left hand carry the Musket , with the Rest.  
In the right hand take your Match between the second finger and the thumb . 
Hold the Match fast and blow it . 
Cock your Match . 
Try your Match . 
Guard the Pann and blow your Ma●ch . 
Open your Pann . 
Present your Musket . 
Give fire . 
Dismount your Musket and carry it with the Rest.  
Vncocke your Match and put it up between your fingers . 


Now touching the Postures of the Hargobus , I hold it needless here to insist or stand upon them , since they are all one with the Musket , ( the Rest only excepted ) and whosoever is a good Musketeer cannot choose but be a good Hargeletier . And therefore I refer it to mo●ss particular practice . And to make a Connexion of all that is before said , I would wish every industrious Teacher , first to respect his men ; then their Arms , and to sort and place each man according to his worth and cunning , not his wealth or birth ; then for his lessons , first to bring him to an exquisite readiness in the Postures , and true manage of weapons ; Next to make him know all the Sounds or Beat of the Dr●mme . Thirdly , the ●rue distance of places and orderly proportions : Fourthly , the execution thereof in all manner of Marches and Motions . And lastly , a general performance of all that hath been spoken in the practice of Skirmishes and alteration of Battalions . So shall men become ready and not confused , as many are by silken and simple Tutors , who strive to teach many things together , but nothing in order . 

Now for as much as dignity of places is a most needful Knowledge for every Commander , both for the adornment of the Band , and the encouragement of the well deserving Soldier , I will show you here a Table , containing the honour and dignity of placest as they have been observed by the most ancient Masters of Martial discipline . 

The Use . 

Now for the Use of this Table , you shall understand , that the figure 1. which standeth on the right hand , is the Leader of the right hand File , and so the first and chiefest man in the Battalions , and that whole Rank in which it standeth is the Front , so called , because the faces of the whole Company are directed one way , and also every man in that Rank is called the Leader or Captain of the File he leads . The figure 2. which leads the left hand File is the second man And the figure 3. ( which is in the Rear ) because there the backs are turned , is the third man , and the whole Rank in which it standeth is called the Rear , or the Bringers up . then the figure 4. is the fourth man , & so forth according to the number of the figures , are the dignities of the places . 

Now here is also to be noted in this Table , that the figure 17. standing in the Front , is the Leader of the middle file to the left Flank ; and the figure 18.  Leader of the middle file to the right Flank ; and so are called Leaders of the main division . 

The fifth Rank from the Front downward towards the Rear , are called Middlemen to the rear , and the sixth Rank are called Middlemen to the front , or the Leaders of half files . 

Lastly , whensoever this Body , or any other whatsoever ( which containeth but ten persons in file ) shall be divided in the midst between the Middle-men , than the last five Ranks to the Rearward are called by the name of Subdevision . And whensoever the Rear shall double the Front , then are the Rear called Bringers up , because they bring up their half Files by Sequence . 

These Rules knit unto memory , and practised with care and diligence , will make any Soldier perfect in the first six parts of Martial discipline ; as Election of men ; Sorting of Arms ; March or Motion ; Distance ; Posture ; and lastly , the beat of the Drum . 

Now to these I will add a little touch or Essay , touching the Carriage , Election , and Composition of Captain's colours , or Ensigns , which is the honourable Badge or Mark of every Captain , and in which both of late here at home , and also formerly in foreign Nations . I have seen as gross absurdities , as any malice would wish to see in the folly of his Enemy , which doubtless must proceed from ignorance , since no Master of Reason would be guilty of his own injury . 

You shall therefore understand , that all Colours belonging unto private Captains , aught to be mixed equally of two several Colours , that is to say , ( according to the rule in Heraldry ) of Colour and Mettle , and not Colour on Colour , as Green and red , or Blue and Black , or such like , nor yet Mettle on Mettle , as White and Yellow , or Orrengtawnie and White , for Colours so born show Bastardy , Peasantry , or dishonour . Now in the Corner which is next to the upper point of the staff , he shall car●ie in a fair large square , or Canton , containing a sixth part of the Colours , a plain red Cross in a white Field ( which is the Ensign of our Kingdom of England . ) If the Colours do belong to a Colonel , they shall then be all of one entire Colour , or one Mettle , only the red Cross , or Ensign of the Kingdom shall be in his due place , as aforesaid . If they belong to a Colonel general , to the Lord Martial of the Field , or any such Superior Officer , than they shall be all of one entire Colour , or Mettle , and the red Cross or Ensign of the Kingdom , shall be in a very little square or Canton , as in a twelft part of the Field , or less if it please them . But if they belong to the General of the Field , than they shall be of one entire Colour or Mettle , without any red Cross at all , as was before said . 

Thus much touching the general Composition and Carriage of Colours . 

Now for a more particular election and use thereof , you shall understand , that every Gentleman of Coat-armour ( being a private Captain ) ought to carry for his Colours , those two principal Colours which are contained in his Coat-armour , being the Field and the chief charge thereof ; which that no Ignorance may be busy to find out , they are evermore contained in the Bandrole , upon which his Crest standeth : Being indeed a true type or figure of his Colours wreathed together , as the Support of his honour . 

Now in as much as Captains are not all Gentlemen of Coare-armour , and so take unto themselves ( in these days ) a more particular freedom , affirming that honour is not Buckled to them , but to their virtues . And that virtue consists not in the same of Ancestors , but in their own Actions , and defences of their Countries , Mistresses , Widows , and the Oppressed : And so may suit or elect their Colours , according to their hopes or imaginations . Taking ( as it were ) their honour from the parties they most reverence ( which is a Paradox easily confuted . ) I will here first show you the nature and signification of Colours . And then some particular offences , in which an indifferent mixture being made , the Composition must needs be noble and wholesome . 

You shall first then understand , that there be in Military honour nine several faces , or Complexions , that is to say , two which be called Metals , as Yellow and White , figuring Gold and Silver , and ●eaven , which are called proper Colours , as Black , Blue , red , Greene , Purple , Tunnis , and Ermine ; figuring seven precious stones , of whose natures here to speak were tedious and needless , and of these , as before I said , mettle may not be carried on mettle , nor Colour upon Colour . 

Now for the significations of these metals and Colours , you shall understand , that Yellow betokeneth Honour , or height of spirit , which being never separate from virtue , of all things is most jealous of of disgrace , and may not endure the least shadow of Imputation . 

White signifieth Innocence or purity of Conscience , Truth , and an upright integrity without blemish . 

Black signifieth Wisdom and Sobriety , together with a severe correction of too much Ambition , being mixed with yellow , or too much Belief and Le●itie , being joined with White . 

Blue signifieth Faith , Constancy , or truth in Affection . 

red signifieth justice , or noble and worthy Anger , in defence of Religion , or the Oppressed . 

Greene signifieth good Hope , or the accomplishment of holy and honourable Actions . 

Purple signifieth Fortitude with discretion , or a most true discharge of any Trust reposed . 

Tunnis , or Tawny , signifieth Merit , or desert , and a foe to Ingratitude . 

Ermine ( which is only a rich Fur with curious spots ) signifieth Religion , or holiness , and that all aims are not divine objects . 

Now from these Colours , and their mixtures , are derived many bastard and dishonourable Colours , as Carnation , Orengtawnie , Popeniay , and such like , all which have bastardly significations , as Craft , pride , wantonness , and such like ; of which who so is desirous to understand , let him look into Du Tillet , and other French Authors , and he shall gain satisfaction . For mine own part , since they appertain not unto honour , I will here omit them , and to those free spirits that have gained these noble places ; from these considerations leave them to their own Elections , and Compositions , with these few advertisements following . 

First , He that in his Colours shall carry full Coat-armour , doth indiscreetly ; for he puts that honour to hazard , which he may with more honour keep in safety , and enticeth his enemy by such ostentation to dare beyond his own nature . 

He that in his Colours beareth any one black spot● and no more ; if it be round , square , or of any equal proportion , it shows some blemish in the owner , and that his life is not void of some notorious scandal . 

If the spot be of unequal proportion , that is , longer or broader one way then another , it signifieth Funeral , or deadly Revenge ; for such a spot is called an Hearse . 

He that carrieth a Word in his Colours without a devise , carrieth a Soul without a Body . 

He that carrieth a devise without a Word , carrieth a Body without a Soul . 

He that carrieth both Word and device , carrieth both Soul and Body , yet if the devise carry any human shape , it is a gross Body , and if the Word contain above three or four words at the most ( except it be the latter end , or beginning of some Verse ) it is an imperfect Soul : But if both Word and devise be complete ; That is , Empresa and not Emblem , yea they are much fitter for Masks , Triumphs , or Pageants , than the Field , or real Action ; for the true mixture of Colours is device enough for every Foot Soldier . 

He that carrieth more Colours than two , except it be some small dash for an especial note , or the Ensign of several Kingdoms , carrieth a surcharge , and it is esteemed the Ensign of Folly.  

Now to conclude and knit up this sleight Discourse , with the true Cement which bindeth all the former duties faithfully together , every Soldier must especially regard obedience , a work which is contained in three Circumstances , and every Circumstance adorned with an especial virtue . The first is Reverence from the Inferior to the Superior , in which is expressed Love. The second , a Readiness to take directions , and a willingness to be commanded , which is a performance of duty : and the last , in the allowing of his Captain's Opinion , and approving his judgement ; which is a certain Character of modesty , wisdom , and discretion . For that Captain cannot be said to be perfect , that wants virtue worthy of Reverence ; Authority fit for commandment , or Experience able to direct and censure his Actions . And he that hath these , hath that Sufficiency , that to disobey , is to die , as witnesseth all the best of the Romans , who never spared any in that capital and gross trespass of absurd disobedience . And to this I must also add , that the tyranny of Captains in commanding with too great rigour , is as offensive as the former disobedience : For as Montaigne saith ; The Authority of them which teach , often hinders those that would learn . And therefore nothing like manly Courtesy doth become a Commander . 

THE CAVALLARIE ; OR THE FORMS AND Manner of Trayning of HORSE , as it hath been received from the latest and best experienced ARMIES . 

Together with all such Knowledges as are meet for the practice of those that are professed Teachers , or professed Learners of this Noble ART . 

VIRG. AENEI . 

Arma virumque Canon — 


By G. M.  

LONDON Printed by I D. for JOHN BELLAMY , and are to be sold at his Shop at the three golden Lions , near the Royal Exchange . 1625.  

THE CAVALLARIE ; OR Trayning of the Horse-troopes . 

Infinite great ( and nor without much difficulty ) are the Considerations which dependeth on him that taketh upon him to Teach , Command , and Govern a Troop of Horse ; For to instruct Man only ( who is a reasonable creature , can understand my Language , and apprehend my directions ) though he be never so ignorant or peevish , yet there is much ease in the progress , and what favour cannot persuade , authority and punishment may enforce ; But to bring ignorant man and more ignorant horse , wild man and mad horse , to those rules of Obedience , which may crown every Motion and Action with comely , orderly , and profitable proceedings ; Hic Labour , Hoc Opus . 

To come then to the office or duty of that Commander , who taketh upon him to Train or Drill a Troop of Horse ; he shall understand , that there be three things referred to his judgement . 

First , Election of Men and Horses . 

Secondly , Arming . 

And lastly , the Forms or manner of Tray●ning . 

For the Election of Men and Horses , they mu●● be suitable to the Arms and Weapons ( defensive and offensive ) which they carry , which because they are of diverse kinds , and diverse dignities And in as much as Horse-troopes consist all of one entire Body or Arms , and not of diverse Bodies , or diverse Arms in one Troop , ( as Foot Companies do ) I will first give you the names of every several Troop of Horse , and after elect Men , Horse and Arms agreeable with each several dignity . 

In the old Wars , and before Fire was got to that height of excellence to which it is now arrived , the first and principal Troop of Horse were called , Men at Arms , or Gentlemen at Arms , because the body of the whole Troop consisted of Noblemen , Knights , and Gentlemen . A Prince ( for the most part ) being ever their Commander ; they were armed with defensive Arms at all pe●ceses , C●●p a Pe , from head to foot ; that is to say , with close Casks on their heads , Gorgets about their necks , fair Brestplats of Hargobus proof , and Backpeeces of less proof for their bodies ; Pouldrons for their shoulders , Vambraces for their arms , Gauntlets for their hands , Taces for the belly , Cui●ses for the knees , and Greaves for the legs and feet , ●nd about their wa●tss rich Bases of Velvet , Satin , S●●ke , or other s●uffe , and Girdles and Hangers . For offensive Arms , they had fair guilt Swords and Daggers , strong Lances headed with Steel , a Case of short Pistols , with Priming-box , Flask , key , and Bullet bag , a well armed Battellaxe , and a strong pair of Spurs on his heels , with long necks and long Rowels . His Horse should be strong , well shaped , of great courage , and thoroughly manned and ridden , he should ( by all means ) be stoned ( because tiring hurts them not ) of lusty age , and fair trotting : and of these Horses the Neapolitan is the best , the Greek next , than the Spaniard , the English , the Almain or the French. For his furniture , it should be either a Barb of Steel , or a Caparison of Bend-leather , arming from the pole of the neck to the pomell of the Saddle , and so round about his breast : as also from the hinder part of the Saddle over all his buttocks , and down to the Cambrell : He shall have a Shaffron for his forehead , and for the other part of his head , an headstall , and reinss of broad leather ( the reinss being lined with a small chain of Iron to prevent cutting ) and in his mouth a fair Bit ; on his back a Steele-saddle , with three Girtes of double Webb , with Stirrups , Stirrop-leathers , and for his Tail a fair Saker , with rich Tassels , and a strong Twynsell . This was the ordinary Arming of the Gentlemen at Arms for the Field , only some at their own discretions would to the former pieces add a Placcard to cover the breastplate , which was an advancement of the proof , but not an enforcement from Commandment . Now if these Gentlemen were to arm for Triumph before the King or Queen , then to the pieces defensive ( before showed ) they ought to have ( if it were for the Tilt ) a Grandguard for the Breast , a Pasguard for the left shoulder , and a Maine-fere for the left hand . If it were for the Tourney , then only a Buff for the chynne , and a locked Gauntlet for the right hand . 

The second Troop of Horse were called Lanciers or Demilaunciers , they were armed at all pieces from the head to the knee , like the Gentlemen at Arms , and their offensive weapons were a Lance , a case of short Pistols , a Battle-axe , Sword and dagger ; strong horses , well ridden for the field , armed with a Steele-saddle , Headstall , Raynes , Bit , Breastplate , Crupper , Trappingss , Girtes , Stirrups , and Leathers . 

The third sort of ancient Horsemen , were called Light-horse , and they were armed for defence with Burgenets , or Steele-caps , Gorgets , Curates , or Plate-coats , Gauntlets or Gloves of Male ; for offensive Arms , they had a slender chase staff , a single Pistol , and sometimes a case , a Sword and dagger . Their horses were nimble light Geldings' , fair trotting , and well ridden : the furniture for the Horse was a strong Headstall and reinss , a Bit , a Morocco Saddle , Pettrell , Crupper , light trappingss , and other necessaries suitable . The men to be handsome Yeomen or Serving-men● light timbered , and of comely shape , where it skills not much for the tallnes or greatness of the body , but for the height of spirit , and the goodness of the inclination . In which little David ( many times ) puts down the greatest Goliath . 

Thus for your knowledge , nor your example , I have showed you the several Compositions and arming of Horsemen , according to the ancient times , when the Bow and the Hargobus had the first place , and the Musket , and other fiery weapons lay obscured . But to come to these our present times , wherein the uttermost strength of the Fire is found out and explained , and to show you that which you must only imitate and follow ; you shall know , that all our Horse-troopes are reduced to one of these three Forms . 

The first and principal Troop of horsemen for the generality , are now called Cuirassiers or Pistolleirs , and these men ought to be of the best degree , because the meanest in one of these Troops , is ever by his place a Gentleman , and so esteemed . They have for defensive Arms , Gorget , Curates , Cutases , which some call Culets , others the Guard-de-reine , because it armeth the hinder parts from the waist to the Saddle-crootch , than Pouldrons , Vambraces , a left hand Gauntlet , Taces , Cuisses , a Cask , a Sword , Girdle , and Hangers . For offensive arms , they shall have a case of long Pistols , fierlockes ( if it may be ) but Snaphaunces , where they are wanting● The Barrels of the Pistols would be 26. inches long , and the Boar of 36.  Bullets in the pound ; Flask , Priming-box , Key , and Moulds ; their horses should be stoned , and of the best Races , fair trotting , and well ridden for the Wars , that is to say , being able to pass a strong and swift Career , to stop close , to retire at pleasure , and to turn readily on both hands , either in large Rings or in straight , especially , the Turn called Terra , Terra , the horse shall have Saddle , Bridle , Bit , Petrell , Crupper , with leathers to fasten his Pistols , and his necessary sack of carriage , with other necessary things according to the form of good Horsemanship . 

The second sort ( of which many Troops of Horse are compounded ) are called Hargobusseirs , or Carbines , these men ought to be the best of the first inferior degree , that is to say , of the best yeomen , or best Servingmen , having active and nimble bodies , joined with good spirits and ripe understandings ; these men shall have for defensive Arms , Gorgets , Curates , Cutasses , Pouldrons , Vambraces , and a light head piece , wide sighted , and the ●ever to let down upon bars of Iron ; for offensive Arms , he shall have an Hargobus of three foot , three inches long , and the bore of twenty Bullets in the pound , with Flask , P●iming-boxe , and moulds ; or in stead of these , Cartalages which will serve either for this or any other piece on horseback ; also a good Sword , and other accoutrements according to his place . His horse shall be either a fair stoned trotting horse , or a lusty strong Gelding well ridden , he shall be armed with a Morocco Saddle , Bridle , Bit , Petrell , and Crupper , with the rest before showed necessary to his place . 

The last sort of which our Horse-troopes are compounded , are called Dragons , which are a kind of footmen on Horseback , and do now indeed succeed the light Horsemen , and are of singular use in all the actions of War ; their Arms defensive are an open headpiece , with cheeks , and a good Buff coat , with deep skirts ; and for offensive arms , they have a fair Dragon filted with an Iron work to be carried in a Belt of leather , which is buckled over the right shoulder , and under the left arm , having a Turn●ll of Iron with a ring through which the piece runneth up and down ; and these Dragons are short pieces of 16. inches the Barrel , and full Musket bore , with firelocks or snaphances : also a Belt , with a Flask , pryming-boxe , key , and Bullet-bag , and a good Sword : the Horse shall be armed with a Saddle , Bridle , Bit , Petrell , Crupper , with Straps for his sack of necessaries , and the Horse himself shall be either a good lusty Gelding , or a nimble stoned Horse . These Dragons in their Marches are allowed to be eleven in a Range or File , because when they serve , it is many times on foot , for the maintenance or surprising of straight ways , Bridges , or Fords , so that when ten men alighteth to serve , the eleventh man holdeth their Horses : So that to every Troop of an hundred , there is an hundred and ten men allowed . 

Now for the Arming of the superior Officers of these Troops , you shall understand , that a Captain of Cuirasseirs may be armed at all pieces Cap a Pe , in such sort as I showed for the Gentlemen at Arms , only he shall have no Lance nor Battle-axe , but only his Pistols and Sword , his own head , his Horse's head , and his Horses buttocks may be plumed . He may lead his men with a white Trunche on charged on his right thigh . His place is on the head of his Troop before the Trumpet ; he hath the absolute governmemt of his Troop , both for instruction and maintenance : only he is to receive all especial Orders from his Colonel ; His Colonel from the Sergeant-major of the field , and the Sergeant-major from the Marshal . 

The Lieutenant may be armed to the knee like the Captain , and his own head , and his Horses plumed ; his place is at the Rear , and in Marches he may carry a Truncheon , but of a thicker size then that of the Captains . 

The Cornet shall be armed and horsed in all points both defensive and offensive , like the Lieutenant , only in stead of the Truncheon , he shall carry charged on his right thigh , his Captain's Cornet , which ( being a private Captain ) should be compounded of Colour and Mettle impaled , that is , the one half Colour , the other Mettle . The substance of the Cornet should be of Damask , and the form must be almost square , ( only a little longer from the staff then on the staff , ( and frindged about sutablie . The staff shall be small like a foot Ensign , and not so long as an ordinary Lance ; it must be headed with Steel , and either guilt or silvered ; with fair Tassels suitable to the Cornet . If the Cornet belong to a greater Officer , it shall then be of one entire Colour , of less quantity and full square ; And in this Cornet , the Captain may carry devise and word , or else none , at his own pleasure . 

The Trumpet is not bound to any Arms at all , more than his Sword , which in former times was not allowed , but with the point broken : He shall have a fair Trumpet , with Cordens suitable to his Captain's Colours , and to his Trumpet shall be made fast a fair Banner , containing his Captains full Coat-armour ; he may wear Scarf and feather , and all other ordinary accoutrements of a horsemen , and for his horse it shall be a good hackney , with Gentlemanlike furniture . 

The Corporals shall be armed at all points , and horsed like the main body of the Troop , only in their right hands they shall carry Truncheons ; for their office is , like the Sergeants of Foot Companies , to ride extravagantly up and down on either side the Troop , & to see them keep their Ranks and Files , and that all things may be performed which shall come from the Captain's direction . They are likewise to supply and do all the duties of Corporals , and Lamprizadoes of Foot , both upon Scouts , Watches , and Guards , as also to look to the provision of all necessary things which appertaineth to the Troop , and where their own power cannot reform , there to inform their superior Officers . And therefore these Officers are to be chosen out of the Troop , as the principal and best understanding men therein . 

The Captain of the Hargobusseirs shall be armed , horsed and accoutered at all points like the Lieutenants of Cuirassiers ; the Lieutenants of the Hargobusseirs like the Cornet of Cuirassiers ; and the Cornet of Hargobusseirs like a private Gentleman of the troop of Cuirassiers . 

The Captain of dragons shall be armed like the Lieutenant of the Hargobusseirs ; the Lieutenant of Dragons like the Cornet of Hargobusseirs ( the Cornet and Pistols excepted for he shall carry the weapons of his own troop ) and the Guidon ( for these shall not be led with a Cornet ) of the dragons shall be armed like a private Gentleman of Hargobusseirs . And here is to be noted , that the difference betwixt the Cornet and the Guidon is much ; for the Guidon is the first Colours that any Commander of horse can let fly in the field ; This Guidon is of damask friudged , & may be charged either with the Crest of him that is the owner thereof , or with other devise at his pleasure ; It is in proportion three foot at the least deep in the top next the staff , & upon the staff and so extendeth down narower and narower to the bottom where the end is sharp , but with a slit divided into two peaks a foot deep ; the whole Guidon is six foot long , and should be carried upon a Lance staff . If the Captain ( owner of this Guidon ) shall do a good day's service , or produce from his virtue something worthy advancement , so that he is called to a better command , as to lead Hargobusseirs , or Cuirassiers , then the General or officer in chief , shall with a knife cut away the the two peaks , & then it is made a Cornet which is longer one way then another ; If ( after that ) he do any thing worthily , whereby he is made by the King or Supreme , either Banneret or Baron , then shall his Cornet be made Just square in form of a Banner , which none may carry in the field on horsbacke under those degrees ; Now if these noble Customs be neglected and that men out of ambition , usurpation , Ignorance or Conivance , take to themselves other Liberties , let those great knowledges which have the command of Arms reform it , or else virtue will fit mourning at the Ladder foot , because she hath not one true Round left to mount by . 

Having thus given you a brief touch of the election of men and horses , and the manner of Arming & appointing them to each several service , with some other especial notes which ( as strangers unlooked for ) have encountered me by the way , and I hope are not all unworthy your consideration , I will now proceed to the forms and manner of Training of men on horsbacke . 

That form ( as I said before ) is to be followed which is soon and easiest learned and fittest for all manner of service ; Therefore supposing you have a Troop of one hundred horse standing in Route , you shall first draw them out man after man , into as many files as the number will contain , every file consisting of six persons ; that is to say a leader , two midlemen , a bringer up , a follower between the Leader and the midleman to the Rear , and a Follower between the midleman to the Front , and the Bringer up which is the last man in the file and called the Rear ; for you must know that a Troop of horse consisteth of Ranks and Files as well as a Company of foot , and having set file unto file close , that is Cuise unto Cuise , or knee unto knee , and made every man to follow his Leader in an even line , you shall then ( having left some space between the ranks ) make the ranks stand even , and in one line also , so that looking upon the whole Battle , you may see them present unto you a just square , then going to the head you shall find you are sixteen in Rank , and six in File , which maketh nintie six men , to which add three Corporals , & the Clerk of the Troop ( who is the Captains continual attendant ) and there is the full Troop of one hundred Men and Horse . Where by the way understand , that as in Foot Companies , so in Horse Troops , a Rank may consist of as many men as you please , according to the number of your Troop . But a File ought never to be above six deep , because that number is sufficient for duty , and more are cumbersome , and not so fit to take directions . 

This Troop of one hundred , you shall divide into three Squadtons , the first Squadron shall appertain to the Captain , the second to the Lieutenant , and the third to the Cornet ; and under them the elder Corporal shall command the Captain's Squadron , the second , the Lieutenants , and the youngest , the Cornets : And the Cornet himself shall ever march upon the head of his own Squadron . These Squadrons shall be divided into as many Files as the number will contain , and the principal and best understanding Gentlemen of the Troop , shall be the Leaders , Bringers up , and Middlemen of every File . 

The Troop being thus form into Battle , and divided into Ranks and Files ; In Trayning there are five principal things to be taught . 

First , the manage and government of the Horse , contained in certain motions of the hand , foot , and sometimes of the whole Body . 

Secondly , the carriage and use of Arms , contained in diverse Postures . 

Thirdly , Distance or orderly proportion in Ranks and Files . 

Fourthly , March and Motion , contained in words and commands of especial directions . 

And lastly , the Sounding and Commands of the the Trumpet . 

For the manage and government of the Horse , though it be supposed that the Horse is ridden and made perfect before he came into the Soldier's hands , yet if the Soldier cannot ( after an orderly manner ) make the Horse do what he hath been taught , and likewise correct , or help him ( in due time ) when the Horse shall either do amiss , or not do with so comely a grace and dexterity as he ought . The motion without all question will be full of disorder and confusion . 

The first word therefore of Command to the Soldier , is — Mount your Horse . 




For it is to be supposed , no Horseman is so simple , as not to know how to dress or apparel his Horse , and therefore for the monture it is in this manner ; 

He shall first in his left hand take the Bridle-rayne , laying his thumb flat on the nearest side of the Rain and his forefinger , his great-finger and his ring-finger groping the far side , and the little finger he shall put between the Reinss , and so with the other hand stretching the Reinss to an even length , that the Horse may feel he is within restraint , the Horseman turning his left shoulder to the Horses near shoulder , shall put his left foot into the Stirrup , and then staying his left hand upon the pomell of the Saddle , he shall bring his right hand to the hinder part of the Saddle , which as soon as he toucheth , he shall immediately ( without heaving or iumping ) raise his body from the ground , and bring it into the Saddle . 

The other words of Command , are — Advance forward . 




This the Soldier shall do by thrusting both his legs forward at an instant , suddenly and strongly , and a little yielding his body forward , ( yet as covert as may be ) and when you have advanst enough , by restraining your Bridle-hand , gently make the Horse stand still . And this Advancement shall be done either upon footpace , upon trot , or upon Gallop , as the Captain shall command — then Retire your Horse . 




This is to make the Horse retrayt or go back , which the Soldier shall do by drawing in his Bridle-hand straight , and observing that as the Horse yieldeth and goeth back , so he must also yield and make gentle his hand . And when he hath gone back sufficiently , than the Soldier shall jert both his legs forward suddenly , and that will stay the Horse from retiring any further . — then Trot your large ring to the right hand . 
Troth your large ring to the left . 
Gallop your large ring to the right hand . 
Gallop your large ring to the left . 




Any of these the Soldier shall do by thrusting the Horse forward with his toes upon the Stirrup , or with the help of the calves of his legs against the Horse's sides , or else with the even stroke of his Spurs , ( in case of dullnes ) and the Soldier shall observe in this lesson to take a very large Circumference , both for the Horse's ease , and his own instruction . And there is no motion more necessary than this , because it is used in every Charge , in every Conversion , but chiefly in Wheeling . — then Set a straight turn to the right hand . 
Set a straight turn to the left . 




This ( if the Horse be ready ) the Soldier shall do , by drawing up his Bridle-hand straight , and turning it inward to the side on which he would turn , and then clapping the calf of his outward leg hard to the Horse's side , and jetting it suddenly forward again , and ( if there be dulness ) by giving the Spur on the outside also he shall make the Horse turn Terra , Terra , in as small a Circumference as may be . And this serves for Countermarches , Charges , or any sudden Assault or Engagement . — then Pass sidewayes to the right hand . 
Pass sidewayes to the left . 
Pass sidewayes to both by division . 




Any of these the Soldier must do by a constant restraynt of his Bridle hand , and ( as it were ) carrying the foreparts of the Horse to that side he would pass , as also laying his contrary leg , and sometimes his Spur to the contrary side , and so making his hinder parts to go equally with his foreparts . And this lesson serves for the Closing and opening of Fyles . — Last Pass a Career and stop close . 




This the Soldier shall do by thrusting the horse violently forward both with his legs and body , and giving liberty to the Bridle . As soon as the Horse is started into his Gallop , he shall give him the even stroke of his Spurs , once or twice together , and make the Horse run to the height of his full speed , then being at the end of the Career ( which will not be above six score or eight score yards ) he shall then draw up his Bridle-hand very hard and constantly , and laying the calves of both his legs gently to the Horses sides , make the Horse stop close to the ground , with only a comely Advancement . And this serves for all manner of Charges , whether it be Horse against Horse , or Horse against Foot . 

When your Soldier can do these things perfectly , he can then do as much as belongeth to the Manage and Government of the Horse : You shall then proceed to the second instruction , which is the Carriage and Use of Arms , contained in diverse Postures . 

Now for as much as the principal Weapons on Horseback , are Pistols , Petronells , or Dragons , and that all these are with firelocks , and those firelocks ( for the most part ) Snap-hances , because the other are too curious , and too soon distempered with an ignorant hand . I will therefore under the name of the Pistol only , ( without any tedious Comment ) give you the names of the Postures , not doubting but every man of Command , will ( upon the reading ) at the first sight find out the application . 

You shall understand then that the Postures of the Pistoll-snaphance , are twentie-foure ; whereof three are to be done standing , two Marching , fourteen Charging , and five Discharging . 

The three Postures which are to be done standing , are — 1.  Prepare for Service . 

Which is to gag the Flask , and to put Bullets into your mouth . — then 


2.  The Scout Posture . 
3.  The Saluting Posture . 


The fourteen Postures which are used in Charging , — are 1.  Draw up your Cock . 
2.  Secure your Cock . 
3.  Open your Pann . 
4.  Prime your Pann . 
5.  Close your Pann . 
6.  Shake off your loose corns . 
7.  Blow your Pann . 
8.  Turn your Pistol about into your left hand . 
9  Charge with Powder . 
10.  Draw out your Scouring Stick . 
11.  Ram in your Powder . 
12.  Charge with Bullet . 
13.  Ram in your Bullet . 
14.  Put up your scouring stick , and stand ready . 


The five Postures which are to be performed in Discharging , — are Draw down your Hammer . 
Unloose your Cock . 
Present . 
Give fire . 
Dismount your Pistol , and put it up . 


Now as in Foot Companies , so in Horse-troopes . In the time of present service , these many Postures are reduced unto these three only ; Make ready . 
Present . 
Give fire . 


The first is done Standing or Marching ; The second , in the Charge , and the last , in the face of the Enemy . 

Now for as much as time is precious , this labour tedious , and men unwilling to take long pains , it shall not be amiss ( for the speedier perfecting of the men ) first to labour the Leaders of the Files ( which should be the most sufficient men of the Troop ) in all these Lessons before showed , and then to make every Leader to instruct the File he leads , which will not only make the Teachers strive to be excellent for their own glory sake , but also stir in the other ( which are taught ) a brave ambition to equal or exceed those that inform them . 

After they can thus Manage their Horses , and handle their Arms in a decent manner ; you shall then come to the third Lesson , which is , Distance of place , and orderly proportion . A matter necessary and dependant upon every Form of Battle , and may not be absent either from Rank or File . 

It is then to be understood , that in Horse-troopes there are but two sorts of Distances or Orders , either in Ranks or Files ; That is , Close Order , and Open Order , Close order in Fyles , is Cuish to Cuish , or knee to knee , and Open order in Fyles , is six foot ( which is accounted an Horse length ) : So Close order in Ranks , is to the Horse's Crupper , or without Street , and Open order is six foot , above which the Ranks must never open . And therefore that the Troop may March orderly and keep their Distance truly , let the whole Troop in Marching , move all at one instant , that is , when the head begins , than the Rear to be ready , so shall they seldom be found to err disorderly . Also you must know , that when the Troop cometh to March in Battalions , that then they must March at their Close Order in Fyles , and at Open Order in Ranks . But when they come to do the Evolutions or motions in war , than they must be at their Open-order , both in Fyles and Ranks . The distance betwixt Troop and Troop ought to be twentie-five paces ; and between Regiment and Regiment fifty paces . And thus much for distance or proportion of place . 

The fourth Lesson succeeding for the use of the Horse-troopes , is March or Motion , both of the horse and man performed in an orderly and comely manner , without neglect of any of the three former Lessons already described ; for in all these motions following , there must be a true Manage of the Horse , and government of the man's body , a formal and cunning carriage of the Weapon , and a due observation in keeping the just measure and proportion in distances according to direction . 

Now the words of especial direction for the particular Motions on horseback in any Battalions , are these or the like following . 

Stand right in your Files . 
Stand right in your Ranks . 
And this is to stand truly man after man , and horse after horse ; as also , man against man , and horse against horse . — then — 

Silence . 
Open your Ranks . 
Open your Files to the right hand . 
Open your Files to the left . 
Open your Files to both hands by division . 
And any of these to any order aforesaid . 

Close your Files to the right hand . 
Close your Files to the left . 
Close your Files to both hands by division . 
And these also to any order aforesaid ; also in opening the Squadron , you must ever first open the Ranks , which must be done downward to the Rear , and then the Files . And in Closing ; you must first close the Files , and then the Ranks , which must ever be done upward towards the Front. — then — Double your Files to the right hand . 
Double your Files to the left . 
Double your Files to both by division . 


And this to any order aforesaid . — Double your Ranks to the right hand . 
Double your Ranks to the left . 
Double your Ranks to both by division . 


And this to any order aforesaid . — Middlemen double the Front to the right hand . 
Middlemen double the Front to the left . 
Middlemen double the Front to both hands by division . 
Bringers up double the Front to the right hand . 
Bringers up double the Front to the left . 
Bringers up double the Front to both hands by division . 


And these to either order aforesaid . — To the right hand turn . 
To the left hand turn . 
To both hands turn by conversion . 
To the right hand about turn . 
To the left as you were . 
To the left hand about turn . 
To the right as you were . 


Now to reduce any Motion before showed , to the same station , in which the Horseman stood before the Command given , you shall use this general word ; — 

As you were . 

Countermarch to the right hand . 
Countermarch to the left . 
Countermarch to both by Conversion . 
Wheel to the right hand . 
Wheel to the left . 
Wheel to both by Conversion . 
And in this Motion of Countermarching , you must observe , that the Leaders ( if it be in a standing Countermarch ) do advance forward full one Horse length before they turn , and then turn to which hand they are commanded , all the Ranks successively following , to make good the Leaders place of turning before they turn , and so to perfect the Countermarch . But if it be to be done upon a greater advancement , then shall either a Corporal or other higher Officer stand at the place of turning , and the Leaders shall advance up unto him and there turn to either hand , according to direction , and so successively all the rest of the Ranks in the Troop , till the Countermarch be made perfect . 

So also in the Motion of Wheeling , you must observe , if the Troop be under an hundred , first to double your Front to the one or the other hand , either by the Bringers up , or the Middlemen , before you Wheel , and then standing at their close order , to Wheel about , or otherwise at pleasure . 

Again , observe when you Wheel to the right hand , to double your Front to the left hand ; and when you Wheel to the left hand , to double your Front to the right hand ; for so the Leaders of the right and left hand Fyles will keep their places on that corner to which you Wheel . 

Lastly , to reduce and bring every man into his first place again , — You shall say , — Files to the right ( or left ) hand open to your Open order . 
Bringers up ( or Middlemen ) to your first places as you were . 


And in this Motion observe , that if the Bringers up did double the Front , then shall the Middlemen being in the Rear first fall into their places , than the Follower , and lastly , the Bringer up . And so if the Middlemen did double the Front , than those Middlemen being in the Front , shall in Countermarch fall into their first places , after them their Followers , and last of all the Bringer up . 

The fifth and last Lesson belonging unto the Horse-troop , is to teach the Soldier the Sounds and commands of the Trumpet , and to make him both understand the Notes and Language of the Trumpet , as also in due time to perform all those duties and Commands , which are required by the Trumpet . And of these Sounding ( which we generally call Points of War ) there are six , which are most necessary for the Soldier's knowledge . — The first is — 

1.  Butte Sella : — or — 

Clap on your Saddles . 

Which as soon as the Soldier heareth ( in the morning , or at other times ) he shall presently make ready his Horse , and his own person , truss up his sack of necessaries , and make all things fitting for journey . 

The second is , — 

2.  Mount Cavallo — or — 

Mount on Horseback . 

At which Summons , the Soldier shall bridle up his Horse , bring him forth , and mount his back . 

The third is — 

3.  Al'a Standardo , — or — 

Go to your Colours . 

Whether it be Standard Cornet● ● or Guydon , upon which sound , the Soldier with those of his Fellowship , shall troth forth to the place where the Cornet is lodged , and there attend till it b● dislodged . Also , this sound in the field , and in service , when men are dis-banded , is a Retrayt for the Horseman , and brings him off being engaged , for as oft as he hears it , he must retire and go back to his Colours . 

The fourth is , — 

4.  Tucquet , — or — 

March. — 

Which being heard simply of itself without addition , commands nothing but a Marching after the Leader . 

The fifth is , — 

5.  Carga , Carga , — or — 

An Alarm , Charge , Charge . 

Which sounded , every man ( like Lightning ) flies upon his enemy , and gives proof of his valour . 

The sixth and last is , — 

6.  Auquet , — or — 

The Watch.  

Which sounded at night , commands all that are out of duty to their rest ; and sounded in the morning , commands those to rest that have done duty , and those that have rested , to awake and do duty . And in these Sounds , you shall make the Soldier so perfect● that as a song he may lanquet or sing them , and know when they are sounded unto him . 

Other Sounding there are ; as , Tend Ho , for listening , a Call for Summons , a Senet for State , and the like . But they have reference to the greater Officers , and those have no need of my Instructions . 

Having thus run through all those parts which make up a serviceable Soldier on Horseback , I will conclude this Discourse , with these few notes following . 

First , You shall understand , that the Cavallerie , or Horse-armie , have for their chief Officers the General of the Horse ; the Lieutenant-generall of the Horse ; and the Sergeant Maior of the Horse , which in some discipline is called the Commissary-generall , or Colonel general of the Horse . And betwixt these three , the whole Army of Horsemen is divided . They have also a Quartermaster , and a Provost-generall . 

The justice rests under the Councell-generall of War in the Army . 

The General's Regiment hath always the Vanguard , and the rest alternately by turns , as he that this day hath the Vanguard , the next day hath the Rear ; and so of all the rest . 

The Colonels have their Regiments Compounded of three or four Troops , and seldom above five , or under three ; and the Colonels Troop ever marcheth on the left Wing of the Regiment . 

The Captains of Horse receive their directions from the Colonels ; the Colonels from the Sergeant-major , and the Sergeant-major from the Lord Martial . 

Thus much I have thought fit to impart , as an Introduction into these Military affairs , leaving to those larger and better enabled Spirits , the unbounded Field of Discourse , into which when they shall be pleased to enter , no doubt but the studious Observer , shall receive a much more worthy satisfaction . 

FINIS . 





Use of the Pike . Use of the Shot . How to give Volleys . Volleys marching . Volleys standing . Volleys retiring . Volleys upon advancement . Volleys upon a swift retreat .   Distance of place . The measure of Distances .   Of Marches . The several places of Officers . Of Motion● .   Of the sounds of the Drum.  Use of words . The words of proper directions . Charging of Pikes . Giving of fire by the Flank . Constancy in words giving . What March & Motion i● . Words of particular motion . What Postures are . The Postures of the Pike . The Postures of the Musket . Postures in Smirmish . Postures in exercising . Of the Hargobus . Repetition by way of advice . The Dignity of places . The use of the Table . Leaders of middle files . Middlemen to the Front and Rear . Subdevisionmen . The first six parts in Martial discipline  Carriage , election , and composition of Colours . Mixture of Colours . Colonels Colours . Superior Officers Colours . Where Gentlemen may find their Colours . 

Difficulty in this Art  Things considerable in this Art    Election of Men and Horses .   Arming of Gentlemen at Arms . Arming for Triumph . Arming of Launceirs . Arming of Light-horse . Arming of Cuirassiers . Arming of Hargobusseirs  Arming of Dragons . Arming of Captains . Arming of Lieutenants . Arming of Cornets . Arming of the Trumpet . Arming of Corporals . Captain of Hargobusiers and his officers . Captain of Dragons or his officers . Difference betwixt the Cornet and Guydon .   Forms of Trayning . The extent of a filo . The extent of a Rank . Division of the Troop . Five things to be taught .   Manage of the Horse . Words of Command . The performance . The Word . The performance . The Word . The performance . The Word . The performance . The Word . The performance . The Word . The performance . The Word . The performance .   Carriage and use of Arms . Posture of the Pistol . Postures in Skirmish . The best way to Teach .   Distance of place . Of Motion .   Of Marches . Words of especial direction . Observation in Countermarching : Observation in Wheeling . Observations    Of the Trumpet . The first point of War . The second . The third . The fourth . The fifth . The sixth . Special notes  