The Triumphs of Honour and Industry . 

A Solemnity performed through the City , at Confirmation and establishment of the Right Honourable , GEORGE BOWLES , In the Office of his Majesty's Lieutenant , the Lord Mayor of the famous City of London . 

Taking beginning at his Lordship's going , and proceeding after his Return from receiving the Oath of Mayoralty at westminster , on the morrow next after Simon and judes' day October 29. 1617.  

IN DOMINO CONFIDO 

LONDON , Printed by Nicholas Okes , 1617.  

To the Worthy Deserver of all the Costs and Triumphs , which the Noble Society of Grocers in bounteous measure bestow on him , the Right Honourable , GEORGE BOWLES , Lord Mayor of the famous City of London . 

Right Honourable , 

Out of the slightest labours and employments there may that Virtue sometimes arise , that may enlighten the best part of man , nor have these kind of Triumphs an idle Relish , especially if they be Artfully accomplished , under such an esteemed slightness may often lurk that fire that may shame the best perfection : For instance , what greater means for the imitation of Virtue and Nobleness can any where present itself with more Alacrity to the Beholder , than the Memorable Fames of those Worthies in the Castle , manifested by their Escutcheons of Arms , the only Symbols of Honour and Antiquity . The Honourable Seat that is reserved , all men have hope , that your justice and Goodness will exactly merit , to the Honour of which I commend your Lordship's Virtues , remaining 

At your Honour's service , T. M.  

The Triumphs of Honour and Industry . 

IT hath been twice my fortune in short time to have employment for this Noble Society , where I have always met with men of much understanding , and no less bounty , to whom cost appears but as a shadow , so there be fullness of content in the performance of the solemnity , which that the world may judge of , for whose pleasure & satisfaction , custom hath yearly framed it , ( but chiefly for the honour of the City ) it begins to present itself , not without form and order , which is required in the meanest employment . 

The first Invention . 

A Company of Indians , attired according to the true Nature of their Country , seeming for the most part naked , are set at work in an Island of growing spices ; some planting Nutmeg Trees , some other spice trees , of all kinds , some gathering the fruits , some making up bags of Pepper , every one severally employed ; These Indians are all active youths , who ceasing in their labours , dance about the trees , both to give content to themselves and the spectators . 

After this show of dancing Indians in the Island , follows triumphantly a rich personage , presenting India , ( the Seat of Merchandise ) this India sits on the top of an Illustrious Chariot , on the one side of her sits traffic or merchandise , on the other side , Industry , both fitted and adorned according to the property of their natures , Industry holding a golden Ball in her hand upon which stands a Cupid , signifying that Industry gets both wealth and love , and with her associate Traffic or Merchandise , who holds a Globe in her hand , knits love and peaec amongst all Nations , to the better expressing of which , if you give attention to Industry , that now sets forward to speak , it will be yours more exactly . 

The speech of Industry in the Chariot . 

I Was jealous of the shadowing of my grace , 
But that I know this is my time and place ; 
Where has not Industry a noble friend , 
In this Assembly , even the best extend 
Their grace and love to me , ( joyed or amazed ) 
Who , of true Fame possessed but I have raised , 
And after added Honours to his days , 
For Industry is the lifeblood of praise , 
To rise without me , is to steal to glory , 
And who so abject to leave such a story , 
It is as clear as Light , as bright as truth , 
Fame waits their age , whom Industry their youth . 
Behold this Ball of Gold , upon which stands 
A golden Cupid wrought with curious hands , 
The mighty power of Industry it shows , 
That gets both wealth , and love , which overflows 
With such a stream of Amity an a peace , 
( Not only to itself adding increase ) 
But several nations where commerce abounds 
Taste the harmonious peace , so sweetly sounds , 
For instance , let your gracious eye be fixed , 
Upon a joy , true , though so strangely mixed . 


And that you may take the better note of their adornments , India whose seat is the most eminent , for her expression , holds in her hand a wedge of gold , traffic her associate , a Globe , Industry a fair golden Ball in her hand , upon which stands a golden Cupid , Fortune expressed with a silver wheel , Success holding a painted Ship in a Haven , wealth a golden key where her heart lies , Virtue bearing for her manifestation , a silver shield , Grace holding in her hand a book , Perfection , a crown of gold . 

At which words the Pageant of several Nations , which is purposely planted near the sound of the words , moves with a kind of affectionate joy , both at the honour of the day's triumph , and the prosperity of Love , which by the virtue of Traffic , is likely ever to continue , and for a good Omen of the Everlasting continuance of it , on the top of this curious and triumphant Pageant , shoots up a Laurel tree the leaves spotted with gold , about which sit six celestial figures , presenting Peace , Prosperity , Love , Unity , Plenty , & Fidelity , Peace holding a branch of Palm , Prosperity a Laurel , Love , two joined hands , Unity two Turtles , Plenty holding fruits , Fidelity a silver anchor . But before I entered so far I should have showed you the zeal and love of the Frenchman and Spaniard , which now I hope will not appear unseasonably , who not content with a silent joy like the rest of the Nations , have a thirst to utter their gladness , though understood of a small number , which is this . 

The short speech delivered by the Frenchman in French.  

La multitude m'ayant monte sur ce haut lieu , pour contempler le glorieux triumph de ceste journee , le voy quen quelque sort la noble dignity de la treshonorable societe des Grociers y est representee , dont mesiovissant par dessus tous , le leur souhaite & a Monsegneur le Mayre le Comble de touttes nobles & heureuses fortunes . 

The same in English . 

IT is my joy chiefly , ( and I stand for thousands ) to see the glory of this triumphant day , which in some measure requires the noble worthiness of the Honourable Society of Grocers , to whom and to my Lord Mayor I wish all good successes . 



This Frenchman no sooner sets a period to his speech , but the Spaniard in zeal as virtuous as he , utters himself to the purpose of these words . 

The Spaniards speech in Spanish . 

Ningunas' de todas estas naciones conciben mayor y ver dadera alegria en este triumphante y glorioso diamond que yo , no , minguna de todas ellas , porque agora que me parece ▪ que son tan ricas , es senal que los de my naciòn en tratando con ellas receberan , mayor provecho dellas , All my signior Don Maior todas buenas y dichosas fortunas , Y a los de la honrada Compania de Especicros dichosoes dessi eos , Y assi dios guard a my signior Don Mayor , y rogo à dios que todo el anno siguiente , puede ser tan dichoso , common esta entrada suya , a la digmday de lu seniora , Guard dios a su sennoria . 

The same in English . 

None of all these Nations , conceive more true joy at this triumphant day , than myself , to my Lord Mayor all fair and noble fortunes , and to the worthy Society of Grocers , all happy wishes , and I pray heaven , that all the year following may be as happy and successful , as this first entrance to your dignity . 



This expression of their joy and love having spent itself , I know you cannot part contented , without their several inscriptions ; now the favour and help must be in you , to conceive our breadth and limits , and not to think we can in these customary bounds comprehend all the nations , but so many as shall serve to give content to the understander , which thus produce themselves . 

An Englishman . 
A Frenchman . 
An Irishman . 
A Spaniard . 
A Turk . 
A jew.  
A Dane . 
A Polander . 
A Barbarian . 
A Ruscian or Moscovian . 
This fully expressed , I arrive now at that part of Triumph , which my Desire ever hastened to come to , this Castle of Fame or Honour , which Industry brings her Sons unto in their Reverend Ages . 

In the front of this Castle , Reward and Industry decked in bright Robes , keep a Seat between them for him to whom the Day's honour is dedicated , showing how many worthy Sons of the City , and of the same Society , have by their Truth , Desert and Industry come to the like honour before him , where on a sudden is shown divers of the same Right Worshipful Society of Grocers , manifested both by their good government in their Times , as also by their Escutcheons of Arms , as an example and encouragement to all Virtuous and Industrious deservers in time to come : And in honour of Antiquity is shown that Ancient and Memorable Worthy of the Grocer's Company , Andrew Bockrill , who was Mayor of London the sixteenth year of Henry the third , 1231. and continued so Mayor seven years together . 

Likewise for the greater honour of the Company , is also shown in this Castle of Fame , the Noble Allen de la Zouch , Grocer , who was Mayor of London the two and fiftieth year of the same Henry the third , which Allen de la Zouch , for his good Government in the Time of his Mayoralty , was by the said King Henry the third , made both a Baron of this Realm , and Lord Chief justice of England : Also that Famous Worthy , Sir Thomas Knoles , Grocer , twice Mayor of this Honourable City , which Sir Thomas begun at his own charge that famous building of Guildhall in London , and other Memorable works , both in this City , and in his own Company , so much Worthiness being the Lustre of this Castle , and aught indeed to be the Imitation of the Beholder . 

My Lord no sooner approaches , but Reward a Partner with justice in keeping that Seat of Honour , as over-ioyde at the sight of him , appears too free and forward in the Resignation . 

Reward .  Welcome to Fame's bright Castle , take thy place , 
This seat's reserved to do thy virtue's grace . 


justice .  True , but not yet to be possessed , hear me , 
justice must flow through him , before that be , 
Great works of Grace must be required and done , 
Before the honour of this Seat be wone . 
A whole years reverend care in righting wrongs , 
And guarding Innocence from malicious tongues . 
Must be employed in Virtues sacred right , 
Before this place be filled ; 't is no mean fight , 
That wins this Palm , truth , and a virtuous care , 
Of the oppressed , those the Lodestones are , 
That will 'gainst Envy's power draw him forth , 
To take this merit in this seat of worth : 
Where all the memorable worthies shine , 
In works of brightness , able to refine , 
All the beholders minds , and strike new fire , 
To kindle an industrious desire , 
To imitate their actions , and their Fame , 
Which to this Castle adds that glorious Name . 
wherefore Reward , free as the Air or Light , 
There must be Merit , or our work 's not right . 


Reward .  IF there were any error ' was my love , 
And if it be a fault to be too free , 
Reward commits but once such heresy . 
How ere , I know your worth will so extend , 
Your fame will fill this seat at twelve month's end . 


About this Castle of Fame are placed many honourable figures , as Truth , Antiquity , Harmony , Fame , Desert , Good works , on the top of the castle , Honour , Religion , Piety , Commiseration ; the works of those whose memories shine in this Castle . 

If you look upon Truth first , you shall find her properly expressed , holding in her right hand a Sun , in the other a Fan of Stars , Antiquity with a scroll in her hand , as keeper of Honour's Records ; Harmony holding a golden Lute , and Fame not without her silver trumpet , for desert 't is glorious through her own brightness , but holds nothing ; good works expressed with a College or Hospital . 

On the top of the Castle , Honour manifested by a fair Star in his hand , Religion with a Temple on her head , Piety with an Altar , Commiseration with a melting or burning Heart . 

And not to have our speakers forgotten , ( Reward and justice ) with whom we entered this part of Triumph , Reward holding a wreath of gold , ready for a deserver ; and justice furnished with her Sword and balance . 

All this service is performed before the Feast , some in Paul's Churchyard , some in Cheapside , at which place the whole Triumph meets , both Castle and Island , that gave delight upon the water , And now ( as duty binds me ) I commend my Lord and his right honourable Guests to the solemn pleasure of the feast , from whence I presume all Epicurism is banished ; for where Honour is master of the feast , Moderation and Gravity are always attendants . 

The feast being ended at Guildhall , my Lord ( as yearly custom invites him ) goes accompanied with the triumph towards S. Paul's , to perform the noble and reverend ceremonies which divine Antiquity virtuously ordained , and is no less than faithfully observed , which is no mean lustre to the City , Holy service and ceremonies accomplished , he returns by torchlight to his own house , the whole triumph placed in comely order before him , and at the entrance of his gate , Honour a glorious person , from the top of the Castle gives life to these following words . 

The speech of Honour from the top of the Castle , at the entrance of my Lord Mayor's Gate . 

Honor.   There is no human glory or renown , 
But have their evening & their sure sunset , 
Which shows that we should upward seek our Crown 
And make but use of time for our hopes bettering , 
So to be truly mindful of our own , 
Is to perform all parts of good in one ; 
The close of this triumphant day is come , 
And Honour stays to bid you welcome home , 
All I desire for my Grace and good , 
Is but to be remembered in your blood , 
With Honour to accomplish the fair time , 
Which power hath put into your hands ; A crime 
As great as ever came into sins band , 
I do entitle a too sparing hand , 
Nothing deads' Honour more , then to behold 
Plenty cooped up ; and Bounty faint and cold ; 
Which ought to be the free life of the year , 
For bounty ' was ordained , to make that clear 
Which is the light of goodness and of Fame , 
And puts by Honour from the cloud of shame . 
Great cost and love hath nobly been bestowed , 
Upon thy triumph , ( which this day hath showed : 
Embrace 'em in thy heart , till times afford 
Fuller expression ; in one absolute word , 
All the content that ever made man blessed , 
This triumph done , make a triumphant breast . 




no sooner the speech is ended , but the triumph is dissolved , and not possible to scape the hands of the defacer , things that for their quaintness ( I dare so far commend them ) have not been usually seen through the City ; the credit of which workmanship I must justly lay upon the deserts of Mr. Rowland Bucket , chief master of the work ; yet not forgetting the faithful care and industry of my well approved friend , Master Henry Wild , and Master jacob Challoner , partners in the business . 

The season cuts me off , & after this day's trouble I am as willing to take my rest . 

FINIS . 

