THE TRIUMPHS of Love and Antiquity . 

An Honourable Solemnity performed through the City , at the confirmation and establishment of the Right Honourable Sir William Cockayn , Knight , in the office of his Majesty's Lieutenant , the Lord Mayor of the Famous City of London . 

Taking beginning in the morning at his Lordship's going , and perfecting itself after his return from receiving the oath of 〈…〉 ralty at Westminster , on the morrow after Simon and judes' Day , October 29. 1619.  

By THOUGH : MIDDLETON . Gent.  

LONDON , Printed by NICHOLAS OKES . 1619.  

TO THE HONOUR OF HIM , TO WHOM THE NOBLE Fraternity of Skinners , his worthy Brothers , have dedicated their Loves in Costly Triumphs , The Right Honourable , Sir WILLIAM COCKAYN , Knight , Lord Mayor of this Renowned City . And Lord General of his Military Forces . 

Love , Triumph , Honour , all the glorious graces , 
This Day holds in her gift ; fixed Eyes , and Faces 
Apply themselves in joy all to Your Look : 
In Duty then , my Service , and the Book , 
At your Lordship's Command , THO. MIDDLETON . 

The Triumphs of Love and Antiquity . 

IF Foreign Nations have been struck with admiration at the Form , State , and Splendour of some yearly Triumphs , wherein . Art hath been but weakly imitated , and most beggarly worded : there is fair hope that things where Invention flourishes , Clear Art and her graceful proprieties , should receive favour and encouragement from the content of the Spectator , which ( next to the service of his Honour , and honourable Society ) is the principal Reward it looks for ; and not despairing of that common favour ( which is often cast upon the undeseruer , through the distress and misery of judgement ) this takes delight to present itself . 

And first to begin early with the Love of the City to his Lordship , let me draw your attentions to his Honour's entertainment upon the water , where Expectation big with the joy of the Day , but beholding to free Love for Language and expression , thus salutes the Great Master of the Day and Triumph . 

The Speech , to entertain his Lordship upon the Water . 

Honour and joy double their B 〈…〉 , 
I , the Day's Love , the Cities g●●●●er all Love. 
Salute thee in the Sweetness 〈…〉 
All ▪ that behold me worthily , may se● ▪ 
How full mine eye stands of the joy 〈…〉 
The more , because I may with Confidence say , 
Desert and Love will be well matched too day : 
And herein the greatest pity will appear , 
This match can lust no longer than a year . 
T●● let not that discourage thy good ways , 
men's Loves will last to crown thy end of days , 
If those should fuile , which cannot easily die , 
Thy good works wed thee to Eternity . 
Let not the shortness then of Time dismay 
The largeness of thy worth ; gain every day , 
So many years thou 'gainst , that some have lost ; 
For they that think their Care is at great cost 
If they do any good , in Time so small , 
They make their Year but a poor Day in all . 
For as a Learned Man , will comprehend 
In Compass of his Hour , Doctrine so sound , 
Which give another a whole year to mend , 
He shall not equal , upon any ground : 
So the judicious when he comes to bear 
This powerful Office , struck with Divine fear , 
Collects his spirits , redeems his hours with care , 
Thinks of his Charge , and Oath , what Ties they are , 
And with a Virtuous Resolution than 
Works more good in one year , than some in Ten. 
Nor is this spoken any to detract , 
But all t' encourage to put Truth in Act. 
Mendoza thinks I see Oppression hang the head , 
Falsehood and Injury with their guilt struck dead 
At this Triumphant Hour , Ill Causes hide 
Their Leprous Faces , daring not t' abide 
The Brightness of this day ; and in mine ear 
Me thinks the Grace's Silver Chimes I hear . 
Good wishes are at work now in each hart , 
Throughout this sphere of Brotherhood play their part , 
chiefly thy Noble own Fraternity , 
As near in hart , as they 're in place to thee . 
The Ensigns of whose love Bounty displays , 
Yet esteems all their Cost short of thy praise : 
There will appear elected Sons of War , 
Which this fair City boasts of for their Care , 
Strength and experience , set in Truth of heart ; 
All great and glorious Masters in that Art 
Which gives to man his Dignity , Name and Seal , 
Prepared to speak Love in a Noble Peal . 
Knowing two Triumphs must on this day dwell , 
For Magistrate , one , and one for Colonel , 
Return Lord General , that 's the Name of State 
The Soldier gives Thee ; Peace , the Magistrate . 
On then , Great Hope , here that good care begins , 
Which now earths Love and ▪ Heavens hereafter wins . 
At his Lordship's return from Westminster , those worthy Gentlemen , whose loves & works were prepared before in the conclusion of the former Speech by water , are now all ready to salute their Lord General with a Noble Valley , at his Lordship's Landing : and in the best and most commendable Form , answerable to the nobleness of their free Love and Service , take their march before his Lordship , who being so Honourably conducted , meets the first Triumph by land , waiting his Lordship's most wished arrival , in Paul's Church yard , near Paul's Chain , which is a Wilderness , most gracefully and artfully furnished with divers kinds of Beasts bearing Fur , proper to the Fraternity , the Presenter , the Musical Orpheus , Great Master , both in Poesy and Harmony , who by his excellent Music , drew after him wild Beasts , Woods and Mountains ; over his Head an Artificial Cock , often made to crow , and flutter with his wings . This Orpheus at the approach of his Lordship , gives life to these words . 

The Speech delivered by Orpheus . 

Great Lord , Example is the Crystal Glass , 
By which wise Magistracy sets his face , 
Fits all his Actions to their comeliest Dress , 
For there he s●●t honour and Seemelinesse ; 
't is not like flauring glasses , those false Books 
Made to set Age , back , in great Courliers Looks ; 
Like Clocks on Revelling nights , that ne'er go right , 
Because the sports may yield more full delight , 
But when they break off then they find it Late , 
The Time and Truth appears , such is their State , 
Whose death by flatteries is set back , awhile , 
But meetes'em in the midst of then safe Smile . 
Such horrors th●se forgetful things ●●end , 
That only mind their ends , but not their End ; 
Leave them to their false Trust ; List thou to me , 
Thy power is great , so let thy virtues be , 
Thy care , thy watchfulness , which are but things 
Remembered to thy praise , from thence it spring's , 
And not from fear of any want in Thee , 
For in this Truth I may be comely , free , 
Never was man advanced , yet waited on 
With a more Noble Expectation ; 
that 's a great Work to perfect : and as Those 
That have in Art a Mastery , can oppose 
All comers , and come off with Learned Fame , 
Yet think not scorn still of a Scholar's name 
( A Title which they had in ignorant youth : ) 
So he that deals in such a weight of Truth 
As th' execution of a Magistrates place , 
Though never so exact inform and Grace , 
Both from his own Worth , and man's free Applause , 
Yet may he called a Labourer in the cause , 
And be thought good to be so , in true care , 
The Labour being so glorious , just , and fair . 
Behold then in a rough Example here 
The Rude and thonny ways thy care must clear , 
Such are the vices in a City sprung , 
As are yon Thickets that grow close and strong : 
Such is oppression , Cozenage , Bribes , false Hires , 
As are yon catching and entangling Briers : 
Such is Gout-iustice , that 's , Delay in Right , 
Demurs in Suits , that are as clear as Light. 
Just such a Wilderness is a Commonwealth , 
That is undressed , vnpruined , wild in her health ; 
And the rude multitude , the Beasts a' th wood , 
That know no laws , but only Will and Blood : 
And yet by fair Example , Musical Grace , 
Harmonious government of the Man in place , 
( Of fair Integrity , and wisdom framed ) 
They stand as mine do , ravished , charmed , and tamed . 
Every wise Magistrate that governs thus , 
May well be called a powerful Orpheus . 
Behold yon Bird of state , the vigilant Cock , 
The Morning's Herald , and the Ploughman's Clock , 
At whose shrill Crow the very Lion trembles , 
The sturdiest Prey-taker that here assembles ; 
How fitly d'os it match your Name , and power 
Fixed in that Name now by this glorious Hour , 
At your just Voice to shakebag the boldest offence 
And sturdiest sin , that ere had residence 
Insecure man , Yet with an equal Eye , 
Matching grave justice with fair Clemency ; 
It being the property He chiefly shower , 
To give Wing-warning , still before he Crows , 
To Crow before he strike , by his clapped Wing , 
To stir himself up first ( which needful thing 
Is every man's first duty ) by his Crow 
A gentle call , or warning , which should flow 
From every Magistrate , before he extend 
The Stroke of justice , he should reprehend , 
And try the virtue of a powerful word , 
If that prevail not , than the Spur , the Sword. 
See , herein honours to his Majesty 
Are not forgotten , when I turn , and see , 
The sever all Countries , in those faces , plain , 
Allowing Fealty to one Sovereign , 
The Noble English , the fair Thriving Scot , 
Plain hearted Welsh , the Frenchman bold and hot , 
The civilly instructed Irishman man , 
And that kind Savage , the Virginian ; 
All lovingly assembled , ●●n by Fate ; 
This thy Days Honour to congratulate . 
On then ; and as your service fills this place , 
So through the City do his Lordship Grace . 
At which words , this part of Triumph moves onward and meets the full Body of the Show in the other Paul's Church yard : then dispersing itself , according to the ordering of the Speechess following , one part which is the Sanctuary of Fame , plants itself near the little Conduit in Cheap ; another which bath the Title of the Parliament of Honour , at S. Laurence Lane end , Upon the Battlements of that beauteous Sanctuary , adorned with six & twenty bright burning lamps , having Allusion to the six and twenty Aldermen , ( they being for their justice , Government and Example , the Lights of the City ) a Grave Personage , crowned with the Title and Inscription of Example , breathes forth these sounds . 

Example . 

From that rough Wilderness , which did late present 
The perplexed State , and cares of Government , 
Which every painful Magistrate must meet ; 
Here the Reward stands for thee , a chief Seat 
In Fame's fair Sanctuary , where some of old 
Crowned with their Troubles now , are here enrolled 
In Memories sacred sweetness , to all ages ; 
And so much the World's Voice of Thee presages . 
And these that sit for many , with their graces 
Fresh as the Buds of Roses , though they sleep , 
In thy Society had once high places , 
Which in their good Works they for ever keep ; 
Life called 'em in their Time , Honour's fair Stars , 
Large Benefactors , and sweet Governors . 
If here were not sufficient Grace for Merit , 
Next Object , I presume , will raise thy Spirit . 
In this Maister-peice of Art , Fame's Illustrious Sanctuary , the Memory of those Worthies shine gloriously , that have been both Lord Majors of this City , and Noble Benefactors , and Brothers of this worthy Fraternity , to wit , 

S. Henry Barton , S. William Gregory , S. Stephen jennings , S. Thomas Mirfen , S. Andrew judd , S. Wolstone Dixe , S. Stephen Slanye , S. Richard Saltonstall : And now the Right Honourable Sir William Cockayn . 

That Sir Henry Barton an Honour to Memory , was the first , that for the safety of Travellers , & strangers by night through the City , caused lights to be hung out from Alhollontid to Candlemas ; therefore in this Sanctuary of Fame , where the beauty of good actions shine , he is most properly and worthily recorded . His Lordship by this time Gracefully conducted toward that Parliament of Honour , near S. Laurence Lane end , Anti quity from its Eminence , thus gloriously salutes Him.  

Antiquity in the Parliament of Honor.  

Grave City Governor ! so much honour do me , 
Vouchsafe thy presence and thy patience to me , 
And I 'll Reward that Virtue with a Story , 
That shall to thy Fraternity add Glory , 
then to thy Worth no mean part will arise , 
That art ordained Chief for that glorious Prize . 
't is I , that keep all the Records of Fame , 
Mother of Truths , Antiquity , my Name ; 
no Year , Month , Day , or Hour , that brings in place 
Good Works and Noble , for the City's Grace , 
But I Record ; that After Times may see 
What Former , were , and how they ought to be , 
Fruitful , and Thankful , in fair Actions flowing , 
To meet Heavens' blessings , to which much is owing ; 
For instance , Let all Grateful Eyes be placest 
Upon this Mount of Royalty , by Kings , graced , 
Queens , Prince , Duke's , Nobles , more by numbering gained 
then can be in this narrow Sphere contained . 
7.  Kings , 5.  Queens , only one Prince alone , 
8.  Dukes , 2.  Earls , Plantagenets twenty one ; 
All these of this Fraternity made Free , 
Brothers and Sisters of this Company ; 
And see with what propriety , the Fates 
Have to this Noble Brotherhood knit such States ; 
For what Society , the whole City brings , 
Can with such Ornaments Adorn their Kings , 
Their only Robes of State , when they consent 
To ride most glorious , to High Parliament ; 
And mark in this their Royal intent still , 
For when it pleased the Goodness of their Will , 
To put the richest Robes of their Loves on 
To the whole City , the Most , ever came 
To this Society , which Records here prove , 
Adorning their Adoruers , with their Love ; 
Which was a Kingly Equity : 
Be careful then , Great Lord , to bring forth Deeds , 
To match that Honour , that from hence proceeds . 
At the close of which Speech , the whole Triumph takes leave of his Lordship , for that Time , and till after the Feast at Guildhall , rests from Service . His Lordship accompanied with many Noble personages , the Honourable Fellowship of Ancient Magistrates and Aldermen of this City , the two new Sheriffs , the one , of his own Fraternity ( the complete Brotherhood of Skinners ) the Right Worshipful M. Sheriff Deane , a very Bountiful and worthy Citizen , not forgetting the Noble pains and loves of the Heroic Captains of the City , & Gentlemen of the Artillery Garden , making with two glorious Ranks a manly & Majestic passage for their Lord General , his Lordship , through Guildhall yard ; and afterwards their Loves to his Lordship resounding in a second Noble Volley . 

Now , that all the Honours before mentioned , in that Parliament , or Mount of Royalty , may arrive at a clear and perfect Manifestation , to prevent the overcurious & Inquisitive Spirit ; the Names and Times of those Kings , Queens , Prince , Duke's and Nobles , free of the Honourable Fraternity of Skinners in London , shall here receive their proper Illustrations . 

Anno 1329.  K. Edward the third , Plantagenet , by whom , in the first of his Reign this worthy Society of Skinners was incorporate , He , their first Royal Founder and Brother , Q Philip his wife , younger Daughter of William Earl of Henalt , the first Royal Sister , so gloriously virtuous , that she is a rich ornament to Memory , She both founded and endowed Queen's College in Oxford , to the continuing estate of which , I myself wish all happiness : This Queen at her death desired three courtesies , some of which are rare in these days . First , that her debts might be paid to the Merchants ; secondly , that her gifts to the Church might be performed : thirdly , that the King when he died would at Westminster be interred with her . 

Anno 1357.  Edward Plantagenet , surnamed the Black Prince , son to Edward the third , Prince of Wales , Duke of Given , Aquitaine , and Cornwall , Earl Palatine of Chester . 

In the Battle of Poitiers in France , he with 8000.  English against 60000.  French , got the victory , took the King , Philip his son , seventeen Earls , with divers other Noble personages , prisoners . 

King Richard the Second , Plantagenet , this K. being the third Royal brother of this honourable Company , and at that time the Society consisting of two Brotherhoods of Corpus Christi , the one at S. Marry spital , the other at S. Mary Bethlem without Bishop's Gate , in the eighteenth of his Reign granted them to make their two Brotherhoods one , by the name of the Fraternity of Corpus Christi of Skinners ; which worthy Title shines at this day gloriously amongst 'em : and toward the end of this king's reign , 1396. a great feast was celebrated in Westminster Hall , where the L. Maior of this City sat as Guest . 

Anno 1381.  Q. Anne his wife , daughter to the Emperor Charles the 4 and sister to Emperor Wenzlaus , whose modesty then , may make this Age blush now ; she being the first that taught women to ride sideling on horseback ; but who it was that taught 'em to ride straddling , there is no Records so immodest that can show me , only the impudent Time , and the open profession ; this Fair Precedent of womanhood died at Sheine , now Richmond , for grief whereof K. Richard her Lord abandoned and defaced that goodly house . 

Anno 1399.  K. Henry the 4.  Plantagenet , Surnamed Bullingbrooke , a forth Royal Brother : in his time , the Famous Guild hall in London was erected , where the Honourable Courts of the City are kept , and this Bounteous Feast yearly celebrated . 

In the Twelth year of his Reign , the River of Thames flowed thrice in one day . 

Q. joan , or jane , Duchess of Britten , late wife to john , D. of Britten , and Daughter to the King of Navarre ; another Princely Sister . 

Anno 1412.  K. Henry the 5.  Plantagenet , Prince of Wales , proclaimed Maior & Regent of France , He won that famous Victory on the French , at the Battle of Agincourt . 

Q. Catherine his Wife , Daughter to Charles 6.  K. of France . 

K. Henry the 6.  Plantagenet , of the House of Lancaster . 

K. Edward the 4.  Plantagenet , of the House of York . 

This King feasted the Lord Maior , Richard Chawrye , and the Aldermen his brethren , with certain Commoners , in Waltham Forrest ; after dinner road a hunting with the King , who gave him plenty of Venison , & sent to the Lady Majoress , and her Sisters the Alderman's Wives , 2.  Hearts , 6.  Bucks , and a Tun of Wine , to make merry , and this Noble feast was kept at Drapers Hall. An. 1463.  Q. Elizabeth Grey , his Wife , Daughter to Richard , Wooduile , Earl Rivers , & to the Duchess of Bedford ; she was Mother to the Lord Grey of Ruthen , that in his time was Marquesse Dorset . 

K. Richard the 3.  Brother to Edward 4.  D. of Gloucester , and of the House of York . 

Lionel Plantagonet , 3 Son to the 3 Edward , D. of Clarence , and Earl of Ulster ; Philip his Daughter , and Heir , married Edward Mortimer , Earl of March , from whom the House of York descends . 

Henry Plantagenet , Grandchild to Edmond Crouchbacke , 2.  Son to Henry 3  

Richard Plantagenet , Father of Edward 4.  D. of York , and Albumarle , Earl of Cambridge , Rutland , March , Clare , and Ulster . 

Thomas Plantagenet , 2.  Son of Henry 4.  

john Plantagenet , 3 Son of Henry 4.  So Noble a Soldier , and so great a terror to the French , that when Charles the 8. was moved to deface his Monument ( being buried in Roan ) the King thus answered : Pray let him rest in peace being dead , of whom we were all afraid when he lived . 

Humphrey Plantagenet , 4 Son of Henry 4.  

john Holland D. of Exeter . 

George Plantagenet brother to Edward the 4.  

Edmond Plantagenet Brother to Edward the 4.  

Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury and Warwick . called the Great Earl of Warwick . 

john Cornwell Knight , Baron Fanhope . 

The Royal Somme . 

7 : Kings , 5.  Queens , 1.  Prince . 7.  Dukes . 1.  Earl 21. Plantagenets 

7.  Kings , 5.  Queens , 1.  Prince . 8.  Dukes . 2.  Earls . 1.  Lord , 24.  Skinners . 

The Feast ended at Guildhall , his Lordship ( as yearly Custom invites it ) goes accompanied with the Triumph before him towards S. Paul's , to perform the noble and reverend Ceremonies which Divine Antiquity religiously ordained , and is no less than faithfully observed . Holy Service and Ceremonies accomplished , his Lordship returns by Torchlight to his own house , the whole Triumph placest in comely and decent order before him , the Wilderness , the Sanctuary of Fame , adorned with Lights , the Parliament of Honour , and the Triumphant Chariot of Love , with his Graceful Concomitants ; the Chariot drawn with 2.  Luzarns : near to the entrance of his Lordship's gate , Love , prepared with his welcome , thus salutes him , 

Love.  

I Was the first , Grave Lord , that welcomde Thee 
To this Day's Honour , and I spoke it free , 
Just as in every heart I found it placest , 
And 't is my turn again now to speak last ; 
For love is circular ( like the bright Sun , ) 
And takes delight to end where it begun , 
Though indeed never ending , in true Will , 
But rather may be said beginning still ; 
As all great works are of Celestial Birth , 
Of which , Love is the Chief in Heaven and Earth . 
To what Blessed state then are thy Fortunes come , 
Since , That both brought thee forth , and brings thee home ▪ 
Now , as in common course which clears things best , 
there 's no free gift but looks for thanks at least ; 
A Love so bountiful , so free , so good 
From the whole City , from thy Brotherhood , 
( That Name I ought a while to dwell upon , ) 
Expect some fair Requital from the Man 
  all so largely Honoured . what 's desired ? 
That which in Conscience ought to berequirde , 
O thank 'em in thy justice , in thy Care , 
Zeal to right wrongs , Works that are clear & fair , 
And will become thy Soul ( whence Virtue spring's ) 
As those rich Ornaments thy Brother Kings . 
And since we cannot separate Love and Care , 
For where Care is , a Love must needs be there , 
And Care where Love is ; 't is the Man and Wife , 
Through every Estate that 's fixed in Life ; 
You are by this the City's Bridegroom proved , 
And She stands wedded to her best Beloved ; 
then be , according to your Morning-vowes , 
A Careful Husband , to a Loving Spouse ; 
And Heaven give you great joy ( both It and Thee ; ) 
And to All Those that shall Match after Ye . 
The names of those Beasts , bearing Furr , and now in use , with the Bountiful Society of Skinners . 

The most of which presented in the Wilderness , where Orpheus praedominates ! 

Ermine , Foin , Sables , Martin , Badger , Bear , 
Lucern , Budge , Otter , Hipponesse and Hare , 
Lamb , Wolf , Fox , Leopard , Minck , Stote , Miniver , 
Racoone's , Moashye , Woluerine , Caliber , 
Squirrel , Mole , Cat Musk , Civet , Wild & Tame , 
Coney white , Yellow , Black must have a Name ; 
The Ounce , Rows-gray , Ginner , Pampilion , 
Of Birds , the Vu lur , Bitter , Ostrich , Swan ; 
Some worn for Ornament , and some for Health , 
All to the Skinner's Art bring Fame and Wealth . 
The Service being thus faithfully performed , both to his Lordship's Honour , and to the Credit and content of his most generously-bountifull Society , the Season commends all to silence ; yet not without a little leave taken , to reward Art with the comely Deuce that belong unto it , which hath been so richly expressed in the Body of the Triumph , with all the proper Beauties of Workmanship , that the City may ( without Injury to judgement ) call it the Masterpiece of her Triumphs ; the Credit of which Workmanship , I must justly lay upon the Deserts of Master Garret Crismas , and Master Robert Norman , ioyn'dpartners in the performance . 

FINIS . 

