THE TRIUMPHS of reunited BRITANNIA . 

Performed at the cost and charges of the Right Worship : Company of the Merchant-taylors , in honour of Sir Leonard Holliday kni : to solemnize his entrance as Lord Mayor of the City of London , on Tuesday the 29. of October . 1605.  

Devised and Written by A. Mundy , Citizen and Draper of London . 

Printed at London by W. Jaggard . 

The triumphs of reunited Brytannia . 

Because our present conceit , reaches unto the antiquity of Britain , which ( in many ●indess ) hath carried as many and variable opinions : I thought it not unnecessary , ( being thereto earnestly solicited ) to speak somewhat concerning the estate of this our Country , even from the very first original , until her honourable attaining the name of Brytannia , and then lastlye how she became to be called England . Most Writers do agree , that after the Deluge , Noah was the sole Monarch of all the World , and that he divided the dominion of the whole earth to his three sons : all Europe with the Isles thereto belonging ( wherein this our Isle of Britain was one among the rest ) fell to the lot and possession of japhet his third son . Samothes the sixth son of japhet , called by Moses Mesech , by others Dys , had for his portion the whole country lying between the Ryner of Rhine and the Pyrenian mountains , where he founded his kingdom of Celtica over his people called Celtae , which name , by the opinion of Bale our Country man , was indifferent to them of Gallia , and us of this Isle of Britain . This Samothes being the first King over these people , of him came lineally these kings following : Magus , Sarron , Bruis and Bardus , all ruling severally over the Celts and Brytons , who were not then so called , but Samotheans , after the name of Samothes . Of Bardus , who , according to Berosus , was very famous for inventing of Music and Duties , came an order of philosophical Poets or Heralds , called Bardi , after his own name , whose excellent qualities were of such power , as they could enforce armies of Enemies ready to fight fierce battle , to stand at a gaze , and forbear their cruel intent , until these Bards left singing , and went out of the battle : According to Lucan . lib. 1.  Vos quoque quifortes animas belloque peremptas , 
Laudius in longum vates dimittitis aewm , 
Plurima securi fudistis carmina Bardi . 


Many of these Bards lined among the Britan's , before the birth of Christ , as Plenid●us and Oronius . Since then , Thalestine , the two Merlin's , Melkin , Elaskirion and others . Among the Welshmen now of late days , David Die , jollo Gough , David ap-williams , and diverse others remaining yet amongst them , and called in their own language Bards . 

Thus continued the name of Samothes the space of 310. years , till Neptune put his son Albion the Giant in possession of this land , who subduing the Samotheans , called this Island Albion after his own name . Concerning the coming hither of Danaus' 50. daughters , and that one of them should be called Albina , and so the land to be named by her : First , not any one of them was so named , neither do I think the story so authentical , but do hold Albion's name for the truest . 

The Country thus peopled with Giants , and continuing after the name of Albion for 600. years : Brutus , ( being directed by a vision in his sleep , to find out a country situated in the West ) with the remains of his Trojan followers , arrived and Landed at the haven now called Totnes , the year of the world , 2850. after the destruction of Troy , 66. before the building of Rome 368. and 1116. before Christ's nativity . He , searching the land over from side to side , found it to be very fertile , and inhabited by uncivil , monstrous huge men of stature , termed Grants , whom he with his bold and resolved companions slew and destroyed . One of them named Goemagot or Gogmagog , exceeding the rest in strength and courage , Brutus caused Corineus , one of his confederates , to wrestle with the said Goemagot at a place beside Dover , where the Grant happened to break a tib in the side of Corineus , which so sharply incensed him , that redoubling his power to win the victory , he threw him headlong down from off one of the Rocks , which place was after called Gogmagog's leap The Giant being thus dispatched , in reward of this honourable piece of service , Brutus gave unto Corineus a part of his land , which according to his name , was , and yet is unto this day , called Cornwall . 

Brutus thus having the whole Land in his own quiet possession , began to build a city , near to the side of the River Thamesis , in the second year of his reign , which he named Troynovant , or as Humphrey Lhoyd saith , Troinewith ; which is , new Troy : in remembrance of that famous city Troy , whence he and his people ( for the greater part ) were descended . Now began he to aiter the name of the Island , and according to his own name , called it Britain , and caused all the inhabitants to be named Brytons , for a perpetual memory , that he was the first bringer of them into this land . In this time he had by his wife fair Innogen , daughter to King Pandrasus king of the Greeks , three worthy sons , the first named Locrine , the second Camber , and the third Albanact , to which three ( not long before his death ) he divided his whole kingdom in several partitions , giving to Locrine all that part which we know best by the name of England , then termed by him Loegria or Logres . To Camber he limited the Country of Wales , called Cambria after his name , and demded from Loegria by the river of Sauerne . To Albanact his third son , he appointed all the North part of the I 'll , lying beyond the River of Humber , then called Albania , now Scotland ; and to that River than Albania did reach . But since that time , the limits of Loegria were enlarged , first by the prowess of the Romans , then by our own conquests , that the Twede on the one side , and the Solve on the other , were taken for the principal bounds between us and Scotland . 

After Brutus , I find not any other alteration of our Country's name , until the reign of King Ecbert , who about the year of Grace 800. and the first of his reign , gave forth an especial Edict , dated at Winchester : that it should be named Angles Land , or Angellandt , for which ( in our time ) we do pronounce it England . Nor can Hengist the Saxon be the Father of this latter name , for Ecbert , because his ancestors descended from the Angleses , one of the six Nations that came with the Saxons into Britain , ( for they were not all of one , but of diverse Countries , viz : Angles , Saxons , Germans , Swissers , Norwegians , jutes , otherwise termed jutons , Vites , Goths , or Geteses and Vandals , and all comprehended under the name of Saxons , became 〈…〉 of Hengist the Saxon and his company , that first arrived here before any of the other ) and thereto having now the Monarchy and pre-eminence , in manner of this whole Island , called the same after the name of the country , from whence he derived his original . So that neither Hengist , nor any Qu. named Angla , or derivation ab Angulo , is to be allowed before this sound and sure authority . Thus much briefly concerning the names of our Country , now come we to discourse the whole frame and body of our device , in this solemn triumph of reunited Brytannia . 

The Ship called the Royal EXCHANGE . 

Master .  All hail fair London , to behold thy Towers , 
After our voyage long and dangerous : 
Is Seman's comfort , thanks unto those powers . 
That in all perils have preserved us. 
Our Royal Exchange hath made a rich return , 
Laden with Spices , Silks , and Indigo , 
Our wines that for our absence long did mourn , 
Now find release from all their former woe . 


Mate .  Master good news , our Owner , as I hear , 
Is this day sworn in London's Mayoralty : 


Boy .  Master 't is true , for , see what troops appear , 
Of Citizens , to bear him company . 
Hark how the Drums and Trumpets cheerly sound , 
To solemnize the triumph of this day , 
Shall we do nothing , but be idle found , 
On such a general mirthful Holiday ? 


Master .  Take of our Pepper , of our Cloves and Mace , 
And liberally bestow them round about , 
't is our ship's luggage , and in such a case , 
I know our Owner means to bear us out . 
then , in his honour : And that company , 
Whose love and bounty this day doth declare , 
Hurl Boy , hurl Mate . And Gunner , see you ply 
Your Ordinance , and of fireworks make no spare , 
To add the very uttermost we may , 
To make this up a cheerful Holiday . 


FINIS . 

The Lion , and the Camel . 

ON the Lion and Camel , we do figuratively personate Neptune and his Queen Amphitrita , who first seated their son Albion in this land . And in them we figure Poetically , that as they then triumphed in their sons happy fortune , so now they cannot choose but do the like , seeing what happy success hath thereon ensued , to renown this Country from time to time . And as times have altered former harsh incivilities , bringing the state to more perfect shape of Majesty , so ( as occasion serves ) do they likewise say their borrowed forms aside , and speak according to the nature of the present business in hand , without any imputation of grossness or error , considering the laws of Poesy grants such allowance and liberty . Corineus and Goemagot , appearing in the shape and proportion of huge Giants , for the more grace & beauty of the show , we place as guide's to Britania's mount , and being fettered unto it in chains of gold , they sleme ( as it were ) to draw the whole frame , showing much envy and contention , who shall exceed most in duty and service . 

The Pageant . 

ON a Mount triangular , as the Island of Britain itself is described to be , we seat in the Supreme place , under the shape of a fair and beautiful Nymph , Britania herself accosted with Brutus' divided kingdoms , in the like female representations , Loegria , Cambria , and Albania . Brytania speaking to Brutus her Conqueror , ( who is seated somewhat lower , in the habit of an adventurous warlike Trojan ) tells him , that she had still continued her name of Albion , but for his conquest of her virgin honour , which since it was by heaven so appointed , she reckons it to be the very best of her fortunes . Brutus shows her , what height of happiness she hath attained unto by his victory , being before a vast Wilderness , inhabited by Giants , and a mere den of Monsters : Goemagot and his barbarous brood , being quite subdued , his civil followers , first taught her modest manners , and the means how to reign as an Imperial lady , building his Troya nova by the river Thamesis , and beautifying his land with other Cities beside . But then the three Virgin kingdoms seem to reprove him , for his overmuch fond love to his sons , and dividing her ( who was one sole Monarchy ) into three several estates , the hurt and inconvenience whereon ensuing , each one of them modestly delivered unto him . He stays their further progress in reproof , by his and their now present revyued condition , being raised again by the powerful virtue of Poesy ( after such length of time ) to behold Britania's former Felicity again , and that the same Albania , where Humber slew his son Albanact , had bred a second Brutus , by the blessed marriage of Margaret , elder daughter to king Henry the seaventh , to james the fourth king of Scotland , of whom our second Brutus ( Royal king james ) is truly and rightfully descended : by whose happy coming to the Crown , England , Wales , & Scotland , by the first Brutus severed and divided , is in our second Brutus reunited , and made one happy Britania again : Peace and quietness bringing that to pass , which war nor any other means could attain unto . For joy of which sacred Union and combination , L●crine , Camber , and Albanact , figured there also in their antique estates , deliver up their Crowns and Sceptres , applauding the day of this long-wished conjunction , and Troya-nova ( now London ) incites fair Thamesis , and the rivers that bounded the severed kingdoms , ( personated in fair and beautiful Nymphs ) to sing Paeans and songs of triumph , in honour of our second Brutus , Royal King james. Thamesis , as Queen of all Britain's rivers , begins the triumphal course of solemn rejoicing . Next her , Sauerne , that took her name of Sabrina , begotten by Locrine on fair Elstrid , and both mother and daughter were drowned in that river , by Guendolena's command , the wife to Locrine , doth the like . Lastly , Humber , whose name was derived from Humber king of the Scythians , who being pursued by Locrine and Camber , in revenge of their Brother's death , was enforced to leap into that Ryver , and there drowned himself , of whom I find these verses written . Dum fugit obstat ei flumen submergitur illic , 
Deque suo tribuit nomine aquae . 


What further may be required , to express Britania's triumph more perfectly to the life , with all the other personages her servants and attendants , is more at large let down in the several speeches , which I have hereto annexed as most meet & convenient . 

The speeches delivered by the several children , according to their degrees of seating in the PAGEANT . 

Britannia .  I that sometime was termed Albion , 
After the name of Neptune's valiant Son : 
Albion the Giant , and so had still held on , 
But that my conquest , first by thee begun , 
Hath in fame's Chronicle such honour won , 
That thy first setting from Albania , 
Crowned me thy virgin Queen Britania . 


BRUTUS .  Wherein , recount thy height of happiness , 
thou that before my honoured victory , 
Wert as a base and o'ergrown wilderness , 
Peopled With men of incivility , 
Huge and stern Giants , keeping company 
With savage monsters , thus was Albion then , 
Till I first furnished thee with civil men . 
Goentagot , and all his barbarous brood , 
( When he was foiled by Corineus' hand , ) 
Were quite subdued , and not one withstood 
My quiet progress over all thy land , 
But , as sole Conqueror , I did command : 
And then from Albion did I change thy name , 
To Brutus' Britania , still to hold the same . 
then built I my New Troy , in memory 
Of whence I came , by Thanesis fair side , 
And nature giving me posterity , 
Three worthy sons , not long before I died , 
My kingdom to them three I did divide . 
And as in three parts I had set it down , 
Each named his seat , and each did wear a Crown . 


LOEGRIA .  But she whom thou hadst made one Monarchy 
To be so severed , to thy sons might show 
Some sign of love , to her small courtesy , 
When three possess what one did solely own , 
It makes more ways to harm then many know . 
And so proved that division of the land , 
It brought in wary that hellish firebrand . 


CAMBRIA .  The king of Huns entered Albania , 
slew Albanact thy Son , and there bare sway , 
Till Locrine rose with valiant Cambria , 
And to revendge their Brother's death made way , 
Which instantly they did without delay , 
And made that River bear the proud king's name , 
That thus intruded , drowned him in the same . 


ALBANIA .  Fair Elstrid taken in that fatal fight , 
And Locrine's love to her , wrong to his wife , 
Duke Corineus daughter , dear delight , 
That ●eft both her and Locrine of his life , 
Opened a gap to much more dismal strife , 
Of all which heavy haps there had been none , 
Had Brutus left me one governor alone . 


BRUTUS .  See , after so long slumbering in our tombs 
Such multitudes of years , rich poesy 
That does revive us to fill up these rooms 
And tell our former age's History , 
( The better to record Brutus' memory , ) 
Turns now our accents to another key , 
To tell old Britain's new born happy day . 
That separation of her sinewed strength , 
Weeping so many hundred years of woes 
Whereto that learned Barde dated long length 
Before those ulcerd wounds again could close , 
And reach unto their former first dispose . 
Hath run his course through times ●andie glass , 
And brought the former happiness that was . 
Albania , Scotland , where my son was slain 
And where my folly's wretchedness began , 
Hath bred another Brutus , that gives again 
to Britain her first name , he is the man 
On whose fair birth our elder wits did scan , 
Which Prophet-like seventh Henry did foresee , 
Of whose fair child comes Britain's unity . 
And what fierce war by no means could effect , 
To reunite those sundered lands in one , 
The hand of heaven did peacefully elect 
By mildest grace , to seat on Britain's throne 
This second Brutus , than whom there else was none . 
Wales , England , Scotland , severed first by me : 
To knit again in blessed unity . 
For this Britannia tides in triumph thus , 
For this these Sister-kingdoms now shake hands , 
Brutes Troy , ( now London ) looks most amorous 
And stands on tiptoe , telling foreign lands , 
So long as Seas bear ships , or shores have sands : 
So long shall we in true devotion pray , 
And praise high heaven for that most happy day . 


LOCRINE .  England , that first was called Loegria , 
After my name , when I commanded here : 
Gives back her due unto Britannia , 
And doth her true born son in right prefer , 
Before divided rule , irregular . 
Wishing my brethren in like sort resign , 
A sacred union once more to combine . 


CAMBER .  I yielded long ago , and did in heart , 
Allow Britannia's first created name , 
My true born Brutes have ever took her part 
And to their last hour will maintain the same . 


ALBANACT .  It is no marvel though you gladly yield , 
When the all-ruling power doth so command , 
I bring that Monarch now into the field , 
With peace and plenty in his sacred hand , 
To make Britannia one united land : 
And when I brought him , after times will say 
It was Britannia's happy Holiday . 


Troya Nova .  then you fair Swans in Thamesis that swim , 
And you c 〈…〉 o●se N●mpheses that do delight to play 
On Humber and 〈…〉 e Save●ne , welcome him 
In Canz 〈…〉 〈…〉 gges and many a Roundelay 
that from the North brought you this blessed day . 
And in one tuneful , harmony le 's sing , 
Welcome King james , welcome bright Britain's King.  


Thamesis .  I that am Queen of all Britannia's streams , 
The Ocean's darling and endear delight , 
that want on daily with the Sun's guilt beams 
and o'er my bosom suffer day and night , 
Fair floats of ships to sail in goodly sight : 
Unto my second Brutus shall homely sing , 
Welcome King james , welcome great Britain's King.  


Savarne .  Fair Elstrid's and Sabrina's fatal grave , 
( Whereby the name of Sauerne fell to me : ) 
When Locrine's Guendolen in anger gave , 
My womb to be their dismal tragedy , 
Whereof my Nymphs ( as yet ) talk mournfully , 
Unto my second Brutus do likewise sing , 
Welcome King james , welcome great Britain's King.  


HUMBER .  Proud Scythians Humber that slew Albanact , 
Whose brethren forest him to a shameful flight , 
When in my watery arms his light I wracked , 
I took his name , and kept it as my right , 
For which my Nymphs still dancing in delight , 
With me these Paeans and sweet Canzoni sing , 
Welcome King james , our second Brutus and king . 


FINIS . 

The Chariot . 

Pheme   Riding before it . FAME that attends on Britain's Monarchy , 
Thus reunited to one state again , 
Ushers this Chariot of true dignity , 
Wherein seven kings that did in England reign , 
These Royal virtues in their shields contain , 
Expressing what great grace each Majesty , 
Gave to the Merchant-taylors Company 
When they were first a Guild , and bore the stile 
Of Tayiors , and of Armourers beside 
Of the Linen armoury : for no little while 
Were they so known , and daily did provide , 
Those coats of arms that quailed our soe-mens' pride 
When England's bent-bow , and the gray-goose wing 
Our many victories abroad did sing . 
From this employment for the State's defence , 
Their ancient title first unto them came , 
and then their following care and diligence , 
Squared them the way to order well and frame , 
all means to keep their Guild in honest fame . 
Now gracious virtues unto you I leave , 
What further fortunes Time did them bequeath . 


Tape●notes .  Edward the third , whose Noble name I bear , 
Hearing the Love and royal amity , 
That good report gave of them every where , 
Preserving peace and kind society , 
In his first year unto this Company , 
He gave this Charter to confirm their Guild : 
And they 〈…〉 oyd it , as his Highness' wild . 


ERISYCHTHON .  To build this body on a stronger frame , 
Richard the second gave authority , 
A Master and four keepers they should name , 
and full elect to sway their mystery , 
Granting them power to have a Lyverie , 
and hold a Feast on saint john Baptist day , 
Yearly for ever , as they do and may . 


Eleutheriotes .  To fortify a work so well begun , 
Henry the fourth did liberally create : 
( Beside the former fovours to them done , ) 
Their Guild a Brotherhood incorporate , 
And thought it no disgrace to his high state , 
To wear the Clothing of the Company , 
A most Majestic royal courtesy . 


Sophrosyne .  Henry the fifth my warlike Lord maintained 
His father's love to this society , 


AGNITES .  Of my sixth Henry they as freely gained , 
all former grants in selfsame quality , 
He wore their clothing , mild and graciously : 
For Princes lose no part of dignity , 
In being affable , it adds to Majesty . 


Hypomone .  Thus long a Master and four keepers stood . 
Till my fourth Edward changed the keeper's name 
To Wardens : for the strength of Brotherhood , 
And thus at first Master and Wardens came . 


Epimeleia .  And for they traded , as no men did more , 
With foreign Realms , by clothes and Merchandise , 
Returning hither other Country's store , 
Of what might best be our commodities , 
Henry the seventh a gracious king , and wise , 
To Merchant-taylors did exchange their name : 
Since when , with credit they have kept the same . 


PHEME .  But sacred Lady , deign me so much grace , 
As tell me , why that seat is unsupplied ▪ 
Being the most eminent and chiefest place , 
With State , with Crown and Sceptre dignified ? 


Epimeleia .  Have our discourses ( Pheme ) let thee know , 
That seven Kings have born free brethren's name , 
Of this Society , and may not time bestow 
an eight , when Heaven shall so appoint the same ? 


PHEME .  I find recorded in my Register , 
Seven Kings have honoured this Society : 
Fourteen great Dukes did willingly prefer , 
Their love and kindness to this Company , 
Threescore eight Lords declared like amity , 
terming themselves all brethren of this band , 
The very worthiest Lords in all the land  
Three Dukes , three Earls , four Lords of Noble name 
all in one year did join in Brotherhood : 
IN the year 1390.  Edward Duke of York . Thomas , Duke of Gloucester . Henry Duke of Hereford and Earl of Derby , who afterwards was K. Henry the fourth . Edward , Earl of Rutland . Thomas Earl of Warwick . john Holland , Earl of Huntingdon . john , Lord Ros● . rafe Lord Nevil . Thomas L. Furnivall . Reignald , Lord Grace of Rithin . 

I find beside great Lords from France there came 
To hold like league , and do them any good : 
Gaylard , Lord Danvers . Barard , Lord Delamote , Barard , Lord Montferrant , etc.  

Yet no embasing to their height in blood : 
For they accounted honour then most high , 
When it was held up by community . 
Of Bishops , Knights and Deans , to those before , 
( Not spoken in vaunt ▪ or any spirit of pride ) 
My Records could afford as many more ▪ 
All brethren , Merchant-taylors signified 
That lived in love with them , and when they died 
Left me their names , to aftertimes to tell , 
Thus than they did , and thought it good and well . 


Neptune on the Lyon.   MY borrowed name of Neptune now I leave , 
the like doth Amphitrita my fair Queen , 
And worthy Lord , grant favour to receive 
What in these mysteries we seem to mean , 
Britannia's glory hath been heard and seen , 
Revived from her old Chaos of distress , 
and now united in firm happiness . 
Blessed be that second Brutus james our dread king , 
that set this wreath of Union on her head , 
Whose very name did heavenly comfort bring , 
When in despair our hopes lay drooping dead , 
When comfort from most hearts was gone and fled , 
Immediately the trumpets tongue did say , 
God save king james : O ' was a happy day . 


Amphitrita .  Our latest Phoenix whose dead cinders shine , 
In Angel's spheres , she , like a mother mild , 
yielding to Nature , did her right resign 
To times true heir , her Godson , and loved child , 
When giddy expectation was beguiled : 
And Scotland yielded out of Teudors race , 
a true born bud , to sit in Teudors place . 
Which seat to him and his , heaven ever bless , 
that we ne'er want a Rose of Teudors tree , 
to maintain Britain's future happiness , 
to the world's end in true tranquillity . 


Neptune .  Sir Leonard Holiday , now unto thee , 
My love in some mean measure let me show , 
S●nce heaven hath called thee to this dignity , 
Which ( than myself ) far better thou d 〈…〉 est know , 
I make no doubt thou wilt thy time bestow , 
A 〈…〉 s so great a Subject's place as this , 
To govern justly , and amend each miss . 
Bethink thee how on that high Holiday , 
Which bears God's Champion , th' arch-angel's name , 
When conquering Satan in a glorious fray , 
Michael Hells-monster nobly overcame , 
And now a sacred Sabbath being the same , 
A free and full election on all parts , 
Made choice of thee , both with their hands and hearts . 
Albeit this day is usual every year , 
For new election of a Magistrate , 
Yet , now to me some instance doth appear , 
Worth note , which to myself I thus relate , 
Holiday , called on Holiday to state , 
Requires methinks a year of Holidays , 
To be disposed in good and virtuous ways . 
For I accounted 't is a Lord's Holiday , 
When justice shines in perfect Majesty , 
When as the poor can to the rich man say , 
The Magistrate hath given us equity , 
And lent no ear to partiality , 
When sin is punished , lewdness bears no sway : 
All that day long , each day is Holiday . 
When good provision for the poor is made , 
Sloth set to labour , vice curbed every where , 
When through the City every honest trade , 
Stands not of might or insolence in fear , 
But justice in their goodness does them bear : 
then , as before , in safety I may say : 
All that year long , each day is Holliday . 
Now in behalf of that Society , 
Whereof thou bearest a loving brother's name , 
What hath been done this day to dignify , 
they pray thee kindly to accept the same , 
more circumstance I shall not need to frame : 
But from the Merchant-taylors this I say , 
They wish all good to Leonard Holliday . 


FINIS . 





A 〈…〉 oment 〈…〉 lib. 〈…〉 de 〈…〉 . Wolfangus Lazius . I Bale cent . 1  I Bale script . Brit cent . 2 I P●●se . defence hist . Brit. Ca 〈…〉 de an 't ●ant lib. 1 John Leland 〈…〉 . an 't ▪ di●t . Neptune for his many ships call●d king or god of the Seas , and in regard of his great skill in Navigation . G●l . Mon.  Albania in Greece . Merlin , who proph 〈…〉 d hereof long ago . 