HIMATIAPOLEOS . THE TRIUMPHS OF old Draperie , or the rich Clothing of ENGLAND . Performed in affection , and at the charges of the right Worthy and first honoured Company of Drapers : at the installment of Sr. Thomas Hayes Knight , in the high office of Lord Maior of London , on Saturday , being the 29. day of October . 1614  Devised and written by A. M. Citizen and Draper of London . 

LONDON , Printed by Edward Allde . 1614  

Himatiapoleos . Or , The Old Draperie and Clothing of ENGLAND . 

IN every well-governed Kingdom and Commonwealth , the chiefest City and Citizens therein , have evermore held the prime place and priority ; as well in matter of honour , as due right of Antiquity . And as the Lacedæmonians , the first instructers of the old romans , and so ( from them ) we , and all other Nations derived our form of rule ; As they ( I say ) made a distinguishing of their most memorable Societies , from other of much less note and merit : Even so this famous City of London , whose continual teeming womb ( from time to time ) brought forth many several Mysteries or Professions , hath referred them all in eminency of place , to twelve only . amongst which twelve gradations of honour and dignity , the first original began in the first Company of all other in this City the ancient fellowship or Society of Drapers . 

To approve the society of Drapers of the first , when ( as yet ) there was none other : it is avouched by William Fitzstephen , john Bale , Roger Hoveden , and others , that the Wooll-winder , ( who was the old Draper or Clothier , as borrowed from the word Drappier ) did card and spin his wool , then wove it into cloth , full , row , sheare , dress , and die it , and sell in afterwards in his shop , performing all these several offices thereto , by himself and servants : which ( since then ) hath branched itself into diverse other Companies , and of one entire Trade or Mystery , is become many . 

Out of this list or band of Drapers , issued Sir Henry Fitz-alwine knight , descended from that Alwine , Uncle to king Edgar , who made him Alderman of all England , when as ( till then ) the name of Alderman , or Eldermen , was never known . This Henry Fitz-alwine had the first honour to be styled More , or Mayor of London , by favour of King Richard the first , surnamed Cuer the Lion , and was himself ( as is credibly avouched ) a Brother of the same Society , in honour of the man by him so advanced , before his journey to the Holy land For , until his time , the troublesome combustions of the City being not fully settled : the government thereof remained first in Portgreves , next in martial Provosts , thirdly in Bailiffs , and lastly in Lord Mayor , as in meet place is more at large declared . 

here before I pass any further , it may appear as a blemish on mine own brow , because in my Book in the worthy Company of Goldsmiths , I did set down Henry Fitz-alwine , Fitz-leofstane to be a Goldsmith , and the first Lord Maior of London , alleging my authority for the same in the margin of the same book , out of john Stowe , which now I may seem to deny , and affirm the same man to be a Draper , to the disgrace of the forenamed Company , and mine own deep discredit . What then I did , was by warrant of my fore-alleaged Author , who finding Henry Fitz-alwine , Fitz-leofstane , to be Master or Guardian of the king's Mint , did therefore set him down to be a Goldsmith ; which was no error in me to do the like , being thereto secured by him , and knowing ( as then ) no other proof to the contrary . But having perused more assured authority in the Draper's Hall , that one , not named Henry Fitz-alwine Fitz-leofstane , but Henry Fitz-alwine , a brother of the old Drapers , was Lord Mayor of London , four and twenty years and a half ( by yearly election ) and longer had been if he had longer lived , who had also given his dwelling house by London stone , to his own free brethren of the Drapers , with an annuity yearly to be paid to the king , out of such land as is held of his by them ; and that he lieth in the parish Church of S. Marie Bothawe buried , the Parish wherein he lived and died ; whereas john Stowe affirmeth him to be buried in the Priory of the holy Trinity , called Christ's Church , on the right hand within Aldegate , which is now called the Duke's place . Nay more , Master Clarentius Cambden , with the advice of diverse other good Antiquaries beside , hath ( under his hand and Seal of Office ) confirmed him to be none other than a Draper . What more free confession can any man make , then of his blind misleading by a blinder guide ? In whose behalf I dare yet boldly maintain , that no such error escaped from him wilfully or willingly , his care and endeavour was so great , but misinformation , or incapacitie of reading , may ( as it hath done to many ) wrong better men than any that are concerned in this case , yet without any prejudice or dishonest taxation . 

What offence then may the Company of Mercers take , who make challenge likewise to the very same man , by mistaking Peter Fitz-alwine ( a Mercer indeed ) for Henry Fitz-alwine the old Draper ? Or that of the Fishmongers , who deem their worthy Wallworth , the first Knighted Mayor in the field , to be the same man also , and that no man before him was Mayor of London ? I answer freely for myself , and appeal to an especial Gentleman in the imagined injured Company of Goldsmiths ( who took no mean pains to be resolved in this case ) that no certain assurance could be had therein , but that it remained doubtful between both the Societies . And therefore we personated old Faringdon , not Fitz-alwine , as the book yet may be seen , to cut off all such contentious questions . Seeing then that reverend antiquity , eminency of honour , and due right of merit ; bestowed so high a dignity upon the Drapers : I might well be justly condemned , if I should seek after any other argument of credit for them ( when so main a business doth necessarily require it ) than their own due deserving , so long time sleeping in oblivion , yet now revived , to their endless honour . 

The walls of any City , were termed by the Grocians , according as we title our instant discourse , Himatia Poleos , The Clothing or garments of the City . Intimating thereby , that as garments and clothing do engird the body , defending it continually from the extremities of cold and heat : so walls , being the best garments of any City , do preserve it from all dangerous annoynances . Here on we lay the foundation of our device , in the honour of Draperie the rich Clothing of England ▪ which ( long before the knowledge of fantastic habits ) clothed both Prince & people all a like , to the 〈◊〉 mean renown of the Kingdom , and admiration of foreign nations , to whom our Draperie ( abounding in her own plenty ) by means of navigation and commerce , afforded the rich Livery of this land ; better embraced by them , and much more highly esteemed , than all other traffic whatsoever . As well appeared by that famous Knight and travayler , Sir Frances Drake , who having rounded the whole world , and noated the riches & best endowments of every naon found none to equal the Draperie and clothing of England . In regard whereof , he choose to be a loving Brother of the Draper's Society , before all other Companies of the City . wherefore our first land device is a Ship , very artificially and workmanly framed , called the Barke-hayes , fitted with Captain , Master , Mate . etc. and supposedly laden with woollen clothes , to make exchange for other Country's best commodities , and thought meet to usher the way to the residue of the shows , which are directed to follow in this manner . 

A beautiful Chariot , drawn by two golden pell●tted Lions , and two golden Wolves Erminnois , after the manner of the triumphal Chariots of the Roman Emperors , is graced with the supposed shape of King Richard the first , with the several figures of so many Cities in England about him , as conveniency of place and carriage granted liberty unto . Those Cities are deciphered by their Eschuchions of Arms , and that their best advantage ever ensued by making of woollen clothes , for the continual maintenance of England's Draperie . But London sitting nearest unto himself , as chief Mother and matron of them all : he honour's the head of his chiefest Chamber , with a triple imperial Crown of gold , under battled or branched with Clouds , and beams of the Sun , being the Arms of the Draper's Society , and declaring his love and favour bestowed on her , by his advauncement of Sir Henry Fitz-alwine to the Maioraltie , in whom began the old Draper's dignity . 

After this Chariot , followeth a Pageant or goodly Monument , figuring the whole estate of London's old Draperie . In the supreme and most eminent seat , sitteth Himatia , of Clothing , as Mother , Lady and commandress of all the rest , who by their distinct emblems and properties , ( apted for the easiest apprehension ) do express their duty and attendance on so gracious a person , in their several places and offices to them belonging ; As in Carding , Spinning , Weaving , Rowing , Fulling , Shearing Dressing , Dying , Tentering and performing all other services to woollen clothes , which at first was done only by the Draper , or Clothier . Peace , Plenty , Liberality , Council and Discreet Zeal , do support the flourishing condition of Himatiaes' Commonwealth , and strive to prevent all occasions which may seem sinister or hurtful thereto . 

Our device which we spoke last of , and yet is appointed the first in service , serveth both for the water and land . Till the year 1453. the L. Majors of London used to ride on horseback to Westminster , at such time as each one went to take his oath . But S. john Norman Draper , being then Mayor , at his own cost and charge , and for the relief of poor Watermen , who were much distressed in those days : made a very goodly Barge for himself and his brethren , to be rowed therein by water to Westminster , and so to continue for a yearly custom . It was a costly Barge , and the Oars are said to be covered with silver : in memory whereof , and the honest benefit yearly found thereby : the Watermen made a pleasant song called , Rowe thy Boat Norman , etc.  This honour beginning likewise in the Draper , and falling out so fitly to help our invention : in a goodly fair Barge , made meet for the purpose , attendeth the supposed shadow of Sir john Norman , with the seven liberal Sciences ( all attired like graceful Ladies ) sitting about him , until such time as the Lord Maior cometh to take water , and then he saluteth him with this speech . 

S. john Normans speech on the Water . 

Welcome to the water , worthy Brother Draper . Imagine me to be the true resemblance of old S. john Norman , sometime Lord Mayor of this famous City , and the first that devised this water honour , making my Barge at mine own proper cost , and rowed with silver Oars to Westminster , when ( as you now ) I then went to take mine oath . In regard whereof , I was the first Mayor , that was presented to the Barons , of the Exchequer . The imaginary shapes of the seven liberal Sciences , each one distinguished by their true character , are placed as my companions in my Barge : in memory of the love I ever bare to learning , and no mean bounties by me extended for the maintenance thereof . I joy , that invention would make use of my remembrance in this manner , to do any service to so desertful a Brother , and to the Company of Drapers which I dearly affected . On then my hearts , and as in those elder days you declared your love to old john Norman : so express somewhat now to delight my honoured Brother , singing cheerfully , Rowe thy Boat Norman . 

Which being no sooner ended , but diverse sweet singing youths , belonging to the master that enstructeth the young Choristers of Paul's , being all attired in fair wrought wastcoates , and caps belonging also to them , each having a silver Oar in his hand ; do sing a most sweet ditty of Rowe thy Boat Norman , and so seem to row up along to Westminster , in honour of the Lord Mayor's attendance . 

For the several peals of Ordinance , which make better report in the air , than they can be expressed by pen : For the Drums , Fifes , Trumpets , and other musical Instruments , whereof each Company maketh their choice , to grace this honourable service out and home again , in the true affection of loving Citizens , not suffering their chief Magistrate to want any part of their kind respect and furtherance : they can much better speak for themselves then I , and serve but as a breathing time to me , until my Lords return and landing . When all our devices being martialled in order , according as we have formerly related , except a goodly Ram or Golden Fleece , with a Shepherd sitting by it ; as occasion serveth , delivereth his intention in this ensuing speech . 

The Shepherd . 

Why gaze ye so upon me ! am I not a man flesh , blood , and bone , as you are ? Or in these silken satin Towns , are poor plain meaning Shepherds wondered at , like Comets or blazing Stars ▪ Or is it this goodly beast by me , that fills your eyes with admiration ? If it be so , let me then resolve ye , that it is an article of duty which we Shepherds of Cotsall owe to the old Drapers of London , for keeping their flocks on the Cotsall hills , that when any worthy Brother of their Society comes to be L. Maior of this City , the very fairest Ram in all their flocks is sent unto them as a solemn offering , as being the Crest of their Companies Arms , and the chief maintainer of Wool for clothing . In which respect , my Father about some six and twenty years since , when S. Martin Calthrope ( a Brother of the same Society ) was Lord Maior , brought then the like goodly . Ram as his oblation ; and I hearing , that his man S. Thomas Hayes , and another Martin , Master Martin Lumley ( by the blessing of heaven and their own virtuous endeavours ) were the next chosen brethren of the same Band , the one to succeed in the self same dignity of the Maioraltie , and the other of the Shrivealty ; have brought this as my hearts free offering , in honour of them that so dear affect them , and in my duty to them both , with all my utmost service beside . For thus say we in Catswolde . 

From the Ram 
we have the Lamb 
From both our finest 
woolles are shorn . 
Wool had thus from 
the Ram and Lamb , 
Makes the best Cloth , 
that can be worn . 
Thank then the Draper 
that began : 
To make such Clothing , 
meet for man  


For , if we have no Ram , we are sure to have no Lamb : no Lamb , no Wool : no wool , no Cloth : no Cloth , no Draper . 

Heaven grant that we may never see these no's , 
For we shall then feel twice as many woes : 
But that of Ram , Lamb , Wool , Cloth , still we may have store : 
So shall the Drapers then thrive more and more . 


As mean additions , to give some small juster to the Show , because over many were thought inconvenient ; we make use of a golden pelletted Lion , a supporter to the Companies Arms , with a Champion mounted on his back , and a golden wolf Erminnois , the Ensign or Impreze belonging to the Lord Mayor's Crest . And with these few slender devices , we usher his Honour's way toward Guilde-haule ; until he come to S. Laurence-lane , where the figure of S. Henry Fitz-alwine , thus favourably stayeth him . 

IN times of old Antiquity , 
When men lived long and healthfully , 
Detesting sloth and idleness , 
Which breeds but surfeit and excess . 
When yea and nay was greatest Oath , 
And men's best wear , good woollen Cloth , 
Yclept England's Draperie , 
more worth than gaudy bravery , 
Of Silken twine , Silver and Gold , 
Near known in those blessed days of old : 
then lived that grave and worthy man , 
That London's honour first began , 
By title of the Mayoralty , 
A high and famous dignity : 
Henry Fitz-alwine was his name , 
Noble by birth , and of much fame . 
Whose substance though his grave hath kept , 
Four hundred years , where he hath slept : 
Yet is his shadow raised in me , 
To grace this day's solemnity . 
For he being first that held the sway 
Of Mayor in London , justly may 
Challenge ( by right ) priority , 
In honouring his own Company , 
With all that sacred Poesy can 
device , to grace so good a man , 
As first with hearts , hands , and free voice , 
Was thought meet in the people's choice 
To rank in that rich roll of fame : 
That honoured first the Draper's name . 
And worthy Brother here survey 
Those several kinds of London's sway 
Till royal Richard first in me , 
Altered the rule to Maioraltie . 
Portgreves held first by strict command , 
Next Provosts with a sterner hand , 
Such from the Conquest was the case 
Of London's awe , till milder grace 
Made choice of Bailiffs , men thought fit 
In the King's judgement Court's to sit , 
And right all causes of contention : 
By upright censure , or prevention . 
Yet all this could not please the king , 
In two men's rule grew varying , 
By leaning to what part each listed , 
So might by might was still resisted . 
Wrongs unredrest , offences flowing , 
Garboils & grudges each where growing . 
Therefore as God had given him place , 
Solely to rule , and judge each case , 
So would he plant a deputy , 
To figure his authority , 
In the true form of Monarchy , 
Than which , no better sovereignty . 
Which office being imposed on me , 
By such a gracious Majesty : 
I held it four and twenty years , 
( Yearly elected , as appears . ) 
Until my very dying day . 
Since when ( my Lord ) I can well say , 
The Science of old Draperie , 
( Our loving kind Society ) 
Hath yielded many a Magistrate , 
In the selfsame degree of State. 
And Time reserveth in his store , 
For the like honour , many more . 
On then before , for we must tend , 
Till this day's triumph have full end . 
The solemnity of so pompous a feast being finished , and his Honour ( according to yearly custom ) returning towards Paul's , with all the former conceits gracefully born before him : he is mildly solicited for a minutes stay by old Sir john Norman , who ( in this manner ) giveth him a reason for it . 

The Speech at the little Conduit in the afternoon , at my Lords going to Paul's . 

Honourable Lord and Brother , it is imposed on old john Norman , briefly to describe these two beautiful devices to ye . In the first , which manifesteth the Honour of Draperie , your well judging eye may easily conceive , each person by their apt distinguishment . The Mother , Old Draperie , with her Daughters and attendants placed about her , do deliver the Draper's true antiquity , and that which he and his only performed , is since become the benefit of diverse trades or occupations . Carding , Spinning , Weaving , Fulling , Rowing , Shearing , Dressing , Dying , Tentering , and what else appertained to woollen cloth , was the ancient Draper's sole profession , and the chief honour of this famous Kingdom : flourishing thereby in so many happy blessings , and so fortefied by Peace , Plenty , Bounty , Council and Discreet Zeal , that all other nations sat and admired thereat . You have a taste of this felicity in that other device , beautified with the chief Clothing Cities of this Land , for maintenance of ancient Draperie , whereof London sitteth the highest advanced , as being his choice Chamber that first made a Draper the only Governor thereof . I am loath to hold ye long , and well I wot , more ample relation hath been made unto ye ; and therefore to God and your good devotions I heartily commend ye . 

Night folding up bright day in dim mantles of darkness , and those divine ceremonies ended , which wait as Henchmen on that day's duty , the Stars seem to leave their places in their fixed Spheres , and become as so many bright flaming Torches to grace our worthy Magistrate home , even to his house , ( as it were ) in the malice of blacke-faced night , and to further the finishing of so solemn a Triumph , which endeth with this humble farewell given to his Honor.  

The Speech delivered to the Lord Mayor at parting . 

The longest days have end at last , 
And pleasures pomp is but a blast , 
You see my Lord that sullen night , 
Sworn enemy to day's delight , 
( For all the pride these Tapers make , ) 
Whispers , that we must farewell take . 
To doubt of your ensuing care , 
Or to advise ye , to prepare 
For envy's storms , or soothing smiles , 
That wait on such high place some while : 
Longs not to me . For in your eye 
Such true Characters I espy 
Of virtue , zeal , and upright heed , 
That you will prove the man indeed , 
Meet such a charge to undergo : 
Whereto heaven's hand hath raised you so ▪ 
And that you 'll equal any yet 
That in the selfsame place hath set . 
Such is the hope of all that love ye , 
Amongst whom , I cannot choose but move ye 
With their remembrance , that this day 
Have done as much as men well may 
In honouring this Solemnity , 
The Draper's worthy Company . 
Their love and bounty hath expressed , 
How with their favours you are blessed : 
For , as their kindness hath not scanted : 
So hath no needful service wanted . 
For this day's honour and delight : 
And so my worthy Lord good night . 
Thus the worthy and first honoured Company of Drapers , having ( in loving and bountiful manner ) declared their kind affection to as affable a Magistrate : I may not omit one thing more , wherein the duteous respect of themselves , and love to the City very manifestly approved their worth : for , when many solemn meetings have been made in the Guild Hall , for election of a Sheriff by common consent , and as many refusals still happening day by day , to the great disquiet of the Companies , and mighty delay of time ; yet when no one would undergo the Office and charge , a Draper hath done it , worthily and willingly , though no Alderman's place as then was void , witness Master Benedict Barneham , a learned and judicious Gentleman , who cheerfully undertook the Shrievalty in Anno 1591.  Next , Master Henry jaye , but a year since , and Master Martin Lumley now Sheriff of London , all of them loving brethren of the Draper's Society . 

To conclude , as the several Inventions ( with all their weaknesses and imperfections ) were mine own : so the worth and credit of their performance ( if any may wait on so mean a business ) belongeth to the exact and skilful Painter Master Rowland Bucket , whose care , diligence , and faithful dealing I must needs commend , and should wrong him overmuch if I did not give him due praise to his merit . ( * ⁎ * ) 

FINIS . 





 He lived and wrote in the time of king Stephen .  In the old Saxon tongue from whence it was derived , it signifieth Dominus or Lord.   The ancient Chronicler of the City . The number of 45.  Lord Mayor , 