Monodia OR WALTHAMS' COMPLAINT , 

Upon The death of that most Virtuous and Noble Lady , late deceased , the Lady HONOUR HAY , 

Sole Daughter and Heir to the Right Honourable EDWARD , Lord DENNIE , Baron of Waltham , and wife to the Right Honourable JAMES Lord HAY.  

Virtus post funera vivit . 

By R. N. Oxon.  

LONDON , Printed by W. S. for Richard Meighen and Thomas jones , and are to be sold at their shop without Temple-bar under S. Clement's Church . 1615.  

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE AND RELIGIOUS PATTERNS OF VIRTUE , AND PATRONS of Learning , EDWARD , Lord DENNIE , Baron of Waltham , and his most noble Son JAMES Lord HAY.  

Right Honourable Lords , though unworthy and unknown ( as n●t worthy to be known to your Lordships ) I want that good opinion begot by foreknowledge , which , like a pleasing glass that makes any thing that is seen through it seem better than it is , might set a fair gloss upon the forefront of this rude Poem ; yet not doubting , but that your Honours will vouchsafe to look upon my imperfections herein , with more affection out of passion for the deads' sake , whom here I honour , than judgement out of reason to discuss , how unworthy I am to discourse of such Honor. I presume to offer up in my Walthams' Complaint this funeral Obsequy , or mournful M●nodia , at the shrine of your Favours , as the Sacrifice of my last duty to that most Noble , and to you most dear , dead Lady ; of whom living , by her Sister's tears , my Muse in her first Infancy of being known , finding gracious acceptance , but deprived the fruition thereof through inevitable chance , and hoping with her weak breath to revive those sparks that my enforced absence had raked up in the ashes of oblivion , lately singing the Image of her Honor , was ( alas than : I should say she was ) too suddenly thunder-striken by that unlooked for Dart of Death , in top of all her hopes . wherefore both of that consecrated to her Honour , then living , and of this , devoted to your lordship's , in honour of her now dead , most humbly craving your gracious Protections , I live 

Your Honour's most ●umbly at command . R. N.  

To the same right Honourable Lords , the Lord DENNIE , and the Lord HAY.  

The last , the least , and yet best deed alone 
Done to the dead by those that d●e survive , 
Is to record their virtues , they being gone : 
For only virtue keeps the dead alive . 
My last , my least , and yet my best I can 
Of duty to that honoured Ladies name , 
Which from her virtues first in me began , 
I owe to you , that best can judge the same . 
My subject ( Noble Lords ) doth fit your worth , 
And since my humble ●lile is far too base , 
I for the subject's sake do pick you forth , 
That stile and subject both may purchase grace . 
Which if ( great Lords ) my humble Muse obtain , 
Walthams' complaint cannot be told in vain . 
Your Honour's most humbly devoted . RIC● . NICCO●SS . 

WALTHAMS' COMPLAINT , 

IN that sixth month , whose name at first begun 
From great Augustus , good Octavius' son , 
When in each fertile field the flowery grain 
Shot up on high , did bow their heads again , 
As doing humble homage to the earth , 
From whence they took their being and their birth ; 
And every fruitful tree did seem to groan 
As burdened with the fruit that hung thereon , 
Inviting all that past by their abode , 
To strip their boughs , and ease them of their load ; 
Beside the banks of lees delightful brook , 
Which Walthams' ancient Town doth overlook . 
I walked , expecting in the days prime birth 
The joy , with which the morning greets the earth : 
But she , as not disposed to mirth , did lay 
Her azure robes with silver fringed away ; 
And in their stead , whose wear the world doth glad 
Was in dark russet mantle meanly clad . 
A vale of mist her silver brow did hide , 
The golden trammels of her hair were tie 
In fillet of black clouds , and with ●ad look 
She mourner-like to heaven her journey took : 
Earth , as it had a part in sorrow bore , 
Upon her back a cloak of vapours wore , 
And , as if wanting eyes her grief to show , 
Her grass in stead of tear●ss dropped weeping dew 
Into the river Lee , by which I stood . 
Three other brooks , that to increase her 'slud 
Did poor themselves , with her along did glide 
As if no grief their waters could divide : 
Which their mixed waves did mutually declare , 
By breathing vaporie sighs into the air : 
Whose waters bubbling o'er the pebble stone , 
As if they would unto the trees upon 
The banks on either side express by voice 
An inward sorrow , made a murmuring noise . 
All things that came beneath my sight did show 
As each with other would consort in wo● ; 
Which through mine eyes did steal my hearts consent 
To bear a part ; for I to Waltham went , 
Beside whose Abbey there a work of praise , 
Which worthy hands in antique time did raise , 
That noble Barons Hospitable sea●e , 
Where rich and poor find bountiful entreat , 
Sad spectacle of sorrow I did see , 
The sight of which did much impassion me . 
On the bare ground , sitting in open field , 
A fair , but forlorn , Lady I beheld , 
Without remorse , now rending from her head , 
Her yellow hair , like threads of gold dispred 
About her silver neck , now beating sore 
Her breast , the lodge of griffe , and evermore 
Fixing her eye so steadfast on the ground , 
As thence , from her own tears , which did abound , 
As from a Crystal glass , help she would borrow , 
To see the face of her own faces sorrow ; 
Whose woeful gesture did my heart so wound , 
That I requested her to show the ground 
Of this her grief , and she as loath to speak , 
Yet in these words at last did silence break . 
In vain , my voice , in vain thou dost impart 
Weak words , for signs of my wo-wounded heart . 
In vain my heart do thy sad sighs arise 
From inward thoughts with tears to fill mine eyes : 
In vain mine eyes your moist tears overflow ; 
no grief so great , that can express my woe . 
Weak words , sad sighs , moist tears , in vain ye be , 
Mine Honour dead I nevermore shall see . 
To hear her mourning and her sad complaint , 
I silent was awhile with grief's constraint ; 
Till sorrow's self did urge me ask her name , 
To which thus she this sad reply did frame . 
Waltham I was ; and though some think I am 
What I have been ; yet bear I but the name 
Of what I was ; and yet in my distress 
Such is my chance , ( hard chance you well may guess ) 
That wretched I of late through death's despite , 
Have lost my Dear , my Da●ling , my Delight , 
The Light of nature , Ornament of earth , 
Model of heaven , the Pearl of grace , whose birth 
Did with that Honour grace my fruitful womb , 
Which now , she dead , lies buried in her tomb . 
For know ( alas that it should ere be known ) 
My honour late is dead , is dead and gone . 
Was 't not enough that fortune , who takes pleasure 
In human woes , bereaved me of that treasure , 
Which daily lees large stream ( though now a poor 
And petty brook ) did bring unto my shore ; 
Till Alfred , scourge of Danes , that Royal King 
Her larger stream to lesser brooks did bring ; 
When Denmark's Navy did on her broad breast 
My sister Hartford with long siege molest : 
Where he that time his foes proud hearts did ●ame 
And burned their Danish Fleet with English flame ? 
Was 't not enough I say , I so should be 
Bereft of comfort in beloved Lee : 
But that by death , eu'u she , whom all did know 
To be ( aye me that now she is not so ) 
My garlands fairest flower , should be defaced , 
The fairest flower , that ere my garland graced ? 
no hand will crop the stem up in despite , 
That yearly yieldeth flowers ●or delight ; 
no churl will lay his axe unto the root 
Of such a plant , that yearly yieldeth fruit ; 
Yet she , true plant of Honour ( OH ste●ne death ) 
e'en bearing fruit was blasted by thy breath . 
If ever beauty might prevail with thee , 
A ra●er beauty eye did seldom see ; 
If ever honour ; she , most noble Dame , 
Was Honour self in nature and in name● 
If ever Virtue ; she was that fair shrine , 
Whence Virtues beams unto the World did shine . 
How couldst thou looking on her lovely face , 
●ift up thy hand to strike , when in that place 
Youth , graced with a●l the grace's heaven could give , 
Did with such beauty beg thy leave to live , 
How couldst thou but let fall thy deadly dart , 
When sadly she ( at thought of which my hart 
Now bleeds afresh ) distilling from her eyes 
D●●ps pure as pearl , did show in woeful wise 
Her childed womb , that thou shouldst pity take , 
I● not for hers , yet for her infant's sake ? 
H●w couldst , I say , but mildly look upon her , 
When in her barthened womb , that babe of Honour 
Did for the mother mercy seem to cry , 
And she again , for her dear babe would die ? 
OH unrelenting death thou couldst not then 
Strike , though thy hand were I f●ed up : but when 
Lucina brought the sweet babe from the throes 
Of the chaste mother to this world of woes , 
then , then , thy hand did crop my Honour's clowre , 
My Beauty's bud , my Bounty's Paramour . 
But why did Nature , to augment her fame , 
With cunning build up such a glorious frame , 
And heaven with her more glorious spirit grace it , 
Finding no fairer mansion where to place it : 
Yet leave it , like vain bubble made of breath , 
To be a triumph to victorious death ? 
Poor Nature well I see , that all thy power 
But weakness is : Death daily doth devour 
Thy noblest works : of beggars and of Kings 
The generation from corruption spring's . 
Flesh is but dust , made up in human shape , 
To which , weak Nature , like th'eternals Ape , 
T'ind●ce us to believe that she can give 
Eternity to make it ever live , 
A lively colour over it doth lay , 
Which makes ●lesh think it never shall decay , 
But flourish ever ; when unlookt-for Death 
Doth in a moment blast it with his breath ; 
" Flesh is but flesh , the fairest things do fall , 
" The strongest stoop , Death is the end of all . 
Love-drawing load-stars , unto whom is given 
Shape , like the winged messengers of Heaven , 
To whose sweet beauties all men's knees are bend , 
Help me , OH help me , kindly to lament 
This honoured Lady , Lady of all Honour , 
And in your gentle hearts so think upon her , 
That in the glass , when you with curious care 
Trimming the tresses of your golden hair 
Shall wonder at yourselves , you then may say , 
This beauty is but borrowed for a day , 
An hour , a minute , or a moment's space , 
death 's here , is there , at hand in every place . 
The Springs most hopeful bud in youthful May 
Is sometime with the blossom blown away : 
The fruit sometimes doth perish in the bud , 
At most it can attain but so much good , 
As to grow ripe , and drop into the shade : 
Both blossom , bud , and fruit in time do vade . 
Nor do I simply challenge Death alone 
Of that late wrong , too soon alas yet done , 
To the dead mirror of all wome● kind : 
th' inevitable end of things designed , 
And written by the great Creator's hand 
In the star-text of Heaven , shall ever stand , 
And in itself is good , but every end 
Upon a mediate cause doth still depend . 
And though by means at evil ends we aim ; 
Yet divine providence directs the same , 
And makes , when wicked we all good neglect , 
An evil cause produce a good effect : 
So that sad instrument of wicked ill , 
By which death doubtless found the way to spill 
This glorious work of nature , evil meant , 
Spoil was the end and scope of his intent . 
But heaven did frustrate what his purpose was ; 
Yet in his action suffered him to pass , 
That so her ●oule , shut up in house of clay , 
Unworthy such a guest might find a way , 
Upon death's ladder from base earth to rise : 
For death is Honour's scale to climb the skies . 
But woe to thee the while , whose wicked hands 
Were instruments of death t'vnknit the bands . 
Which in that body held so fair a mind , 
In which soul envies self no fault could find ; 
OH wretched world , whose crooked back doth bow , 
And groan beneath four ages past , yet thou 
As old in evil , as in age dost nurse 
thine own disease , and which alas is worse 
Dost only yield thine aged paps to those , 
That are black mischiefs friends and virtues foes : 
thine iron age the worst of all the four 
In no part good , when good men did deplore 
Astr●as' flight from hence to heaven above , 
Was not so bad ; but that it may improve 
This thy last age , of clay , of dirt , of mud , 
Of anything more vile or void of good 
When evil spirits in shapes of men do dwell , 
And earth itself is made another hell : 
Astraea then from earth to heaven did fly , 
Because truth trodden down did helpless lie 
Beneath oppression , and to her was given , 
That place , where now she holds the scale in heaven , 
Yet Honour with us st●●l did seem to stay ▪ 
As if from earth , heaven would not take away 
Virtue's reward , till Vice did so abound , 
That now true virtue no where can be found : 
Or if it can , yet doth it want reward ; 
The sons of Honour now have no regard , 
To base vice greatness of state inclines , 
Who●e upstart grooms , each where in purple shines ; 
Soule-saving virtue shames to show her face , 
To be true virtuous now is to be base , 
And honesty , whence Honour takes her name , 
To those profess it , is accounted shame : 
then happy she , though hapless we lament 
The absence of her noble soul , which sent 
From Heaven at first , as heavenly dew did fall 
Upon this sinful earth , and finding all 
Too gross end muddy , where she might remain , 
Was through the poors of her life's fru●t again 
Exhaled from earth by those attractive rays , 
Which heavens bright sun of mercy thence displays 
Where unto her all glory now is given ; 
Astraeas self and all those stars in heaven , 
Which antique times did stellify of yore , 
Give honour unto Honour evermore : 
no part of those rare parts , that did excel , 
Whose worth no tongue , much less thy Muse could tell● 
Though she obliged by duty gave th'g assay , 
While time doth last , on earth shall ere decay . 
For heaven ▪ whe● living she did truly honour , 
Now dead bestows a living name upon her ; 
A name to live , while fame hath wings to fly , 
For sure on earth , the fame shall never die 
Of her true noble Sire , a patron known 
Unto weak want , and second unto none 
For great good deeds , which Envy cannot blame , 
Nor to this Lord deny ; but yield , what fame 
To 〈◊〉 , and his dear daughter dead doth give , 
That she by him , and he by her may live ; 
May live in those two noble pla●tss which she , 
True honoured ●o●d , hath living le●t to thee : 
In whom , that so t●ine image and her own 
May unto all posterity be known , 
Heaven give them length of days , & bless them so , 
That from suc● plants fruit evermore may grow : 
Who in all 〈◊〉 times may claim the crown 
Of that il●st●ate deed , which doth renown 
Their Father's name , of which if these bad days 
Which sleights best things would harken to my lays , 
My Mus● ( great Lord ) should strike so high a string , 
T●at boldest Bards should cease to hear her sing . 
And on thy Falcon's wings alost should soar , 
To tell of thy great Ancessors of yore , 
And of their valour , whence derived came 
Those arms , that now nobiliate thy name . 
When like a tempest that proud Pagan host 
F●om the North seas arrived on Scotland's coast , 
Where near Loncart the noble ●iver T●y 
From that sad sight , as grieved , did glide away . 
When she beheld her country's lot sink down 
And fame in fight her foes with conquest crown . 
Till with his ploughbeame glory-thirs●ing Hay 
Aided by his two sons did cross the way , 
And forced his flying countrymen again 
With courage to 〈◊〉 head upon on the Dane , 
Whose host destroyed , with a ploughbeame that day 
He saved his King and country ●rom decay , 
Of which upon that field , the Hay●● own land , 
The Falcon's stone a trophy still doth stand . 
But back my Muse , their glory may not be 
Thy subject now ; yet we by this may see , 
That by him living , bles● is she now dead , 
Who made him blessed by a fruitful bed : 
She dead , he living both blessed evermore 
In that fatre fruit , which her chaste bosom bore ; 
Her chastest bosom , which was once the bower , 
Where virtues Queen did keep her court , whose clowre , 
Which from a plant in paradise did spring , 
Set in her thoughts fair garden forth did bring , 
The fruit of chaste desire and spotless love : 
For which her happy soul now sits above 
Those , that for other virtues praised been ; 
In women chastity is virtue's Queen , 
Which through that grace , which unto her was given , 
For her true zeal unto the King of heaven , 
Without the which none can possess the same , 
While life did last , she kept from touch of blame : 
( The nobler Dames ) that all vain thoughts despise , 
Who would preserve from theft of hungry eyes 
Your clowre of beauty , and would quench the fires , 
Which fal●e termed love hath tined in base desires , 
Ensue her steps in grace and piety , 
Which are the guardians of true chastity ; 
OH let not those shape-shifters , that do steal 
By false pretence of sanctimonious zeal , 
Into the closet of your thoughts , entice 
Your ears from truth , who by a new device 
Teaching to be unchaste , to be no crime 
Or veial at the least , abuse the time : 
Nor let those Palace parasites , those apes , 
Who putting on the gestures and the shapes 
Of graver men , with their profaner lips 
To make their Ladies laugh , spit forth court quips 
Against devotion , mocking holy things , 
Improve your sanctity , whence all good springs : 
Shame not to show in public , as she did 
Your zeal to heaven , true zeal will not be hid ; 
join outward action to your inward will , 
Not to do good , she knew , was to do ill . 
But from her faith the efficient cause of good , 
And those diviner virtues understood 
Of heavenly souls , in which she did excel , 
Let me proceed her other gifts to tell . 
least courtly ease , of great ones counted state , 
To wanton Vice might open Virtue's gate , 
Her studious soul was exercised sti●l ; 
For where ease is , 't is easy to do ill . 
When she herself to solace did dispose 
To pass the time , no vain delights she chsse's : 
If in her needle she did tak● delight , 
What fairer pattern than her hands fair white ? 
If she by art the I illies white would show ; 
then if not there , where did white Lilies grow ? 
If azure brooks winding the lands about 
In their true figure she would portrait out , 
then th●se blue veins were such , which on her hand 
Made little Lands in a little land . 
Would she work roses with a perfect red , 
Her lips , as often as she did beh●d 
The si●●e grown short with pearl-like teeth , had power 
To give a ●●imson colour to each flower , 
Which on her w●●ke so like the life did show , 
As if h●y by her eyes fair be●ameses did grow , 
And through her t●uch for sent did so excel , 
As if her brea●h had given them fragrant smell . 
In which for skill with that ra●e Lydian Dame 
She seemed with Pallas to contend for ●ame . 
Sometimes her dainty voice with breath as sweet 
As April Zephyr's gentle gales , that g●eet 
Our scent with odor of the morning's rose , 
Sweet ditties did in such sweet tunes compose , 
That all ●hat h●ard her so amazed were , 
As if their souls were only in the ear : 
While her soft hand wou●d gently touch the Lute , 
And sometimes bid the Viol not be mute , 
Who taught by her , as if they did rejoice 
To bear a part to so divine a voice , 
Such heavenly music to the ear wou●d bring , 
That ●oves nine daughters could no better sing : 
With whom she ( honoured Lady ) nights and days 
Would spend in hearing their melodious lays , 
And unto learning ever being a friend 
To hopeful wits her help she would extend . 
But here ( perhaps ) if thou do hap to write 
Her noble worth , which now I do recite , 
Virtue's companion black mouthed Envy says , 
Thy pen doth drop a mercenary praise ; 
But to acquit thee here the world may know , 
She lived not ( noble Lady ) to bestow 
Her purposed favours on thy forlorn Muse , 
In whom , her worth yet , which I more abuse 
then truly blazon , cannot silent sleep ; 
Of her great worth what Muse can silence keep ? 
ye thrice three sisters of that sacred spring , 
About whose banks ye sit and sadly sing 
Your heavenly skills contempt and learning's scorn , 
Double your grief ; for greater cause to mourn 
How can ye have ? your art must now need● perish , 
Since all are dead with her , that arts did cherish . 
Look not in Court or City any more 
To find that grace , was given you of yore , 
Now gentle bloods trained up in fancy's school , 
Do give the due of learning to the ●oole ; 
Your art is base , your skill is counted shame , 
You must be poor with those profess the same ; 
A●d thou unhappy Swain whose Muse did raise 
An image of her Honour , poor ●ssay●ss 
In haste compiled in hope her grace to gain , 
Neglect of which sorced absence did constrain , 
This Lady's loss may most of all lament , 
Too hasty death did all thy haste prevent ; 
What boot● it here to bid thy Muse be sad , 
Who now more grieves , that she may say she had 
Hope in good hap , till that unhappy day , 
That death with her took hope and hap away ; 
then justly hast thou part in my complaint , 
To wail the loss of that now heavenly Saint ; 
For who like her ( ah none like her is left ) 
Will deign to hear thee sing , thou art bere●t 
Of future hopes , who spoke thee fair , forlorn , 
Now mock thy hopes and laugh thy ears to scorn ; 
Break then thy pipe , that was thy wont bliss , 
Whose tunes once pleased , if some think not amiss , 
Ne let thy Clioes trump , whose sound did bring 
The dead to life , when Envy's ears did ring , 
To hear the praises of Eliza's name , 
Be ever heard to sound the deeds of fame , 
May none alive , that do the Muses wrong 
Once dead , be named in any Muse's song . 
Ne let the painted Theatre be gr●eed 
With tragic scene from thee ; Wit so misplaced . 
Hath weaved the webs of folly , neither let 
Thy Muse henceforth more serious things , ●orget , 
To please the world : who best deserves , shall find 
Best friends wax cold , and all the world unkind . 
then henceforth silent sit in thy sad cell , 
And evermore bid such delights farewell . 
Or in thy thoughts , if to thyself thou raise 
A shrine to virtue , where to offer praise , 
To whom so chaste , yet fair as eye could find , 
To whom so fair , and yet so meek in mind ; 
To whom so meek , yet born in Honour's Throne , 
Canst offer it but unto her alone ? 
In them that live , what now is worthy found , 
Who only vaunt to hear false flattery sound 
Their painted beauties , chiefly they provide 
Them Parasites to praise their foolish pride , 
Sly Apes , that can but congee with a leg , 
Do gain their grace , while learned wits may beg . 
Go then , ●h go thou to you sacred Fane , 
In which her chaste dead body doth remain ; 
For left to me poor Wal●ham nothing is 
Of my dear Honour now , excepting this , 
That burial to her body dead I give , 
Who gave it birth at first , when it did live : 
There as thou didst before her living shed 
Thy sister's Tears for Royal Henry dead , 
Unto her Tomb , let tears thy duty tell , 
And from sad Wal●ham bid a sad farewell . 
This said , she sighed , and as that sigh did rise , 
She rose and vanished from before mine eyes , 
Which not so maz'de to see , as grieved to know 
Her cause of grief , I to that place did go , 
To seek the grave and bless that happy stone , 
Which keeps the shrine where Honour kept her throne 
Where when I came , the doors did say me nay , 
From whence debarred with grief I went my way , 
Else on her Tomb , whose soul now lives in bl●sse , 
I had imposed this Honour's Pyramid . 
FINIS . 



Sky 
Azure 
'Bove the 
TO endure 
Most s●●e 
then this here 
And greater , 
far better , 
In HONOUR 
Ever to live 
God her doth give 
That place of ●est , 
For Abraham's breast ; 
To place her in . 
To mean hath been , 
An Angel's room , 
Where being come 
To this her bold assay 
And Charity made way 
Hope made her hart soar high , 
●aith gave her Wings to fly 
To blast her youths May flower ; 
That Age might have no power 
't is thought this ●ady past , 
And thither with mo●e hast 
Above each heavenly stair : 
She is ascended ●arre 
Which Fame bestowed upon her , 
For leaving ●ar●hly Honour ; 
Her sweet Soul did aspi●e ▪ 
'Bove which with brave desi●e 
Above the Earth they do abide , 
The base Earth can never hide 
Her Virtues and her Nobler part● , 
But her true ●ove to learned Arts 
Her part of Earth to Earth doth give : 
That was , while thee on Earth did live , 
As Fair a Fair as any one , 
Fair HONOUR here beneath this stone ▪ 




 Waltham Abbey .  Marra●● Be●ne and S●ower with an arm called the 〈◊〉 because it devid●th 〈◊〉 , and Hartfordshi●eses .  The Lord Dennie .  or Alured which upon this occasion 〈◊〉 called the King's stream at Waltham . Ralph Holles●lia , Descript. Britt .  〈…〉   〈…〉   〈…〉  