Prince HENRY revived . 

OR A POEM UPON THE BIRTH , AND In Honour of the Hopeful young PRINCE HENRY FREDERICK , First Son and Heir apparent to the most Excellent Princes , FREDERICK Count Palatine of the Rhine , And the Mirror of Ladies , Princess ELIZABETH , his Wife , only daughter to our Sovereign JAMES King of Great Britain , etc.  

By HENRY PEACHAM . 

LONDON , Printed by W. Stansby for john Helm , and are to be sold at his shop in Saint Dunstan's Churchyard , under the Dial . 1615.  

HENRICUS FERD : COM. PALATE : RHENI ET BAVAR . D. FILIUS ET HAERES . 



Diva anima Augustos haud ementita parents 
Frontis honore , decus Rheni , spes una BRITANUM 
Cresce per immensum● donec virtutibus annos 
CAESAR , avos titulis● famâ superâris Olympum 


Henricus Peachamus TO THE MIGHTY , AND MOST MAGNIFICENT PRINCESS ELIZABETH , PRINCESS PALATINE OF THE RHINE , Duchess of Bavaria , etc.  

Most Excellent Lady . 

sithence it hath pleased your Highness , heretofore to take notice of me , and my labours , such as they were , nothing hath been oftener in my wishes then ability to pay the debt I owe to the respect of so peerless a Prince , and Princely a Patroness . But since the more I strive , the more I am entangled by mine own weakness , I submit to my Fortune , and must rest Captived in the bands of your gracious mercy . Yet so to be bound , is sweet liberty , and beholding the face of such a judge , I read my pardon upon a brow of juorie . But as Favour is wont to make offenders bold , so truly I confess your Favours have drawn me into this , and your Bounty having watered some flowers , hath brought up I fear more weeds , which perhaps by their rankness will rather give offence , then with their smell or beauty breed you delight . I now present your Highness , with a Genethliaque or Birth Poem , done by me aswell in Latin , as English Verse , in Honour and the behalf of young Prince Henry your sweet and dearest Son , the most part in my travails here in the Low Countries upon the way , without other help then a bad memory , and my Table book , and now ended under the aspect of that star of honour , and Honourer of your Grace and all virtuous Excellence , Sir john Ogle Lord Governor of Vtrecht , my noble friend . If any ask why it came no sooner and had not the being with the Prince's birth , I answer a Poem is a fruit that had need of a winter to ripen it , I could say with Horace●'s ● nine years , neither am I one of those , who have their wits au bout des doigts , as Du Bartas saith . Last of all it is a joy that can never come out of season . Yet had these excuses , I confess been of no force , had the way to Heidelberge been free from danger , during either Armies lying at Rees and Wesel , for so far I was come on my Pilgrimage with this little , less than a candle toward your Highness the Saint and Sovereign of my devote affection , whom since it is papistry to pray unto , I cannot , as I am bound , but pray for so long as I live . I most humbly take my leave of your Grace : From Vtrecht , the of 

Unto your Highness , the most devoted in all duty , HENRY PEACHAM . 

To the same most Excellent Princess . 

Dear Henry's loss , Eliza's wedding day , 
The last , the first , I sorrowed and sung , 
When laid my reeds for evermore away , 
To sleep in silence , Isis' shades among : 
Dead to the Muse , and manyheaded throng , 
Through hard constraint of fruitless Hope compelled : 
And Envy rife , that kills with cankered tongue 
The sacred Bay , so honoured of eld , 
Though left forlorn , ne now , of Phoebus' self upheld . 
Where are the Summers when the righteous Maid , 
With ev'nest hand the heavenly Scale did wield , 
And golden Deed with golden meed repaid : 
When Virtue was in price , for Virtue , held , 
When Honours dainty but desert did gild , 
And Poesy in graces goodly seen , 
Raised her high thought , with strains that Nectar stilled ? 
Th●y are ascended with that glorious Queen : 
And she , alas , forgot , as she had never been . 
But dearest daughter of the greatest Isle , 
Sole glorious Empress of the Northern Maine . 
Yet thou her glory : Since thou didst erewhile , 
Thy bounteous hand , and sweet supportance deign 
Unto my verse , and all unworthy vain : 
As humblest ju●e , by those arms I creep , 
That gave me growth , and first my entertain , 
Else lowly buried in Oblivion deep , 
Who here had heard me sing thy sweetest babe a sleep ? 
And him again to waken with my song , 
Which thousand tunes shall variously divide , 
As Vahale by thy flowerie banks along , 
I take my pipe at morn and eventide : 
Hence may it down thy gentle bosom glide , 
And going on , alloy th' enraged Rhine , 
Where goodly Nymphs with Muses mild abide : 
Who often in his surplusage of Wine , 
Do teach him Temperance , in songs and lays divine . 
Now while I shall beside this cradle sing , 
Leave Venus' Queen a time thy silver sphere , 
And to mine aid thy dainty darling bring , 
With Mart appeased after death and drear : 
But from thy pure and peerless excellence , 
Eliza mother , dreaddest Lady dear , 
Light , life , o , lend unto mine eine and sense , 
For vigour have I none but what I draw from hence . 
And Royal child , who like another Sun , 
From Rosy bed arised'st in the East , 
When that great light we saw extinct and done , 
Ah Henry , wailed of every gentle breast , 
Dart one sweet smile upon me early guest : 
And that my Muse with thine owue height may fly , 
A feather shed from thy fair Phoenix nest : 
So may she teach thy Fame to strike the sky , 
And thee a Mirror ●ake to all Posterity . 
PRINCE HENRY REVIVED . 

Now jocund Muses to an higher string 
We tune our Lyre , a lofty Theme to sing , 
And leave a while the vale , to mounten up 
With bolder wing Parnassus heavenly top : 
Where holy Virgin elder of the nine , 
Whose temples with a sevenfold crownet shine 
And glorious mantle guilds the sable night , 
With many a thousand twinkling Chrysolite : 
Say , in what part we find those happy stars 
That keep enrolled , in golden Characters , 
The Fate of Princes , and eternal sum 
Of all ; that was , and ever is to come . 
To after times , I may arightly read , 
The hopeful Harvest of this heavenly seed . 
For , can the blood , derived from the veins 
Of so great Princes , such imperial Reigns , 
Vnhopefull be ? and Imp of richest root , 
Deceive our wishes in abundant fruit : 
Or whether this been that same goodly tree , 
That nigh the fertile Rhine must planted be : 
Whose fruitful branch , should Europe overspread , 
And check the Heaven with her lofty-head . 
Or one of those brave Worthies , joined in one 
With the red Lion of old Caledon , 
( Foretold by Merlin , whose one foot should press 
The unshorn top of that vast wilderness , 
The other grasp , with far extended power , 
The Pyram of Troie-novants highest tower ) 
Should as so many fatal suns appear 
To chase the Crescent from our Hemisphere : 
Or that strong arm expected long ago , 
Should give the Byzant beast a deadly blow : 
At Collen bathing ( drunk with Christian blood ) 
His loathed limbs in Rhenus' silver flood , 
I may not rash aread ; but this I wot 
How janivere , his bitter rage forgot , 
For lusty green y'changed his frosty grey : 
( As if he wooed the sweet and dainty May ) 
For joy he brought first tidings of this birth , 
And gave the goodliest New years gift on earth . 
When smiling Gladness , child of heavenly jove , 
( Her dainty cordial gotten from above ) 
With rosy fingers now began to shed 
Ambrosian dews with kisses tempered . 
And drops for joy , Love's self had wept full often , 
Wherewith she wont , afflicted hearts to soften , 
That all to mirth , each Creature melted now ; 
Yea Envies self , though knew not why or how , 
Until thy being , Fame had fully blown : 
Thrice-welcome Infant , which no sooner known , 
But reared wear in honour of thy name , 
The goodliest sights Magnificence could frame ; 
When Piles bright burning , by the silent Moon 
In every street , of midnight made the noon . 
While silver bells , with iron tongues proclaim 
A new born Henry , to the Nymphs of Thame . 
Ye Nymphs of Thame , whose lovely shape excels 
So far the fairest of each Beauty else , 
That you may boast both model and the mould 
Of her perfection . What we do behold 
In stranger Countries , read in antique lines , 
Are pourtraies , but of sunburnt Abyssines , 
To you compared ; that Paphos seems to me , 
From Greece transported into Britanny . 
And while I blazon broad this beauteous crew ; 
Fair Sisters , let me draw the veil from you : 
Who though ye live , retired from world's eye , 
Estranged from Court , and City's vanity , 
For lovely feature do give place to none . 
Whereto , your birth ( as some high prized stone ) 
Though adds more lustre , yet the goodly care 
Of virtuous life , wherein ye nourtred are , 
Gives freer wing abroad unto your Fame , 
then your brave Beauty's , or great Dudleys name . 
They dedicate with one accord the day , 
To all disport , and merriment they may ; 
For thy , thy stars foretell them happy peace , 
And give their half-dead Hopes a new increase , 
Fair morning bud of England's white-red Rose , 
And seventh Henry in her strifes compose : 
If ever ( God forbid ) her breast should feel , 
The bitter edge of her own conquering steel : 
Wherewith she wont with mighty arm to lordship 
The proudest head that durst her overtop . 
Who comest another anchor to her state , 
For it she lost by woeful wreck o'late ; 
That hate of Hell ; nor Traitor Heauen-abhored 
Do what they may shall break our triple cord , 
Who sheildest , sleeping even in Mother's arm , 
Thy Grand sire , uncle Prince , more safe from harm , 
then Axes , Tasters , Grooms about the bed , 
then strongest holds , or guards twice doubled . 
Who comet-like dost suddenly amaze 
The strike foe , who standing at the gaze 
Amused , reads o'er what unhappy Realm , 
The bloody Meteor shakes his fiery stream . 
But as o'er Haemus , when the morn hath drawn 
Her purple Curtains , after early dawn , 
To lay to view her goodly golden pawn , 
Her new born son y'wrapt in Rosy lawn : 
Who now awearie of his watery bed 
off shakes the dew from his bright burnished head ; 
And with Ambrosian smile , and gentle cheer 
Revives the world that wanted him whileare , 
So us thine own thou gladdest with thy birth , 
The welcome-welcomst stranger upon earth ; 
New come into thine age , where all things smile 
By peace composed , ( that Chaos-like erewhile 
Lay rude , confused ) discords indigest , 
Whose formelesse form may no where be expressed . 
Like as into some goodly garden plot , 
That heretofore hath her rude face forgot , 
And lay an heap defaced with filthy soil , 
O'ergrown with briars , abused by beastly spoil : 
By Art and Nature now embellished 
Smiles with a thousand dainty beauties spread , 
Vaunting unto the greedy gazing eye 
By Sun-rise her perfumed embroidery . 
When Mother-feared War , that long hath rend 
The body of our Christian continent ; 
And like the in-breach of a mighty flood , 
O'erthrown our houses , drowned our streets with blood : 
Consumed our Cities , laid our Country wa●t , 
Devoured our people , holy things defaced : 
Shall prostrate at thy foot in deep disdain , 
Lie raging bound in hundred double chain , 
Until his heartstrings break for fell despite , 
Or his own arms do kill him with their weight . 
Why brave Heroes ye that Eaglets be , 
And high-born sons of Caesar's Monarchy , 
Who have so oft your puissant forces tried , 
Against the common foe , do ye divide 
Yourselves and safeties , while ye entertain 
Huge Armies in your homebred quarrels vain ? 
Or factious Schism that some dissentious head , 
By night ( his Cockle ) hath dissemined ? 
Or erst as Suizze and Burgundy begin , 
An endless war about an vntolled skin ? 
While Eagle Eagle cruelly pursues , 
And brother brother with his blood embru●s . 
If the easeful age your active spirits irk , 
Not weeting how to set yourselves a work , 
Turn your keen steel against the hateful Turk . 
Enough , enough , our guilt ( o gracious God ) 
If be thy will , hath felt thy bittter rod. 
O turn that sword again into his sheath 
That hath so long chastised us beneath : 
Let not ourselves our executioners be , 
While foes are fatted with the Tragedy . 
As when there been in Erimanthus met 
Two savage Boars , with tusks deadly whet , 
Who either each with fiercest fury gore , 
For rangership the spacious forest o'er , 
Until around the grassy velvet stead 
With bloody filth be all discolored ; 
A slily lurking Lioness beneath , 
When sees them weary , wounded , out of breath , 
Leaps from her lare to arbitrate the fray , 
With hungry teeth , and both become her pray . 
What flood , the blood of Christians not infects ? 
What Seas have not been covered with our wrecks ? 
What fields not tainted with our scattered bones ? 
What tower's not turned to wasteful heaps of stones ? 
That foes are filled with the piteous view , 
And Discords self our Misery doth rue . 
But ( happy Prince ) thy time foretells thee peace , 
And restful days , with Honour's large increase . 
Now Germany , and Britain , shall be one , 
In League , in Laws , in Love , Religion : 
'twixt Dane , and English , English and the Scot , 
Old grudge● ( see ) for ever are forgot ; 
The Hebrid Redshank shall not dare too rout , 
Or inland Rebel double walled about : 
But shaftlike all one bundle , be too strong 
For mightiest foe to do the meanest wrong . 
While foreign Princes from remotest shore , 
Thy cradle shall by Embassies adore , 
The Sunburned Niger shall present thee plumes , 
Sweet Arabia delicious perfumes : 
Sarmatian Ister many a costly skin , 
And Armenia her dainty Ermelin . 
Egypt the Balm , or blood of Myrrha's wound , 
And Persis , pearls within her channels found , 
With Oriental Gems , to embosse arowne , 
( In time perhaps ) a Caesars triple crown : 
When Mother Earth ●hall to thee , incompelled , 
Her treasures , pleasures in abundance yield . 
The hardy Oak shall melting honey sweated , 
And bushes bend with Bacchus' clusters great : 
The Lion couch him by the Lamb in love , 
And Eagle perch beside the gentle Dove : 
The ripened grain shall yellow veil the ground , 
no Serpent hurt , or harmful herb be found . 
Wood-nymphes the shady violets shall pull , 
And bring thee Lilies by whole baskets full ; 
Some crop the Rose , to show thee how in grain , 
That crimson , Venus bleeding hand did stain ; 
How from that dainty daughter of the morn , 
And silken leaves , thy lovely self art born : 
Or Primrose , with the king 's enameled cup , 
( Whose Nectar Phoebus early quaffeth up ) 
The Amaranth arrayed in velvet still , 
Sweet Rhododaphne , and the Daffodil : 
Soft Marjoram , the young Ascanius' bed , 
While Cupid kissed and courted in his stead : 
The frail Anemon , Hyacinthus soft , 
The Ladie-glove , Coronis weeping oft , 
And whatsoever else the pleasant spring 
Throws from her bosom foremost flourishing . 
When Piety no more with sword in hand 
Shall need beside her smoky Altar stand , 
Or make her won from sight of living men 
Some wasteful wood or solitary den ; 
But every where her holy things profess 
Reside in Courts , high Heaven's Ambassadoress , 
And as the Lily free from cumbrous brire , 
To heavenward , homeward , in her height aspire . 
When arts , that now for nouriture do starve , 
Or ( which is worse ) as common subject serve 
Of scorn or pity , to the golden Ass , 
That for his Isis must adored pass , 
Shall lay their rich inventions to the view , 
Be mates with Majesty and reap their dew . 
Had I the tongues of Angels and of men , 
An endless memory , Fame's golden pen , 
Far I unable ( Peace ) were to portray 
Thy lovely face , and down in order lay 
Those blessings which from heaven thou dost convey . 
But if brave Imp , by Mars thou shalt be hent 
From thy soft Palace , to a warlike tent , 
To undergo an honourable war , 
In common , or thine own particular . 
then shine in glorious ●rmess Heaven be thy spe●d , 
And endless F●me thy everlasting m●●d . 
Go look about the spacious earth , and see 
The triumphs , trophies of thine ancestry ; 
( Ne let thine eye on meaner Glories f●ed , 
But imitate th● best , a●d best exceed ) 
What court or coast so ere thou comme●● in , 
There Grandsire , uncle or thy Cousins been ; 
Even Envy , search thy father's Pedigree , 
From Charles , and she shall find allied to thee 
Eleven Great Caesars , twenty crowned Kings , 
That blood contribute like so many springe● 
Into thy veins : — 
Great Charlemaigne , who taught his Eagle fly , 
Above the tops of lofty Pyranie : 
( Bathing his plumes in streams of Pagan blood , 
From Roncevall , to Iberos golden flood ) 
Subduend the Saxon , Italy did free , 
From Longobards , and Got●ish Tyranny , 
Subjected wholly , by an holy war , 
The Hun , the S●la●e , the Sor●be , and Auar . 
To that brave Lord , that held Vienne so long , 
'Gainst Soliman , three hundred thousand strong : 
Yet all these honours , are but common , new , 
To those , that by thy Mother's side a●●rew , 
From warlike Britons , and that brave remain 
Of ancient Troie ( who once as great did reign ) 
Of whom descended , boldly vaunt thy birth , 
Above the greatest , who ere h● be on earth . 
From Brutus , to Bre●●us' ( and the brave Belli●e ) 
That ransacked Greece , and o●● thy fertile Rhine 
Victorious troops of Britons did advance , 
Sacked perjured Rome , and conquered all France , 
Unto Cassivelan that twice did foil , 
The mighty Caesar entering this I 'll . 
By Aruirage , that was the Roman dread , 
Till Claudius' daughter afterwards did wed 
To Greatest Arthur , whose immortal name , 
Bright'st Glories damps , and even amazeth Fame . 
But needs me not , in infinite extent , 
Draw down these Images , or that descent 
From Holy Edward , and the Saxon line , 
To later Norman Ancestors of thine : 
From Scottish Kings , or Denmark , sing they stand 
So dainty limned by a later hand ; 
I sooner ( ●e●e ) the Lights of heaven should count , 
The Ocean Sand , or if aught that surmount , 
then them or their brave deeds to view●n lay , 
Or as I ought their worthiness display . 
Yet note they all be drowned in Lethe quite , 
Or thou deprived of some glorious light , 
Of later times , revealing to thy view , 
Our English s●ar● , yet almost bleeding new : 
Though known , and common to the world they be , 
What th●n ? Sweet Henry it is news to thee . 
Imagine in some goodly Gallery , 
Su●h as in Hampton thou mayst one day see , 
Who knows not Hampton ? Mansion fitting jove , 
Or Phoebus' self , excelling that above , 
His Court of sparkie Gemme● , and Ivory , built , 
On Columns raised , and by his raions guilt : 
thou to the life , their legend didst behold 
On Arras , in the silk enwoven gold , 
So sweetly done , by needle on the frame , 
That Pallas self , nor Envy might it blame : 
And saw'st here valiant Cordel●on come , 
Before Acon , marching with an English Drum , 
Third Edward , there in triumph leading France , 
An humble Captive to his puissance : 
Forcing the fair De-luce upon her shield , 
Quit the French Garden , for an English●ield ●ield . 
here youthful Edward , his victorious son , 
At Poiteirs , hand to hand encountering jon , 
That hail of arrows seem to cloud the sky ; 
While English follow , and the French do fly , 
Some take that River , other yonder wood , 
Which so the dainty vermill dies in blood , 
Upon the silver wave , and silken green , 
As if no semblance , but the thing were seen . 
There Lancaster inflicts a deadly blow 
On bastard Pedro , that usurped so , 
here Henry Monmouths' beacon gives alarm , 
At Agincourt , that makes all France to arm : 
And she , there she , whom bleeding hearts inter , 
Rather than those few stones at Westminster : 
Whose name , even now my ravished ●ence doth pierce , 
And with sweet Nectar sprinkleth my verse , 
Eliza Queen , the Maiden conqueress , 
Born in triumphal Chariot , ( I guess , 
Like Thomyre , or that brave Semiramis ) 
From hundred handed Gerion's defeat , 
And his proud Castles fall in eighty eight . 
But what shall need examples from a far ; 
Edge thy high courage to a glorious war 
Some self high-prized Italian , Squire of France , 
Instruct thee ride , and how to bear thy lance : 
Or learned Lipsius , by his reading show , 
The antique practice , postures long ago , 
Of Greatest Caesar , or that haughty Greek , 
Who other worlds bewailed he moat not se●ke ; 
All the●e , and far much more comprised be , 
In that brave offspring , of the Orange tree , 
Thy gallant Uncle ( whose resounded name 
Hath filled all ears , and spent the voice of Fame ) 
Victorious Ma●rice , worthy be enrolled , 
'Mong those great worthies , and Heroes old , 
Whose conquests earth hath bounded , thoughts & fame , 
find no dimension but the heavenly frame . 
But grow sweet Infant , grow , and grow apace , 
Unto thy height , in goodness , and in grace , 
For Europe on thee 'gins to fix her eye , 
And note thy tender towardness busily . 
Perhaps ( somewhere ) consulteth with the stars , 
How thou inclinest , to laborious wars , 
Or restful peace , how mild● thy government , 
How long the Fatal Sisters in extent 
Shall draw thy days , ( Ye Princes Mirrors are 
Reflecting your impressio●ss as far , 
As Mountain Beacons , or like Cedars tall , 
Most eminent in flourish , or your fall ) 
And with thy Mother's milk , from her fair breast , 
Draw those sweet virtues that therein do nest , 
Whereby her heart is dewed from aboven 
With gracious goodness , and all heavenly love : 
True Piety ; the fairest virtue Gem , 
That may adorn a Prince's Diadem : 
Best Goodness , that Vain Glories foil rejects , 
But rather shows the value by effects , 
That Modesty , which Majesty alleys , 
Yet Royal Type , beyond itself doth raise : 
Her Courtesy , wherewith she leads enchained , 
Even foes , and friends , by million hath gained ; 
Her Bounty , mirror of her Royal heart , 
To skill , and every generous desert : 
But stay my Muse , why does our ruder quill , 
Attempt a task , that craves Appelles' skill ? 
Yet thus the Sun we view , through shadowes-light ; 
When cannot else behold his beams bright , 
And ( Pearl of Princes ) thus the shore I keep , 
When cannot sound thy praises Sea so deep : 
Now ye who ever that shall hold in trust , 
This precious jewel , and his nonage must 
With tender care , and timely tendance breed , 
Be virtuous guides , unto this hopeful seed : 
His weaker age with all uprightness prop , 
Until he hath attained to goodness top : 
For Infancy like unto water spilt , 
Is with a finger drawn where thou wilt : 
Or as an April Imp that late did shoot , 
From the warm bosom of its Mother root : 
A thousand ways by cunning hand i● taught , 
To take his course , to climb , or lie aloft , 
Or clip with friendly twine the shady bower , 
That shendes true lovers , in the silver shower , 
Or grow a Nymph , that naked seems to blush , 
When white and red have clad the bloosmed bush . 
then like a rampant Lion , or to been 
A branch-horned Hart , or forester in green , 
Even so this Age we work unto our will , 
Thus waxie-pliant unto good or ill . 
Religion , than first ground work lay below 
Which inward though it lies , and makes lea●t show , 
All other Virtues it doth strong sustain , 
As weaker pieces resting on the main ; 
This shall his life establish and assure , 
Heighten content , and make his seat secure . 
then as strong Columns , that must bear the weight , 
And raise this Princely model to his height , 
Let other Virtues take their order , place . 
First Temperance , that aye with goodly grace 
Doth rule the mind , and with her golden bit 
Curb headstrong passion , overmaistring it : 
then Prudence , the soul's eye , although she be 
Daughter of Use , and strongest Memory , 
And seldom settles in a growing brain , 
Unapt her graver lesson to retain , 
But born with fancies , like a troubled Sea , 
From Card and Compass makes contrary waie● 
Acquaint him though betimely with her name , 
How she it is must his Lives Action frame , 
Direct , and end ; and , like that golden spray , 
Led through this Vale of wretchedness his way , 
Whose waking eyes a centinel must keep 
( Like twinkling stars ) while all the world doth sleep : 
Now justice , that with her b●ight golden beams 
Enlights the world , & calms the state of Realms , 
Preserves the City , safer and more sure 
Than wall of brass , or that same triple mure , 
Wherewith th' Assyrian Empress long agone 
Encompassed her mighty Babylon . 
This doth adorn the Majesty of Kings 
'Bove every grace , and all their rarest things , 
Resembling the Divine Creator right , 
When borroweth from Piety her light . 
Next Clemency , who from th' Almighty's seat 
Derives her lineage , or by mild extreate 
From justice drawn , in readiness doth stand , 
And stretcheth out her sovereign helping hand ; 
Who rankor doth of deepest wound allay , 
And takes the smart of punishment away , 
The Moon of Empire● that with mild aspect 
Doth coolly temper , graciously affect : 
And as in Heaven she ; so in a Prince , 
This claims the second glorious eminence . 
What worldly Empire long hath ever stood , 
Whose Tyran-scepter was distained with blood ? 
Or Prince , that long in Peace possessed his state , 
Whose law was will , and whom the most did hate ? 
This ●rowness with Immortality his Fame , 
And sheds abroad , as Ba●me , his precious name . 
The lesser Virtues let the front adorn ; 
And as in pleasing Pa●ergie be worn , 
A rightly teach him use o● Majesty , 
The sweet effects of m●nly Modesty , 
In speech , apparel , painting lest the rind 
He kills the pithy substance of the mind . 
Let Pomp and Pride with those weak judgments suit , 
That have no other way to win repute : 
And let him hate the name of Nigardise 
The rust of Greatness , with base Covetise . 
more Honour vanquished of a foe to be , 
then overcome in Liberality . 
And that he may the better , as by line , 
Run this fair course , and fouler way decline ; 
O timely teach him the abundant use 
Of all good Learning , and to love the Muse , 
Who gives the boundless Intellect her eye , 
Conversing with her Maker most on high , 
Who meanest doth to mighty Rule advance , 
Still waging war with brutish Ignorance . 
She safest with dead counsel will avise , 
And guard his ear from living flatteries : 
In after age she sha●l revive his Name , 
And crown with Honour his admired Fame . 
Hence could the wisest Solomon dispute , 
From the tall Cedar to the Hyssop root . 
Hence Caesar's star did gather first her f●ame ; 
And Philip's son , the Earth's sole Lord became . 
E●ke those old warriors with astondement , 
That made the Earth to tremble where they went , 
Those fairest flowers within their garlands worn , 
Do owe to skill , that framed their minds before . 
That goodly fount of Graecian Eloquence , 
who 's Cyrus shape's us so unmatched a Prince ; 
Themistocles that beaten at Salamine 
The greatest Army that was ever see●e ; 
Pericles , from whose powerful accents broke 
Thunder , and piercing lightning , while he spoke ; 
Miltiades , that Marathon did slain 
With blood of hundred thousand Persians slain ; 
Epaminondas , in whom lived and died 
The Theban Glory ; those brave spirits beside 
Of antique Rome ( that whilom in her pride 
Even Victory held pineond , forced Mart 
And drew perforce the Fates to take her part ) 
Were goodly learned , who will it deny ? 
And lived the fathers of Philosophy : 
When rather skill the headpiece did adorn , 
then wanton plumes , that hold her now in scorn . 
How often do I meditate upon 
That of Alphonsus , King of Arragon ; 
Avowing it the sentence of a beast , 
Who said , That Princes had small interest 
In Learning : who as well may want their eyes , 
Their tongues to speak , or Use to make them wise . 
But nearest pattern place before thine eye , 
Thy Grandsire james , our Royal Mercury : 
Who with his wand all tumult caused to cease , 
Fulfilled our wishes , gave our days their peace . 
Without it do thou Greatness but account 
That golden Calf adored in Horeb mount , 
Or Winter-sun , whose beams do feebly glance ; 
Wrapped in the mists of foggy Ignorance . 
O sacred skill whose fruit ( as from that tree 
Of Eden ) feeds us with felicity , 
And goodly branches stretch themselves so far , 
That all too weak my wit and senses are 
To comprehend their compass , as fought , 
Exceeding measure and all mortal thought● 
Thrice happy me the mean●st of the ●e●● , 
Were I but with her only shadow blessed 
Thus in the Circle that thou ha●t to run , 
Display thy glory with the rising Sun : 
Thus to thy Solstice , c●i●bing by degree , 
Exemplar let thy life's whole pa●terne be 
To such , as from thee must derive their light 
By thousands , and are dimmed without thy ●ight . 
The winged vessel is not by her helm 
So much commanded , as a potent Realm 
Is by her Prince's life example lead , 
To frugal course , or vile unthriftihead . 
Edicts , nor Axes , Priso● , Pyran l●w , 
Do not so much the stubborn vulgar draw , 
As doth ( the glass of Honour ) Innocence , 
And Virtue's parts , exemplar in a Prince . 
Herein they see , love , imitate , admire , 
And are enkindled from his all s●ene ●●re . 
This Caesar knew , when foremost did assay 
Each deepest stream , to teach his troops the way● 
And that great Cato , whose command was none 
By word , but his own personal action . 
no engine like to that of hearty love , 
Or fair example ; able sooner move 
The massy Earth , than that rare Instrument 
The Syracusian boasted to invent . 
This is that Adamant , whose Character 
Stirs up with counter-motion nigh and far 
All Hearts the Cyphers , who ( conjointly me● ) 
Do turn or t●rrie by her Alphabet . 
Thus pious N●ma over Rome did reign , 
And Solomon his peaceful Thr●●● 〈◊〉 
( By where E●phr●●eses with his silu●r 〈◊〉 
A thousand palmers on his shore do●h nu●se ) 
Whose Sceptres , Swords no● 〈◊〉 d●d ●ss●●● , 
But justest Laws , with life's 〈◊〉 and 〈◊〉 t●●●onn● 
When that proud Eastern Conqueror 
Of Fortune , r●ther th●n of Macedon ) 
Together with his father , and the r●● 
Of Roman Caes●rs' th●t did most 'em 〈◊〉 
Their Bayss in blood , or else with hands unjust 
Dealt wrong for right , or drowned lay in lust , 
Out-breathed their soule● by poison at the board , 
Or sudden fell upon a villain's sword● 
Thi● end had Nero's beastly life in fine : 
Thus died Domitian , and thus M●ximine . 
Unhappy Pyrr●●s' was pursued by Fate , 
On Sea and Land , unto his li●●● lost date : 
By loathsome li●● Antiochu●'s did die● 
And 〈◊〉 even s●●rned o● Misery : 
A Sheaperd●s●● sent Cyrus down to hell : 
Upon his own swords point Ca●bys●●'s fell : 
And cruel Arist●●●●●● , at l●st , 
His heart a● once 〈…〉 omit 〈◊〉 . 
Thus vengeance tra●●s ●hen by the blood they spilth 
Till their own mo●●heses gi●es sente●●● 〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉 
O heavens' to 〈…〉 no worldly thing 
more 〈…〉 the ●●●●and pious King : 
Upon whose brow 〈…〉 see 
The Image of the highest Majesties 
And sparkling graces , that do sweetly shine 
With something ( what I know not ) that 's divine● 
Which if themselves through filthy vice deface , 
Or cursed hand attempts to c●t or race , 
As Traitor's Heaven adjudgeth them alike ; 
And last or first will in avengement strike . 
O timely let these things engraven be 
Upon the tablet of thy memory : 
And thus let virtues golden linked chain 
A bracelet on thy tender wrist remain . 
So shalt thou not give thy Elector vo●ce , 
And of some mighty m●ke the foremost choice ; 
But reign thyself more absolute and free , 
An Emperor in thought and dignity , 
then if thou shouldst with mighty arm adjoine 
All Persis to thy County P●latine , 
The Gades with Lybia , & couldst claim thine own 
What from the South been to the Arctic known . 
O that the Fat●s would lengthen my extent , 
And let me draw so long this Element , 
That I the footsteps of thy praise might press 
In riper years , How should my song address 
Thy Honour's Triumphs ! not the T●●●cia● Lyre , 
That death in deepest slumber could inspire , 
In stately numbers should our Muse excel , 
While she did on thy lo●●i● Glory's dwell . 
then grow ( swee● Infant ) grow and grow apace , 
And live t●● ●●●nix of thy roy●●●●ace , 
For 〈…〉 , guarded by 〈◊〉 vows , 
Till foes thy feet , 〈…〉 browe● , 
That Caesar 〈◊〉 thou maist●on● day reign , 
As good , as great , as ever 〈◊〉 . 
FINIS . 





nonumque premantur in annum . 

Vrani● . The honourable and most accomplished Gentleman Sir Robert Dudley his five daughters .  Guicciardine .  jerem. c. 47.  & 29.   As descended from the united Rose of Lancaster , and York .  The King Cup.  Virg. Aeneid . 1   Piety so portrayed in the medals of Augustus . See the history in French , in Fleur de la maison du Charlemai●● .  Philip Count Palatine of the R●i●e in the ti●● of Charles the 5.   Genuissa named the fair .  john King of Fra●ce .  The Orange tree Prince Maurice hi● emblem , with Fit tandem surculus arb●r .  Afranius .  Arist. Ethic. l. 1   V●g . A●neid . 6   Cicero in paradox . Aristot. Rhetoric . 1. cap. 3.   Aristot. praesat . ad Alexandrum .  Sallust . jugurth .  Who conquered in less than in te● years 300 N●●i●●ss to the R●●●●● Empi●●●aving married his pe● to ●is sword . Cicero .  A●c●im●des .  Who spoilt Proserpina's Temple .  He defiled the Temple .  Who slew his wife , and own Mother .  Who slew his brother & sister great with child .  He put to death his mother and brother .  Xenopho● i● Cyripadia . 