A CONTENTION FOR HONOUR AND riches . 

By J. S.  

— ubi quid datur oti , 
illudo chartis . — 


LONDON , Printed by E. A. for William Cook , and are to be sold at his shop near Furnivals' Inn gate in Holborn . 1633.  

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and his honoured friend , EDWARD GOLDING of Colston in Nottinghamshire Esquire . 

Where there is a will to be grateful , the acknowledgement supplies the defect of action , reddit enim beneficium qui libenter debet . Although this hold no force in the common and municipal laws , where men do no benefit , before they accounted to receive ; it is allowed a Canon in morality , where many good deeds are to be lost , that we may place one well . no man can die in debt , that hath an honest remembrance of his obligation , since death is to be reckoned from the first day of our ingratitude . In this confidence I appear , and being neither guilty of desert , or power to reward , I must present the memory of your own act and virtue to pay yourself . 

That which waits upon my thanks , is this handful of paper imaginations , though below your study , not beneath your virtue to accept , and smile upon ; they were meant for innocent mirth , and can be no prejudice , if they only serve to set off your Nobler Contemplations . Read when you will dispense with half an hour , and continue your favour to him , whose ambition is to write himself 

Your Servant , James Shirley . 

The Speakers . 

Ingenuity a Scholar . 
Courtier . 
Soldier . 
Clod a Countryman . 
Gettings a Citizen . 
Women . 

Honour . 
riches . 
Mutes . 

Honesty . 
No-pay . 
Long-vacation . 
Foul-weather-in-harvest . 
A CONTENTION FOR HONOUR AND riches . 

Enter riches , and Ingenuity a Scholar . Ing.   MY Lady desire's to speak with you . 


Ric.   Your Lady ? who 's your Lady ? 


Ing.   The Lady Honor.  


Rich.   Let Honour come to riches , it will not 
Disparage her , my friend . 


Ing.   She is not well . 


Ri.   Honour is seldom sound , what ails her Ladyship ? 


Ing.   She had a fall lately . 


Ric.   A fall ? 


Ing.   And sprained 
Her foot . 


Ric.   Teach her to climb ; she 's so ambitious . 


In.   Please you to do her the favour , she will wait 
Upon your Ladyship another time . 


Ric.   I cannot come 


Ing.   Good Madam . 


Ric.   I ha' the gou●e 


Ing.   You may command a Coach.  


Ric.   riches I know 
May command any thing but I do not use 
To come to every one desires my company 
Beside , my servants are abroad , and it 
Becomes me not to go so unattended . 


Ing.   I shall be fortunate , if you accept 
My service . 


Ric.   Is that state enough for me ? 
Although it be in fashion with your Lord , 
To amble with his foot man and Page , 
I use to have more followers . 


Ing.   Great Ladies 
Have no such train , many are held supers●uous , 
The Gentleman Usher now a days is thought 
Sufficient for a Countess , nay , for two 
Take him by turns , & yet he may be courteous 
To the waiting Gentlewoman . 


Ric.   You assume , me thinks , 
Much liberty in talking , what 's your name ▪ 


In.   They which know me , call me Ingenuity . 


Ric.   Ingenuity ? 
Out upon ! thee I suspect , 
Your are a Scholar . 


Ing.   I have studied Arts.  


Ri.   Defend me from his witchcraft had thy Mistress : 
None but a Scholar to employ upon 
Her compliments to me , one whose profession 
I hate , whose memory is my disease , 
And conversation death ? how rank he smells 
Of Aristotle , and the musty Tribe 
Of worm-eaten Philosophers ? get from me , 
I will endure the Bears , and their provision , 
Lie in an Hospital , or French-footmen , feed 
With prisoners , or be racked at Westminster , 
Nay , die , & make poor orphans my Executors , 
E'er be confined to hear thy learned nonsense . 


Ing.   Why should you be such enemy to Scholars ? 
They waste Miner●aes' precious dew , their sweat , 
To gain your favour , and would think themselves 
Blessed , when your golden beams but shine upon 'em . 


Ric.   't is not your flattery can win upon me . 
Go , and declaim against me , good Diogenes , 
Admire a virtuous poverty , and nakedness , 
Call Fortune whore , and write whole volumes in 
The praise of hunger and your lousy wardrobe , 
Yes , teach the world , riches is grown a monster , 
And that she dotes on ignorance : these are 
Your vulgar doctrines , and I pray pursue 'em , 
My most immortal beggar , and get ●ame 
With some twice sodden pamphlet , till you make 
Submission to my fool , in hope of the 
Reversion of his Grooms bare livery : 
Your Theses , and your Syllogisms , will 
no doubt convert the Beadle , and the dog-whip . 


Ing.   Be pleased to hear me speak — 


Ri● .  What impudence 
Does this appear , you should desire that favour ? 
Have I not given testimony to the world 
Sufficiently , I do not love a Scholar ? 


Ing.   Endure me for my Mistress Lady Honor.  


Ric.   I wonder what she meant to entertain thee ! 
Away , dispute no further , if you move me 
To more impatience , riches will find ways 
To curb your infolence ●s not your pretence 
To Honour's service , can protect you from 
My anger , I have kindred , and acquaintance 
Shall with their breath blow thee beyond the Sea ; 
Or if I should be merciful , and let thee 
Enjoy thy Country , never hope to arrive at 
Above a pension , that will find you woollen 
A Pedant , or a Vicarage pre●ement , 
Gelded sufficiently by the improper Parson , 
Is all your wit must hope for ; and take heed 
That you be modest then , no coat , nor Cass●cke 
Can charm you ▪ if I offer to complain , 
I shall put your Divinity to silence . 


Ing.   I despi●e 
Thy womanish threats , and shall accounted myself 
Happy without thy favour . OH Philosophy , 
Assist thy poor admirer , and infuse 
A noble fortitude to scorn her malice : 
I have no thought , but has a triumph'ore 
Thy base conspiracy . Welcome my dear Books , 
And contemplation , that shall feed my soul 
To immortality : let Puppets dote 
Upon thy gifts , and sell their privilege , 
For gaudy clothes and Epicurean●urfetss , 
Lust , and a Catalogue of Rich men's sins , 
That shall like plummets hang upon their heart : 
When wings are most required , keep thy resolve , 
And be attenemy to Learning still , 
That when we find a Scholar , by thee favoured , 
We may suspect him sergeant and a dunce 
Honour will be my Mistress , who●e lest smile 
I value above all thy pride , or treasures , 
And she will scorn thee too . Farewell , gay Madam , 
A painted tomb ! though glorious to the eye . 
Corruption dwells within thee . 
Exit . 

Ric.   Fowl mouth Satire , 
But 't is some punishment to let him waste 
His spirits with his railing , let him fret , 
It may consume him without more diseases , 
Let him die any way , men of his quality 
Are living but unprofitable burdens 
To the earth , as they were born to consume fruits , 
And talk of needless Sciences . Who are these ? 
My ancient suitors , Clod the Countryman , 
And Gettings the rich Citizen ? 


Enter Clod and Gettings . Get.   she 's here . 
Good morrow to the star of my delight , 
Whose beams more glorious do eclipse the Sun , 
And cast a richer warmth about the world . 


Ric.   How ? turned Poet ? 


Get.   Fear me not , Lady , 
I am none of those were born to 't , I had rather 
Be a jew then christened in Parnassus' Pomp , 
I have nothing but the knuckles and the rumps 
Of Poetry . 


Ric.   Take heed in time , lest you become infected 
With wit , I do not love poetic fancies , 
Nor any thing that trenches on the Muses , 
They were baggages , and Phoebus their protector , 
Deserved the whipping post . 


Get.   I have-read , he was 
A common Piper , and those Nine were Gipsies , 
That lived by cheating Palmistry . 


Ric.   I like it , 
When you do rail at Learning , I allow you 
To read a Ballad , and ridiculous Pamphlets , 
Written on the strength of Beer , or some dull liquor : 
But if you smell profane Sack in a Poem , 
Come not within a league of understanding , 
As you respect my favour . 


Get.   I am instructed . 


Ric.   But why does Clod stand all this while so mute ? 



Clo.   Either I am John a Noakes , or I am not John a Noakes . 



Ric.   he 's dreaming of his horses . 



Clod.   Give , sweet Lady , I am all to be mired in your beauty , the horses of my imagination are foundered in the highway of your perfections , for I am deep in love with your Ladyship , though I do not wear such fine clothes as Master Gettings here , and so much out of fashion : for if I commend my doublet , I must speak sustian , yet my heart is cut and flashed , and I defy any man that has a better stomach to yovi●n the way of Matrimony . 



Get.   no comparison , Master Clod.  



Clod.   Let him be odious , that names comparison , for my part , I scorn 'em all and the degrees . 



Get.   y' are very positive . 



Clod.   Dost thou positive me ? And my Mistress were not here , thou shouldst find Clod is made of an other guess mould , then to endure thy affronts . 



Ric.   And you quarrel , I am gone . 



Goe   Nay , nay , sweet Lady we shall be friends again . 



Ric.   I hope it wonot stretch to a duel . 

Exit . 

Get.   Duel ? You wonot provoke me , Clod , Will you ? if you do , Clod.  



Clod.   I will provoke any man living in the way of love . 



Get.   How ? 



Clod.   He that shall go a wooing to my Mistress , 
I will provoke him , and he were my father . 


Get.   y' are a dirty fellow , Clod , and if I had met thee that year I was Scavenger , I would have had thee carted . 



Clod.   Me carted , Cart thy Bawds , there be enough within the walls , dost tell me of a Scavenger ? a fart for thy office , I am a better man in the country than the Constable himself , and do tell thee to thy face , though I am plain Clod , I care not a beanstalk for the best What lack you on you all , no not the next day after Simon and Judas ; when you go a seasting to Westminster with you G●lly●oist and your potguns , to the very terror of the Papet-whales , when you land in shoals , and make the understanders in Cheapside , wonder to see ships swim upon men's shoulders , when the Fencer's flourish , and make the King's liege people fall down and Worship the Devil and Saint Du●stan , when your whifflers are hanged in chains , and Hercules Club spit● fire about the Pageants , though the poor children catch cold ▪ that show like painted cloth , and are only kept alive with sugar plums , with whom , when the word is given , you march to Guildhall , with every man his spoon in his pocket , where you look upon the Giants , and feed like Saracens , till you have no stomach to Paul's in the afternoon : I have seen your Processions , and heard your Lions and Camels make speeches , in stead of Grace before and after dinner : I have heard songs too , or something like 'em : but the Porters have had the burden , who were kept sober at the City charge , two days before , to keep time and tune with their feet , for brag what you will of your charge , all your pomp lies upon their back . 



Get.   So , so . 



Clo.   Must this day's pride so blow you up , that a Countryman's tale may not be heard ? 



Get.   That day's pride ? 



Clo.   Or what is (null) make you Gambol so ? 



Get.   Why , anger has made you witty Countryman . 



Clo.   thou liest , and I am none of thy Countryman , I was born out of the sound of your Pancake-bell , I cannot abide to see a proud fellow : and it were not for us in the Country , you would have but a lean City , we maintain your Charter , and your Chamber too , you would ha' but ill markets , and we should forswear to furnish 'em , where were your hides , horns and plenty of other provision ? your , wives could not do as they do , with your short yard and your false light , and the Country should not come in upon them . Come , you cannot live without us , you may be called a body Politic , but the Country is the soul , and therefore subscribe and give way to me . 



Get.   The highway , but not the wall in London , do you know where you are , and what you have talked all this while ? an Informer would squeeze your trunk hose for this , and teach you to know your Terms and your Artornies . 



Clo.   I 'll have as good Law for my money , as the best on you , I know what belongs to 't , I have almost broke the Parson of the Parish already , about his Tithe-eggs . 



Get.   Why , thou lump of ignorance , leather and husbandry ill compounded , thou that hast been so long a dunghill , till the weeds have overgrown thee , and a far off hast cozened a horse , thou that dost whistle out thy prayers , and won't change thy dirty soil , for so many acres in Paradise , nor leave thy share o' the plough , for Saint Peter's patrimony , thou that were begot upon a hay-mow , bred in thy father's stable , and out-dunged his cattle , thou , that at one and twenty , wert only able to write a sheep's mark in Tar , and read thy own capital letter , like a gallows upon a cow's buttock ; you that allow no Scripture Canonical , but an Almanac , which makes you weather-wise , and puts you in hope of a dear year : let the Country starve , and the poor grinned provender , so the market rise : let your soul fall to the Devil among the Corn-cutters , I am ashamed to hold discourse any longer with thee ; only one word , I would advice you to let your action of love fall , and be content to marry with Malkin , in the Country , she can churme well , and humble herself behind a hedge , for this Lady is no lettuce for your lips , go go , meddle with your jades , and exercise a whip , among your bread and cheese eaters . 



Clo.   Sirrah Cit , I do challenge thee . 



Get.   What weapon ? 



Clo.   The next 〈◊〉 shall furnish us both if thou hast any moral , let us try before we part who is the better man  



Get ,  If thou hast any ambition to be beaten to dust , Clod , thank yourself . 



Clo.   I will flash ●hy skin like a Summer doublet , come thy ways . 



Enter a Courtier and a Soldier 〈◊〉 Honour Ingenuity . Cour.   Look this way , Lady , and in me behold 
Your truest servant . 


Sol.   't is but 〈◊〉 Courtship 
That he professes , look upon the Lady 
That can be active in your service . 


I●● .  't is 
The Courtier and the 〈◊〉 pleading their 
Affection to my mistress Lady donor , 
I won't interrupt them yet , I cannot 
find by 〈…〉 that she inclines to either 


Col.   Bless me but with one smile if you did know 
With what devotion my soul looks on you , 
How next to my religion I have placed , 
If not above 〈…〉 
How long since I first vowed myself your 〈◊〉 , 
That eye would 〈…〉 


Sol.   I have 
no stock of soft and melting words to 〈◊〉 you , 
Such silken language we are strangers to , 
We are used to other Dialect , and imitate the Drum , 
Bold Artillery : can you love me ? 
When I have marched upon the dreadful Cannon , 
My heart was fixed on Honour nor could death 
In all her shapes of horror temp● one thought 
To base retire , when no voice could be heard , 
But thunder , and no object seen but lightning , 
Which seemed to have been struck from the first Ch●o● , 
So great a darkness had eclipsed the S●nne , 
Yet than I thought on Honour , and 〈◊〉 
Their lives that 〈◊〉 about me , every body 
I trod upon , ( for now the dead had 〈◊〉 
The earth ) gave me addition 〈◊〉 
Where , in my imagination I saw 
Thee charioted , and dropping down a G●●land . 


Ho.   no more there are but compl●●●●● of wars , 
Perhaps some studied speech 〈…〉 
But am not taught with these Hyperbol●● 
Honour's not wone with words 〈…〉 
no paint of often 〈…〉 
That has the greatest 〈…〉 not 
The greatest danger . 


Ing.   She has 〈◊〉 his Culverin , 
And now he 's swearing out some prayers ▪ 


Cour.   she 's mine . 
Thus looked the moon , when with her virgin fire's 
She went in progress to the mountain Latmos , 
To visit her Endymion , yet I injure 
Your beauty , to compare it to her orb 
Of silver light , the Sun from which , she borrows 
That makes her up the nightly Lamp of heaven , 
Has in his stock of beams not half your lustre , 
Enrich the earth still with your sacred presence , 
Upon each object throw a glorious star , 
Created by your sight , that when the learned 
Astronomer comes forth to examine heaven , 
He may find two , and be himself divided , 
Which he should first contemplate . 


Ho.   You both love me . 


Cour.   But I the best . 


Sol.   How sir , the best ? 


Cou.   E'er since I knew the Court , 
I had no other study but to advance 
Myself to Honour , all my suits have been 
Directed to this one , that Honour would 
Fix me among those other Constellations 
That shine about the King , 't is in thy love 
To plant a Coronet here : and then I dare 
justle the proudest Hero and be inscribed 
A demi god , frown dead the humble mortal , 
And with my breath call back their souls again . 
What cannot Honour do ? 


Ho.   Not that you boast . 
True Honour makes not proud , not takes delight 
i' th' ruin of poor virtue . 


So.   Sir , you said you loved her best . 


Co.   And will maintain it . 


So.   You cannot , dare not . 


Co.   Dare not ? 


Ho.   So peremptory , Honour may in time 
find ways to tame the insolent Lady riches , 
But leave her to her pride . 


Ing.   The Courtier , and 
The Soldier look as they would quarrel . 


Ho.   Let ' 'em . 
You see how they pursue me still , but Honour 
Is not so easily obtained . 


Ing.   They are 
Gay creatures , and conspicuous in the world . 


Ho.   But no such miracles : Gentlemen , you promise 
Some spirit in you , there 's no way to make 
Me confident of your worth but by your action : 
In brief , if you be ambitious of Honour , 
You must fight for me , and as fame shall give me 
Your character , I shall distinguish you , 
And cherish worth : mean time I take my leave . 
Come , 〈◊〉 , you and I must have 
Some private conference , I dare trust your bosom 
With some thing of more weight . 


Ing.   I am then happy , 
When you command me service . 


Ho.   And I keep 
A Register of all , and though delayed , 
Forget not the reward . 


Exeunt Honour , Ing.  So.   Hark , Master Cringe , 
How d' ye like her sentence ? If you mean 
To have Honour you must fight for 〈◊〉 speeches , 
Nor crinkling in the hams will carry her , 
You have worn a sword thus long , to show the h●lt , 
Now let the blade appear . 


Co.   Good Captain Voice , 
It shall , and reach you manners , I have yet 
no Ague , I can look upon your buff , 
And punto beard , and call for no strong waters , 
I am no Tavern gull , that wants protection , 
Whom you with oaths do use to mortify , 
And swear into the payments of all reckonings , 
Upon whose credit you wear belt and feather , 
Top and top gallant , and can make him seal 
At midnight to your Tailor , go invite 
Young Gentlemen to dinner , and then pawn 'em , 
Or valiantly with some of your own file , 
Conspire a Sconce , or to a bawdy house 
March with your Regiment , and kick the Leverets , 
Make cullis o' the Bawds , yet be made friends , 
Before the Constable be sent for , and 
Run to'the ticket for the pox , these services , 
I do presume , you are acquainted with . 


So.   Musk-cat . 


Co.   Or wert thou what thou seem'st , a Soldier , 
For so much good I wish thee for my honour , 
When I have killed thee . 


So.   Sirrah Civet-box . 


Co.   Let me ask your Soldier ship but one cold question , 
If Lady Honour , whom you have presumed 
Without good manners to affect , should possibly 
Descend to marry thee , prithee what jointure 
Couldst thou make her ? 


So.   jointure ? 


Co.   I 'll admit for arguments sake , 
thou art a Soldier , perhaps 
You will give her a Catalogue of Towns , 
Or Leaguers , the names of bridges broken down , 
Your nose in time may make another , you will tell her 
Of onslaughts , Bulwarks , Barricado , Forts , 
Of Cannon , Culverin , Sacres , and a rabble 
Of your Artillery , which you have conned by heart , 
A role of Captain's names , perhaps you have 
In ready wounds , some twenty idle , admit it , 
And in diseases can assure her forty , 
This won't do , she cannot eat a Snapsack , 
Nor carry baggage , lie in your foul Hut , 
And roast your pullen , for whose precious theft , 
You and the Gibbet fear to be acquainted , 
If you return into your wholesome Country , 
Upon your honourable wooden legs . 
The houses of correction are no Palaces , 
And Passes must be had , or else the Beadles 
Will not be satisfied , the Treasurer's name 
And twelvepences for your service i' th' Low countries , 
And spending of your blood for doughty Dutchmen , 
That would have hanged you there , but in their charity 
You were reserved for begggery at home , 
Is no inheritance I take it sir.  


So.   Have you done yet ? 


Co.   I have not much more to say . 


So.   It does appear by all this prattle then , 
You do not know me , and have ta ' ne too much 
On trust to talk of Soldier , a name 
thou 'st not deserved to mention , because 
Some fellows here , have bragged , and perhaps beaten 
You , and some other of your satin Tribe , 
Into belief that they have seen the wars , 
That perhaps mustered at Mile-end , 
Or Finsbury . Must the true sons of courage , 
Be thus dishonoured , and their character 
Defaced by such prodigious breath ? must we , 
We that for Honour and your safeties suffer , 
What in the repetition would fright 
Your pale souls from you , when perhaps you foot 
A jig at home , and revel with your Lady , 
Be thus rewarded ! Happy they that died 
Their Country sacrifice , to prevent the shame 
Of living with such popular drones , but I 
Should wrong our glorious profession 
By any Arguments , to make thee sensible 
Of what we are : it shall suffice to publish 
What is not now in ignorant supposition . 
But truth , of your gay quality and virtues , 
You are a Courtier . 


Co.   Very good . 


So.   Not so . 
If such there be , I talk not to them now , 
But to thee Phantasm , of whom men do doubt 
Whether thou hast a soul , thou that dost think it 
The better and more grateful part of thy 
Religion , to we are good clothes , and suffer 
more pains at buttoning of thy gaudy doublet , 
then thou durst take for heaven , thou hast divided 
Thy flattery into several articles , 
And hast so often called your great men goods , 
That 't is become thy Creed , and thou dost now 
Believe no other , thou wilt take a bribe , 
To undo a Nation , and sell thy Countrymen 
To as many persecutions as the 
Devil : thou art beholding to thy pride , it has 
Made thee thy own self-lover , for without it , 
None else affecting thee I do now see , 
What else could keep thee from despair & drowning ? 
Thy wantonness has made thy body poor , 
But not in show , for though thy back have paid for 't , 
It wears rich trappingss ; Art may help your legs , 
But cannot cure your dancing : that and pepper , 
Avoid with like discretion , one betrays you 
At dinner , and the other between meals . 
Go purchase lands and a fair house , which must 
When thou livest in it be an Hospital , 
And owe no other body for diseases . 


Co.   Pray come , and take a chamber . 


So.   thou hastignorance 
And impudence enough for twenty Alchemists . 


Co.   I 'll hear no more . 


So.   A little , I 'll entreat you , 
You shall be beaten afterwards , never fear it . 


Co.   dar'st thou blaspheme the Court ? 


So.   I honour it , 
And all the Noble ornaments of State , 
That like Pomegranates in old Aaron's coat , 
Adorn the Prince that wears 'em , but such Courtiers 
That cousin us like Glow-worms in the night , 
Or rotten wood , I hate , and in their number 
For this time be content I list your worship . 


Co.   How do you know what I am , or what title 
Perhaps I wear ? 


So.   I know thee by the wrong 
To Soldiers . 


Co.   I speak of such as thou wert , and I dare 
Maintain , and write as much in thy own blood . 


Enter Honesty . Co.   Dost thou not see , Honesty ? 


So.   Honesty ? what hast thou to do with Honesty ? 


Co.   I never could endure her , she appears 
more terrible than a ghost , I ha' no stomach 
To fight , my blood is frozen in my veins , 
She is a thousand punishments at once : 
Now would I give my Office to be at peace 
With mine own conscience , ha , she does pursue me ? 


So.   These are idle imaginations , collect 
Yourself , good Courtier , and remember what 
We are to do , or I shall , ha . 


Enter No-pay . Co.   what 's the matter , more terror ? 


So.   I am cold too . 


Co.   Another apparition . 


So.   You may know him by a jaw-fallen , 't is No-pay . 
And what a comfort no-pay 's to a Soldier , 
I appeal to a Council of war , the Devil is not 
So full of horror , No-pay ? I 'll not fight 
A stroke , though I were sure to clear the Empire . 


Exeunt . Enter Citizen and Countryman armed . Get.   Our weapon's length are even , but you 'll find 
There is such odds betwixt us , naught but death 
Can reconcile our difference . 


Clod.   Deny your major . I think I heard a Scholar use that word against Bellarmine . ay , I 'll stand to 't : for if naught but death , can reconcile our difference , we must be both killed : no , prepare thyself , I hope to send thee to heaven , and be far enough off ere Sunset : if thou hast made thy Will , let them prove it when thou art dead , and bury thee accordingly , thy wife will have cause to thank me , it will be a good hearing to the poor of the Parish : happy man by his dole , besides , the Blue-coats can but comfort thy kindred with singing and rejoicing at thy Funeral . Come on thy ways . 



Get.   y' are very round , Clod , I do not think you have practised Fencing of late , this is a weapon you are not used to , a Pitchfork were more convenient for you to manage . 



Clo.   A Pitchfork ? thou shalt know thy destiny by this , though it have but one point I know where thy heart lies , I desire no more , and less would satisfy me , unless thou wilt eat thy words , and confess thou hast wronged me , out it shall , I have a stomach to cut thee up , and my sword has a pretty edge of itself , and my greatest grief is , that I owe thee nothing , to discharge all together , but 't is no matter , I can but kill thee . 



Get.   You cannot , sure : for ought I see in your countenance , you are not long-lived yourself , you have but a tallow complexion , do you know what ground you stand upon , Clod ? 



Col.   Ground ? 



Get.   You may tread upon your grave now , for all this blustering . 



Clod.   thou liest , there 's more to provoke thee : no , I came not hither to die , and I 〈◊〉 be buried at any man's discretion , my father was buried 〈◊〉 Country , and my grandfather , and his father before him , and if I live I 'll be buried there myself : but what do we lose time ? look to thy head , for I will make an even reckoning with thy shoulders presently . Enter Foul-weather-in-harvest . ha , hold , alas , I won't fight , I ha' no heart to lift up a weapon . 



Goe   You were fi●e and tow but ' e'en now . 



Clo.   But here 's water Dost not see ? I shall be undone . 



Get.   Who is this ? 



Clo.   Why , 't is Foul-weather-in-harvest , all spoiled , I won't have thy heart now , and thou wouldst gee'tme . 



Get.   't is well , something will cool you , after so much thunder , but it won't quench the fire of my anger . I do not use to put up these things , when I am drawn to 't , your Fowl weather is nothing to the business in hand , therefore submit thy neck to my execution , or — 



Clo.   Kill me : I 'll forgive thee , I shall have no Harvest to year . 



Enter Long-vacation . Get.   And thou hadst as many heads as Hydra — ha , I 'll not hurt a Hare , I am frighted this is my heart , you had not so wet , but we are like to have as dry a time on 't , I stood upon te●●●eses before , this is Long-vacation . 



Clo.   Long-vacation ? 



Get.   I dreamed of a dry Summer , he will consume me , it will be a thousand years till Michaelmas . Prithee let 's be friends , for my part I have no hope of riches . 



Clo.   And I but little , and this weather hold . Enter riches . Here she comes . 



Ric.   Where be these friends of mine ? Alas , what 
Mean you ? I am faint with seeking you to stay your fury : 
For I was told your bloody resolutions . 
You should be a man of government , are these 
The ensigns of the City ? will you give 
Without the Herald in your Arms , a Sword 
To the old City Dagger ? you wear a Gown 
Emblem of peace , will you defile your gravity 
With Basket-hilt and Bilbo ? And you bold Yeoman , 
That like a Rieke of hay , hath stood the shock 
Of Winter , and grew white with snow of age , 
Is this an instrument for you ? 
But I am confident that you will say , 't is love 
Of me hath brought you to the field , and therefore 
To prevent future mischief , I determine 
Here to declare myself : but first conjoin 
Your loving hands , and vow a constant friendship , 
then one of you I 'll choose my husband . 


Get.   By our seven gates that do let in 
Every day no little sin , 
By the sword which we advance , 
And the Cap of Maintenance : 
By the Shrieve's post , and the hall 
Yclept Guild , and London wall , 
By our Royal Change which yields 
gentile ware , and by Morefields , 
By our thrice burned famous Steeple , 
That doth overlook the people , 
Cheapside Cross , and loud Bow-bell , 
And by all that wish it well : 
I am friends with him till he dies , 
And love him like my liberties : 
So help me riches , what I speak : 
The Citizen will never break . 


Ric.   What say you ? 


Clo.   By my Cart , and by my Plough , 
My don Mare , and best red Cow , 
By my Barn , and fattest Wether , 
My grounds , and all my state together , 
In thy love I overtake thee , 
Else my whistling quite forsake me , 
And let me ever lie , which worse is , 
At rack and manger with the horses . 


Ric.   then Master Clod. — 


Clo.   ha , ha , with all my heart , am I the man ? 


Ric.   The man I must entreat to have some patience . 
I do imagine you affect me dear , 
And would make much of riches . 


Clo.   there 's no Lady That shall outshine my Darling : 't is no matter , though I be in Russet all the week , riches shall live like a Lady , have perfumed linen , costly Gowns , and Petticoats worth taking up , and as the fashion is ; I will put thee into a bag . 



Ric.   This won't , sir , agree with your condition , 
To keep me brave : the Country Cut must be 
Observed . 


Clo.   hang Country Cuts ! Do but marry me . — 


Ric.   But this is not my exception ; there is more 
That interdicts our marriage : for though you 
Are willing to conceal it , Master Clod , 
Yet you and I are kindred , at least cousins . 


Clo.   Why , is not your name riches ? 


Ric.   Though my name 
Be riches , yet my mother was a Clod , 
She married rich earth of America , 
Where I was born , a dirty family , 
But many matches have refined us now , 
And we are called riches . 


Clo.   If you were born in America , we are but kindred a far off . 



Ric.   Let us not confound our Genealogies . 



Clo.   I would be loath to marry an Infidel born , and yet I like your complexion so well , that — 



Ric.   no , I am reserved for thee , 
And here I plant my best affection . 


Get.   Welcome to my heart . 
How I do love thee , riches ! OH my soul , 
we 'll marry strait . 


Ric.   And thus much for your comfort . 
Nay , droop not , Clod , though I be wife to him , 
Yet if I bury Gettings , I 'll be thine , 
And carry London with us into th' Country . 


Clo.   After this rate you are my wife in Law. 
Well : give you joy . 


Get.   Me thinks I fumble my gold chain already . 
But who are these ? 


Enter Courtier and Soldier . Co.   no Honour to be found . 


So.   Let us inquire 
Of these . Did any see the Lady Honour ? 


Get.   What care we for Honour , so we have riches ? 


Co.   ha ? I have been acquainted with this Lady . 


Ric.   I was at Court the last week , sir.  


Cour.   I remember . 


Sol.   I ha' seen her somewhere too . 


Ric.   I ha' been a Traveller . 


So.   Were you never taken by the Hollander ? 


Ric.   I was in the Plate-fleet . 


So.   Base los manos Signiora . 


Ric.   I have almost forgot my Spanish , but after a little practice I may recover it . 



Clo.   I know not Honour if I see her , I have heard of such a Lady : ten to one , but riches can direct you to her . 



Ric.   I apprehend your desires , sir , & will direct you . 


Co.   I am your servant , Lady . 


Ri.   But first , Mr. Gettings , know these Gentlemen . 


Goe   They are in my books already , pray Gentlemen , 
Know my Commodities , when I ha' married riches , 
I shall be better able to furnish you 


Co.   We wish you joy . 


So.   And shall remain your debtors . 


Get.   I make no doubt . 


Co.   But here 's the Lady whom we inquire for . 


So.   She has music to attend her . 
Music . Enter Honour and Ingenuity . Ha! the Scholar ? 
The case is altered . Is not that Ingenuity ? 


Co.   How familiar they are ! I hope they 're not married . 


Cl.   Is this Madam Honour ? 


Co.   So , Lady . 


Ho.   Gentlemen , 
I come to reconcile your difference , 
I did foresee you desperate in love , 
And prompted , I confess your swelling valours 
To fight for me , but upon second thoughts . 
I cancelled that opinion , and devised 
A way to settle all things without danger 
This Gentleman late my servant , Ingenuity , 
Hath removed all occasion of your further 
Courtship , and now wone me for his Bride . 


Co.   Married the Scholar ? despised . 


So.   Affronted . 


Ho.   You are passionate . 
You could not both possess me , yet in him 
Your excellencies meet , and I enjoy 'em . 
He can be Courtier and a Soldier 
When the occasion presents itself . 
He that hath learned to obey well , can command . 
Nay , be not sad , if you loved me , express it 
In your Congratulations . Here I fix 
Myself , and vow my best affection . 
If in the number of my friends , I may 
write you , be confident you sha'not lose 
By your respect to Honor. Lady riches , 
I hope there is no Antipathy in your nature , 
But you may smile upon a Scholar now 
Married to Honor.  


Rich.   Since you have so advanced him , 
He shall not want my favour . 


Ing.   Now I am confident . 


Co.   We must obey our destiny . Since Fate 
Meant me not so much happiness , to be 
The husband , let me still be humble servant 
To Honor.  


So.   My desires have the same ambition . 


Co. and So.   joys crown your marriage 


Ing.   Now you both denied me . 
But in this Empire I can brook no Rival . 
Be all my honoured guests , and with one feast 
And revels celebrate our double marriage . 


Co.   And here our love unites . Pardon what language 
My passion threw upon thee● acknowledge 
A Soldiers worth above the reach of malice . 


So.   My heart shall spread to embrace the noble Courtier . 



Clod.   here 's nothing but compliment . you should bring up a fashion to kiss one another . 



Get.   't is such a dry Clod ! 


Ing.   Correct your passions , sir , I am informed 
You have been guilty this day of abuse , 
Against the noble Citizens , and traduced 
Their yearly Triumph . 


Get.   'T was his ignorance , 
But we are friends again . 


Ing.   then I ha' done . Now Gentlemen and Ladies , 
In the assurance all are pleased , l●●us 
join in dance . Such mirth becomes a wedding . 
Strike up some nimble air . 


They dance . Ing.   Thus all have ●eene how Providence imparts 
Wealth to the City , Honour to the Arts.  


Exeunt . FINIS . 

