THE HONORABL●… AND MEMORABL●… Foundations , Erections , Raising , a●… Ruins , of diverse Cities , Towns , Castles , and other Pieces of Antiquity , within ten Shires and Counties of this Kingdom ; 

Namely , Kent , Sussex , Hampshire , Sur●… Berkshire , Essex , Middlesex , Hartfordshire Buckinghamshire , and Oxfordshire : With the Description of many fam●… Accidents that have happened , in diver●… places in the said Counties . Also , a Relation of the Wine Tavern●… either by their signs , or names of the pe●…sonss that allow , or keep them , in , and throughout the said several Shires . 

By JOHN TAYLOR . 

LONDON , Printed for HENRY GOSSON . 1636 

TO ALL THE Good-fellows in general , and particular , that do keep , inhabit , allow , or maintain the Wine Taverns , or Inn Taverns in the ten Shires and Counties before named 

MINE HOSTS , 

I Hope I am not much mistaken in calling you Gentlemen , or kind Friends ; if you be either , it is as much as I look for , or can deserve ; you only are the men that do truly merit the name and title of Mine Hosts , for alas , our City Taverns have no other entertainment , but Welcome Gentlemen , a Crust , and What Wine will you drink ? But you , Brave minded , and most jovial Sardanapalitans , have power & prerogative ( Cum Privilegio ) to receive , lodge , feast , and fe●… both man and beast ; you have the happiness to Boil , Roast , Broil and Bake Fish , Flesh , and Fool , whilst we in London have scarce the command of a Gull , a Widgeon , or a Wood●…ock ; and for your further , and more high Reputation , the most part of your Customers come riding to your houses , where almost all our guests are footmen ; with you it is common for the Master to drink pints or quarts ●…ut of Pots , whilst his horse is eating of Bottles . Besides , our City Taverns are not troublesome to their Clients with many various Items , and reckonings ; but briefly , so much for Sack , Claret , or White ; whilst you have the predominance to assault a man with 〈◊〉 Bill , and call him to a straight and strict ●…ccount , not only for himself , but for the ●…oings of his horse ; the jury is divided or ●…ven into five parts , in the manner of Lin●…y Woolsey ; namely , the Hosts , the Drawer , ●…e Chamberlain , the Tapster , and the Ostler . Who having viewed the Bill of Indictment , They ) being themselves , Accusers , Evidence , Plaintiff , jury , and judges ; the final Sentence is pronounced at their own Bar of ●…ustice , where the Delinquents conscience knowing all to be justly laid to his charge , with patience and Fortitude , suffers the irrevokeable doom to pass upon him , pays the Reckoning , puts the Bill out of all Force and Virtue , paying his Fees , he is discharged with a heartily Welcome . Of all , or the most part of such Accounts , Actions , Debts , or Demands , our City Taverns have a long time pleaded not Guilty . They cannot ●…ee taxed with the deadly Sin of Gluttony , nor are they troubled with the harsh music of Trencher-scraping , so that if I were to be transformed , or metamorphosed into a Hogg , I would be loath to dwell in one of our Taverns , because I should have such plenty of Wash , and such scarcity of Grains . 

But Gentlemen , though I am bold ( a little ) to play the ( — ) with you , yet I assure you , I love you well ; but for some more special love and favour that I bear to myself . I have written this my second Book of Taverns , I have not written Epigrams here , as I did upon the former , because in City and Country the signs and the Wines are all alike . 

Yet ( to give all the respectful content that I can to my Honourable , Worshipful , and o●…rss of my good Friends , that are to pay me money , upon the receiving , or this my ●…shing this small Book . ) I have recorded in stead of Epigrams , some Monu●…entss of Ant●…quity , which my hope is , will ●…ee more profitable and delightful ; And Gentlemen ( I mean you that are engaged ●…nto me ) in your just payment to me , you may wo●…ke a piece of a wonder , ( which is , ●…o make a Rich Poet ; ) but alas ! that stile is as much too high for me , as I am too low for 〈◊〉 , ( that 's a Bull ) so much the better ; for almost all men are turned Graziers , and speak ●…lss familiarly , and those are the Mounsier Vomusses , who have sold their Wise Acres ●…efore they have sowed their Wild Oats ; And these will censure harshly , any thing ●…hey understand hardly , whose knowledge is as much in the validity and measure of a Verse , as the Ass had that judged the Cuckoos song to be sweeter than the Nightingales . 

I have laid the Foundation of this Project myself , it is a Vineyard of mine own Planting , the Grapes of mine own Pressing , the Wine of mine own Vintage ( or Vantage ) the Taverns of mine own finding , and the Vintoners my own friends , in lieu of which , I am not mine own man , but theirs , or yours , or his , or hers , that wis●…eth me well , as far as my Intentions and Actions are Just , Lawful , o●… Laudable , 

〈◊〉 TAYLOR . 

These Taverns ( some of them ) were mistaken in the first Book , and some of them have been set up since the said Book was Printed ; therefore , to give satisfaction , I have here inserted them . 

Angel near St. Clement's Church . 
Angel near Creechurch , or Aldgate . 
Bull within Bishopsgate 
Bull without Bishopsgate . 
Bull or Buffles Head at Charingcross . 
Bush in Buttolph lane . 
Castle without Cripplegate . 
3.  Cranes near the Customhouse . 
Crown near Dowgate , that was the Dolphin . 
The Raine-deere without Temple Bar . 
Dog , or Talbot in Long Lane.  
Dog near Bishopsgate . 
●…ountaine in Bloomesbury . 
Hart in Basin lane . 
Golden-fleece without Temple Bar.  
Green Dragon at Breadstreet hill , was the Castle . 
Globe in Bedlam . 
Hart in Little Moorefields . 
Harrow in Southwark . 
Hoop in Purpoole lane near Graysin-lane . 
Horse near the Bridge in Southwark . 
King's head in Southwark . 
The golden Lion in Fleetstreet . 
Maidenhead in Pudding lane . 
Mayden-he●…d in Bush-lane . 
Mermaid in White Cross street . 
Prince's Arms in Fleetstreet late the Fountain 
Prince's Arms in St. john street . 
Prince's Arms in Finch Lane , was the 3 Flower de Lices . 
Queen's Head near the Wardrobe . 
Queen's Arms at Westminster . 
Queen's Arms in St. Martins . 
Rose in Turnbull street . 
Sun in Thames street near Dice Key . 
Salutation in Bermondsey street . 
Ship in Butolph lane . 
Ship at Smithfield Pens . 
A CATALOGVE OF Taverns in ten Shires about LONDON . 

Kent 

For Noblemen , Knights , Gentlemen , ●…erss , Mariners ; Virtuous and ●…auteous Ladies , and Women of meanest degrees , comely , pretty , proper , handsome , cleanly , neat , and hon●…●…red with all sorts of Artificers , and 〈◊〉 with ●…full and profitable Husbandmen ; famous for ●…o most ancient Cities , ( whereof ●…ne is the 〈◊〉 Metropolitan seat of England ) It hath many fair M●…ket Towns , ●…mpregnable Castl●…s , s●…e and 〈◊〉 Havens and Harbours for S●…ipping , abo●…nce of rich Villages and Ham●…s' : So that by the Almighty's blessings , and the pe●…es' 〈◊〉 , this ( old Kingdom ) County is for Fruit , F●… , Fl●…sh Fish , Cloth , Corn , Wood and dattle , or 〈◊〉 or any thing that is for the use of Man to maintain life and pleasure , Kent is , an●… hath been renowned universally . 

Deptford , or Deepefourd , so called by reason o●… the deepness of the Fourd or River there , where Ships of great Burden may safely Ride at Anchor , there is a fair and useful Do●…ke for the building or mending of the King's Ships , it hath also a goodly storehouse for provision for the said ships . Deptford is sometimes called East-greenewich . This Town hath these Tavern Licences or Inhabiters . 

The King's Head , The Mermaid , The Sun and the Ship : the parties that keep or maintain them are William Tyle , Richard Aileworth , jeffrey Nixon , William Dring . 

Eltham , where the King hath a fair Summer House , at the first it was founded by Anthony Beck Bishop of Durham , who gave it to Elinor , wife to king Edward the first , but since often Re-edified by succeeding Princes . It hath a Tavern under the name of one Nathanael Mercer . 

Greenwich , for situation and prospect a Paradise of pleasure , the Palace there was first built by Humphrey Duke of Gloucester , in the Reign of King Henry the 6.  Since when it hath been Re-edified , and made more large and sumptuous by King Henry the 7.  Which Palace also was begun be enlarged by the late virtuous Queen Anne , ●…t now finished by our gracious Queen Mary . his Town is most famous for the Birth of that ●…dmired Wonder of her Sex , Queen Elizabeth , ●…ho was born there , in the year of Grace 1533. ●…ptember the 7.  

Greenwich hath these Wine Taverns : ●…he Bear , The Crown . The King's Arms The ●…rinces' Arms . The Rose . And ( which I should ●…ave named first ) the Ship. kept by Henry Noris . Also there is a Tavern with a Bush only , kept ●…y Gregory Martin , and the King's Arms at Dept●…ord bridge in Greenwich Parish . 

Darentfourd , so called because it is situate on the River Darent , it is vulgarly named Dartfourd , there was once a Nunnery built by King Edward the third , which after was made a House for King Henry the 8.  Where he did sometimes keep his Court. Dartford hath these Taverns : At the Bull , George Hanger . At the Cock , William Somers . At the White Hart , Elizabeth Glover . 

Gravesend ( as the Learned Antiquary Master Camden writes ) is so called , because it is the end of the Greve Reeve , or Port Greves government , or bounds . It is a Town famous for receipt of ●…ll Nations , having at any time more fair Lodgings , and provision for Entertainment , than many Towns hath that are thrice as great ; It ha●… oftentimes lodged Kings , Princes , and Forreig●… Ambassadors ; it is divided into two Parishe●… namely , Gravesend and Milton . It hath the Wine Taverns . William Vernon at the Ange●… Richard Tucker at the Ship. Thomas Tongue at t●… Anchor . William Diston at the Bull. The Christ●…pher . Thomas Skilhorne at the Horn 

Seavenoake so called , because seven great Oake●… growing there about's , it is a good Market Town and a great thoroughfare , and hath these Taverns The Crown , the Cat , and the Bull ; they are Taverns in the tuition ( or by the Licenses ) of Margery Pocock . Deborah Pocock . and William Petley 

Tunbridge , ( or the Town of Bridges ) so called , by reason , it hath five stone Bridges , for passage over the River ; which River is divided there into so many several Branches ; it is lately famous for a healthful , approved , sweet , medicinable water , that cures , or eases many diseases : The Taverns there , are at the dispose of two women namely , Martha Bartlet , and Elizabeth Frye . 

Maydstone , a fair , spacious , sweet , pleasant , rich , and populous Market Town , hath these Taverns , or Tavern keepers , john Taylor , Thomas Davis , and Agnes Shorey . 

Rochester , is a fine N●…ate City , long sinc●… founded by a Bishop named Hamo : it was destroyed by Atheldred , King of the Mercians Anno 676. it hath been oftentimes spoilt by th●… Danes ; the Castle there hath been a strong piec●… of defence , it was built by a Bishop named Gun●…dulph ; it was razed , and spoilt in the Baron wars , in King Henry the third's Reign . Th●… Cathedral Church there was built by Aeth●…lber King of Kent : The goodly s●…one Bridge ther●… was built by Sir Robert Knowles , Knight , with s●…ch Spoils as he had valiantly gotten from th●… French in the Reign of King Richard the second Rochester hath these Taverns , Thomas Lovel a●… the King's head , Dorothy Allen , or Thomas Mot , a●… the Bull , john Stone . or Ambrose Groom at th●… White-hart , and john Dom●…w , or john Philpot a●… the Crown . 

Queenburrough was built by King Edward th●… third , in the honour of Queen Philip his Wife there is a Tavern which serves for Minster as wel●… as for Queenburrough , it is a●… the dispose or keeping of james jacob . This Town is famous for my Arrival there ( from London thither ) with a Boa●… o●… Browne Paper , Anno 1619.  

Feversham , a good Town , it was sometimes the residence of Athelstane , King of Kent ; where he enacted Laws : it is also famous for a sump●…uous Aboey , ●…uilt there by King Stephen , and there 〈◊〉 , Queen Maud his wife , and his Son ●…ince Eustace were s●…pulchred . It hath three Ta●…erneses : at the Ship , Walter Moses , the other two ●…elongs to S●…muell Thurstone , and james Hudson . 

At the Town of Ashfourd , there may be three ●…averness , for Thomas Mascall may or doth keep ●…wo , the other doth belong to Peter Colebrand . 

At Chepsted one , Anthony Fuller . 

At Lenham one , Robert Tray.  

At Egerton one , Elizabeth Faireway . 

At Erith one , Giles Sidgwick . 

At Kenthatch one , Edmund Plomley . 

At Gowthurst one , Thomas Cowchman . 

At Ashe one , john Tompson . 

At Br●…mley two , Toby Priest , john Halfepenny , ●…he Bell , the Hart.  

At Chattham , Francis Giles . 

At Folkstone one , Elizabeth March.  

At Ferningham one , john Rad●…liffe . 

At El●…m two , jane Country , Robert Fox . 

At Crayford one , Ralph Meykins , at the Angel . 

At Lamberhurst , Mary Astone . 

At Greenehive one , Miles Croxton , the sign , Calais Sands . 

At Leed●…s , one Edward Lloyde . 

Canterbury , or the Kentish Burough or Citi●… is ancient and renowned , it hath Metropolitan dignity , chief over England : Augustine the Monke●… about the 67 year of Christ , came into Britaine●… and at Canterbury kept his residence , where by hi●… Doct●…ine , and good example of life , he confirmed and established many in the Christian Fait●… causing it to spread and flou●…ish by his painful Ministry , so that after a holy and laudable lif●… ended , he died , and was buried in that Honorabl●… City . It hath these Taverns , Elizabeth Lockley or William Terry at the Rose ; Edward Den , at th●… White-hart , james Penn , or George B. at the Red. Lion , Elizabeth Bridg , at the Sarazers' head , Miles Bull , or Warham jemut , at the B●…ll , William Mann Esquire hath also a Tavern Licence , Robert or Susan Turner , Alias Baker , at the Ch●…quer ; Peter Winn , or Christopher Baldwin , at the Sun , 8.  

At Milton and Newington one , William Dickins . 

At Staplehurst one , William Poynet . 

At Wye one , Simon Allen.  

At Strewed one , Edward Monox . 

At Lewsham one , Elizabeth Tarpley . 

At Sandway one , john White . 

At Mard●…n one , Anthony Young.  

At Yalding one , Richard Pix . 

At Offham one , Thomas Tress . 

At New Romney , three , Susan Wood , Sara Wood , Smith Tookey . 

At Hawkhurst one , Agnes Viney . 

At Bersted one , Thomas Holford . 

Deal , where stands a strong defencible Castle , ●…uilt by King Henry the eight , the place is famous ●…or repulsing julius Caesar three times thence before he could arrive there : it hath these three Taverns kept by Susan Woodland , Mary Coun●…rey , and judith Hudson . 

At Crambrooke two , joan Kirkham , and john Leigh . 

At Charing one , Anthony Page . At Appledore and Biddenden — William Poynit , 

Sandwich , so called , by reason of too much Sand , which , not only makes sh●…aleses and flats in the Sea , but also chokes up the Haven there ; it is a fair rich Town , and one of the ●…inque Ports ; it hath had the trial of sundry alterations ; It hath been often distressed by the Danes ; it was sacked , spoiled and burned by Lewis , the Dauphin of France in the reign of King john . King Edward the first placed there a Staple for Wool . King Edward the third did honour it with much Princely favour , since when , it was again burned by the French in King Henry the sixth his reign , since which time it hath been so repaired , that it flourisheth beautifully and bountifully : there do inhabit man●… Dutch people , who do enrich themselves , and a●… profitable to the ●…owne , by making diverse sor●… of Stuffs there . Sandwich hath these Taverns john Seymer , Axne Peyton , Hugh Rhodes , jane Woo●… Roger Pain , and Alice Barrell . 

At Saint Laurence one , Katherine Hudson . 

At Stonecrutch one , under William Campio . Esquire . 

At Ospring one , Peter Greenstr●…t . 

At Redred , Marry Oxo●…bridge . 

At Penchurst one , Thomas Sexton . 

At Woolwich , john Sims at the Hart.  

At Saint Mary Cray one , Edward Fleet.  

At Woodsgate one , john Burdet . 

At Benenden one , William Leedes . 

At Blenchdy one , Elizabeth Clampard . 

At Wingham one ; Elizabeth Ashton . 

At Sunbridge one , Anne Cacot . 

Tenterden is 〈◊〉 good Town for clothing , and so is Crambrooke ( before named ) Tenterden hath two Taverns : Matthew Outred , and james Glover . 

At Rootham and Norflect , Thomas Spencer , the Crown . 

At Westram and Aeton Bridge , Anne Spencer . 

At Mawlin , George Huntley , may keep two ●…verness . 

At Margate , two , Averie jenkinson , and Henry ●…ulmer . 

At Lid , Godfrey Martin , and Thomas Tookey . 

At Sutton Valience , Anne Vsm●…r . 

At Seal , Mabell Sandall . 

At Herne , Willi●…m Towlson . 

At Highgate , William Warson . 

At Bexley and Foot●…bray Nathaniel Mercer . 

At Hyde Henry Hart , William N●…t . 

At Sittingborne , four , Margaret Husbands , ●…nne Wood , Margaret Law , Thomas Rochfourd . 

To finish my Collections of this famous Coun●…e ; I , for my relish to my Narration , and as an ●…xcellent seal , or E●…sterne limitation to the most ●…xcellent bounds of Kent , I close up all with 

Dover , a brave Town , and one of the Cinque ●…orts , the m●…st commodi●…us place for passage too ●…nd from between the mighty Kingdoms of Eng●…nd and France . It hath a good and safe Haven , ●…hich was at the first made by the command of ●…ing Henry the eight , at sixty three thousand ●…ound charges , which is called , Dover Peer : but 〈◊〉 time , all the cost being almost lost , & by the vio●…ence of the raging sea , decayed and broken , Queen Elizabeth ( of blessed memory ) with much of her ●…wne cost , and Parliamentary authority , enacted that a Toll upon Tonnage should be paid for some years , for all manner of Goods transported inward or outward . 

There is also an impregnable Castle , which is the strongest Hold , and Fortress in England , commanding both by Land and Sea ; is is supposed to have been built by julius Caesar. Dover hath these Taverns , Tavern keepers , or Allowers . john Low , judith Haines , Edward Waller , john Hugesson , Anthony Percivall , Trustram S●…evens . 

At Dover Peer be these , William Streeting , Elizabeth Alley , and William Bradshaw , to whom I dedicate these few lines : 

Kind friend , as thou didst once the favour gain , 
Great Britain's Mighty Prince to entertain ; 
So entertain these Verses I have penned , 
As my remembrance unto thee my friend : 
thou know'st ( by old experience ) that I love thee ; 
And if thou lov'st me , I will one day prove thee . 
The County of Kent had , in King Henry the eight's reign , at the suppression of Monasteries , Abbeys , Nunneries , Priories , Friaries , Colleges , Hospitals , and ( as they termed them ) Religious houses , the number of fifty three . 

Kent is divided into sixty four hundred , or divisions ; namely , Black-heath hundred , Lesnes , Rooksley , Axtave , Broomley , Whitstaple , Milton , ●…oltingtroph , Ho , Tencham , Shammell , Fever●…ham , Blengate , Bouton under Bleath , Kingslow , ●…etham , Westgate , Ham , Downhamford , Tenterden , Preston , Felborow , Oxney I 'll hundred , Black●…urne , Wye , Winham , Charte , Stowting Co●…los , Longbridge , Bi●…cholt , Franchils Calhill , Heane , Blewborough , Street , Selbright fenden , Folkstone , Worth , Eyhorne , Lovingborough , Roluinden , New-church , Maydstone , Barnesield , Kinghamford , Brinkley and Horse , Saint Martins , Chattham and Gillingham , Bredge , Langport , Twyford , Watheling stone , Larkfield , Loway and Tunbridge , Alloftbridge , Littlefield , Marden , Wortham , Barkley , Godsheath , Westram , Crambrooke and Somerden . 

Kent hath seventeen good Market Towns , three hundred ninety eight Parishes , and one hundred thirty seven Wine Taverns . 

Sussex . 

Sussex , or South-saxony , so named when there was an Heptarchy , or government of 7 King●… at once in England ; because this County was the best part of the Southsaxon Kingdom . It is a rich County , plenteous in Iron-mines , and much goo●… Ordnance are cast there , with other necessary Iro●… works : also it is much enriched by Glass-making●… It is situate near the British Ocean , whereby 〈◊〉 is plentifully stored with Fish : also it is Nob●… rich with Inhabitants , and all other Commoditi●… for Life and Maintenance . 

Arundel , A Town famous for a goodly Cast●… there , belonging to the Earls of Arundel an●… Surrey . This town hath two Taverns , held b●… Mi●…as H●…g , and Elizabeth Freeman . 

At Chilkington , Charles johnson . 

At Witham , William Pigott . 

At Forest Roe , Edw. Woodman , the Antelope . 

At Battle , Matthew Cowchman doth or ma●… keep two Taverns 

At Marsfield , William Mowhurst . 

Chichester was built by Cissa , the second Kin●… of the Southsaxons , An. 586 The Bishops See f●… the Diocese of Sussex or Chichester , was kept an●… held at Selsey till the time of King William th●… Conqueror . Chichester hath these Tavernes●… Thomas Powsley , Anne Billet , Marry Billet , Th●…mas Billet , Thomas Ball , Matthew Ball.  

At Front , john Giles . 

At Ditchelling , james Da●…y . 

At Newshoreham , Richard Gold.  

At Tarring , William Fletcher . 

At Hay field and Seaford , Richard Meade . 

At Haughton , George Coles . 

Petworth , a pretty Market-town , where the ●…arle of Northumberland hath a goodly house , and ●…s an honourable and bounteous housekeeper . It ●…ath these two Taverns , Anthony Goodman , and ●…ohn Hall.  

At Hartsield , Mary Shelton . 

At Ticehurst , joan Kipping . 

At Micheing , Samuel Towers . 

At Cuck field , Thomas Tasker . 

Horsham seems to take derivation from Hor●… the Saxon , the brother of Hengist , the first King ●…f Kent : It hath the allowance of two Taverns ●…der one M. Robert Deering . 

At Staining 2.  Richard Briant , and Tho. Oliver . 

At Wadehurst , one Francis Wilfourd . 

Winchelsea was overwhelmed with the Sea , ●…n 1250. in the reign of King Henry the third ; ●…ce when the town is built higher out of the ●…anger or fury of the Ocean's violence : but the ●…aven is decayed , to the towns great hindrance , ●…d for the commodity and profit of the town ●…f R●…e . Winchelsea hath one Taverner , john Pettit . 

The town of Midhurst hath four Taverners , john Kelsey , Anne Carus , Mary Hudson , and joan White . 

Hastings is a good and profitable Fisher-town , a Nu●…sery for Mariners and Sailors : It had a Mint to coin Money in it , in the time of King Athelstan : and it is named the first of the ●…que Ports ; it had these ports ●…nd towns belonging to it , namely , Seaford , Pemsey , Hodney , Bulver●… , Winchelsea and Rye : all which were at any time at command of the King to set out 21 serviceable ships , for the service of their Prince and Country ( within forty day's warning ) and to bear all the charge of the said ships for the space of fifteen days , and the King was to be at all the charges after the fifteen days were expired . Hastings hath two Taverns , john Phissenden , and Francis Wennell . 

Lewis , a famous Market Town , which had a Mint in it , in King Athelstanes Reign , for his Coin of Gold and Silver , or other Metals . It hath 6.  Churches , and a goodly house belonging to the Earl of Dorset ; A mighty memorable Battle was fought there Anno 1264. betwixt King Henry the third and Simon Montfort Earl of Leaster , where the Earl took the King , and the King of the Romans prisoners . Lewis hath these Taverns , or number of houses for the sale of Wines . Agnes Thurgood , Thomas Oliver , Robert Carter , and William Peake may keep two Taverns if he william  

At Lingfield Beding , and Bramborow , Richard Meade . 

At Billi●…ghurst , john Agate . 

At V●…field . field , john Ford . 

At Backesteed , Thomas Oliver . 

At Cliff , Richard Meade , and William Peake . 

At Crawley and Worth , john Peake . 

At Brighthelmeson , Alice Harding , and William Peake . 

At Barreash , Mayfield , Pemsey , and Westham , Thomas Oliver . 

At Dallington , Henfield , and Abfreston , Thomas Oliver . 

At East-greensteed , john Langridge , and Henry Baldwin : the signs at East Greensted , are the Crown , and the Catalina  

Rye , is a good Town , and was made strong by William of Ipres , ( A valiant Nobleman and Earl of Kent ) It was walled in the undefensible and weakest places by King Edward the 3.  Terrible storms and tempests hath done more for them , than they could well have done for themselves . for the blustering raging Winds hath formerly caused the violence of the Sea to make them a good Haven : but great pity it is , for it is much decayed . For Rye is a brave flourishing Town , and serves London and many other places with Fish in abundance : It hath these Taverns in name or number . Richard Pecote . john Halsey . Richard Thomas . 

Sussex had at the suppression of Abbeys , Nunneries , Priories , Friaries , Colleges and Hospitals 32.  This County is divided into 6.  Devisions , or Hundred , called Rapes , namely . Chichester , Arundel , Bramber , Lewis , Pemsey and Hastings . There are in Sussex 18 Market towns , 312 Parishes , and 61 Taverns . 

Middlesex . 

Middlesex doth ( almost ) round begirt the two famous Cities of London and Westminster : And although I have in my former Book made mention of many of the Taverns near adjoining to the said Cities ; yet to make this my second narration in the better form and order , I have named some of the said Taverns again , because I would play the part of an honest true Tailor , and put in all the stuff . 

At Chelsey , Richard Eeds the sign of the Dog.  

At Fulham , joseph Holden , Richard Parkes : the signs are , the King's Arms , and the Nag's head . 

At Hammersmith , Alice Robinson , or Thomas Warner at the white Hart and Thomas holden at the Goat or Ant●…lop . 

At Chiswick , Valentine Smith at the King's head . 

At Acton , john Cooth●…idge , and William Aldridg : their signs are the Cock , and the Bell.  

At Old Br●…ntford , and New B●…entford , are these signs , the Three Pigeons , the Half Moon , the Lion , the Goat , the George the Swan . 

The Ga●…ter near Hammersmith in London way towards Brentford . 

At Hownslow , Henry Needles , and Martha Warwick : the signs are , the Katherine Wheel , and the Georg●… . 

At E●…gworth , Henry Haley . 

At Harrow hill , Peter jones . 

At Strangreene , Thomas Blithe . 

At Northket , Katherine Awceter . 

At Thistleworth , Anne Parks . 

At Rayslip , Margaret Price . 

At Kensington , Annis Turbervill , at the Lyon.  

At Knightsbridge , Richard Kellway , Elizabeth Sharpe , there are three Tavern signs , G●…ave Ma●…rice , the Swan and the Rose . 

Uxbridge is a fair long Market town , it hath many Inns , and four of them be 〈◊〉 , john Raynor , Edmund Morrice , Sara Hitchcock and Michael Web : The signs are , the Chequer , the George , the Crown , and the White horse . 

The Toy Tavern at Hampton-court needs no sign . 

At Twickenham , Anne Palmer . 

At Paddington , Walter Whitlock . 

At Kingsland , George Willis ; the sign , the King , or Prince's Arms . 

At Newington , john Usher , at the Sun.  

At Islington are these signs and Taverns : the Angel , the Globe , the Lion , the Mitre , the Nagshead , the Swan , and the Saracens head . 

At Kentish Town , the Rose , Gregory Machin . 

At Whetstone , the Lion , and the Prince's Arms , Samuel Augier , Richard Taylor . 

At Whitechapel , Habacuck Kirby . 

At South M●…mms , Thomas Avis , the Bell.  

At Hillingdon , Katherine Taylor . 

At Pinner , Margery Bateman . 

At Saint Giles , john Prince , William Pearpoynt . 

At Kenton , William Bird.  

At Tottenham Court , john Day . 

At Tottenham-highcrosse , Matthew Beuning , at the Sun.  

At Chiswell street , Samuel Taylor . 

At Cow-crosse , Robert jordane . 

At Edmonton , Stephen Goodyere . 

At Highgate , at the Mermaid , Marry Sell.  

At Budfo●… , Thomas Weldish . 

At Hackney , William Gore , and William Cave : the signs are the Mermaid and the Rose . 

At Engfield , Elizabeth Kirby , and Mary Southwell . 

At Hardington , Elizabeth Osbourne . 

At Tottenham street , Francis K●…y . 

At Hayes , Mary Hill.  

At Feltham , Robert Butler 

At Holloway street , Ez●…hiel Cates●… the B●…ll 

At Blackwall , Zachary 〈◊〉 ●…igne of the Arms of the East India Company . 

The Cross at Ratcliff , the Diagon , the Kin●…s' head , the Mermaid , the Ship , the Queen's head , the Lion , the ship at Dickshore , and the Hoop , and the three Kings . 

In Ratcliff highway , the Anchor , the Garter , the Rose . 

At Bow , the Flower de Lice , the George , and the King's head . 

At Mile end , the Nagshead . 

At Limehouse , john jennings . 

At Wapping , james Bull : the Bull , the Angel , the Cross , the Dragon , the Gun , the Ship , the Popes-head , the Rose , and the King's head . 

At Poplar , the Ship , the Lyon.  

The Bull at Stepney , and the Bullhead . 

These that follow hereafter named , are already in my former book , because they are so near to the Cities of London and Westminster , but because they are in this County of Middlesex , I will name them once more . 

Near the Bowling Alley at Westminster , Henry Normaville . 

〈◊〉 Galley street , Daniel Hitche . 

〈◊〉 Holborn , William Matthewes , Thomas Simcots . 

In Saint john street , Margery Baines , and Mary Motsley . 

In Saint Martins in the fields , Richard jeyner , Anne Parks , and Gertred Swan . 

In Silver street , john Thomas . 

In Tuttle street , jeffrey George . 

In Savoy Parish , Robert Amery , and Thomas Blunt.  

In the Tower Liberties , Thomas Foster . 

Stanes is famous for a Meadow near it called , Rennimead or Running mead , where in the twelve or thirteenth year of the reign of King john , the most part of the Lords , and great States of England met , and opposed the King in Warlike manner , the Lords rebelliously to compel the King , and the King to defend his person , and Royal Prerogative ; and at last ( after much council and debating ) they forced the King to yield to such conditions as were never observed . Stanes is a good through fare , and hath these ●…averness : Thomas Wilkins , john Shorter , and Margaret Venman ; the signs are , the Bush , the Bell and the Lyon.  

This County had of Religious houses , a ●…ess , Nunneries , Priories , Friaries , Colleges and Hospitals , nine . London , within and without the Walls and Liberties , thirty one . 

It hath these hundred , or divisions ; Edmonton , Gore , Finsbury and Wenulocks , Barn , Osulston , Elthorne , Istleworth , Spelthorne . 

It hath seventy three Parishes , three Market Towns , and a hundred and one Wine savernes . 

Essex . 

Essex , or East Saxony , is a good , a great , and a rich County , stored plentifully with Wood , Fish , Flesh , Butter , Cheese , Saffron , and as good Calves as any other County , or Country whatsoever ; in a word , it is stored with any thing , or all things needful . 

Colchester stands near the River Colne , it is 〈◊〉 wasled Town , with fifteen Churches , and one other , a most stately building , now ruined with an old Castle , which Time hath brought into a Consumption . This Town is famous for Adtiquity , it was built by Coylus , a good King of Britain , it is said that this Coylus was father to Queen Helen , who was born , or brought up in this Town , she was the mother of Constantine the great Emperor , who ●…lt Constantinople . Colchester hath these seven ●…e Taverns : Francis Kitteridg , john Portkell , Laurence Browne , Mary Spilesby , Mary Bloomfield , Elizabeth Wyles , Elizabeth Wade . 

At Barking , joan Gown , or George Lily at the Bull.  

At Braintree two , john Sparhawke , and Ralph Burton . 

At M●…nningtree , George Springet , and Robert Heywood . 

At Abridge , Samuel Newbold . 

At So●…field , Anne Dae . 

At Epping , john and Mary Archer at the Cock.  

At Gray's , Thomas Farnell & Edward Knightly . 

At Danbury , William Dickins . 

At Harlow john josceline . 

At Rochfourd , judith Rix.  

At Orsed near Gray , Anthony Web.  

At Raynam , john Slany . 

At Wethersfield , john Aldridge . 

At Sampford Magna , Ireffrey Baker . 

At Pritle well , Thomas Wait.  

At Thacksted , Edward Constable . 

At Stork , Charles Newman . 

At Woodham-series , Oliver Higham . 

At Springfield , Richard Smith . 

At Thorpe , john Beriffe . 

At Wivenhoe , john Parker . 

At 〈◊〉 , Dame Martha Harris . 

B●…entwood , or Burntwood , is an ancient Town and had a Market and a Fair , allowed by King Stephen , and continued ever since . It hath these Taverns : the Crown , the Angel ; but there are three in all , kept or allowed by Richard Smith , jane Taylor , and john Camper , the Angel . 

At high ●…asterne , Robert Plat.  

At Dagnam , joan Bird.  

At Lexden , john Pottler . 

At Leigh , james Hare . 

At Southweald , Edward Woodford . 

At Aveley , Lucy Ringsoll . 

At Saint Ozith , Thomas Rand.  

At Bardfield , john Rudland . 

At South Ockenden , Elizabeth Wortley . 

At Dedham john Wills.  

At Horndon , Nicholas Richold . 

At Upminster , Elizabeth Saward . 

At Tarling , Dina Has●…er . 

At Blackmore , john P●…chy . 

At Little Waltham , Abel White . 

At Eastcolne , Samuel Burton . 

Ingarstone , a good Town for Market , and excellent neat entertainment for Travellers , it hath these Taverns : Agnis White , john Bond.  

At Bocking , joan Kent , Francis Fit●…h . 

At Chippingange●… , William Stane , Katherine Stane . 

At Waltham Abbey , Tho : more , Mary Waterer . 

At Walthamstow , Ralph Baker , Thomas Shaw.  

Rumford is a sweet , savery , clean and gainful Market for Hogs , and all other sorts of swine , and of what else is needful for man's life . It hath these Taverns , the Angel , the Bell , the White Hart , and the Cock . 

At Raleigh , Rob. Luckin , & Thomas Parker . 

At Dunmow , George Deane , and Agnes Gynn . 

At East Tiburly , john French.  

At Boreham , john Lane.  

At Halstead 3  William Thurstone , john Coe , Thomas Harvie . 

At Hithe near Colchester , Edward Legg , Francis Allen.  

At Ilford , Francis Blanchard , the sign of the blue Boate.  

Wittam , or Whittam is an ancient very fair through-faire . It was built by King Edward the Elder , in the year 914 ; which was 154 years before the Norman Conquest , 722 years since : It hath two Taverns , William Nevell ( alias ) Smith , and john Alexander . 

At Stratford Langthon two , Ralph Keeling , and William Lovel . 

At Low Laighton , or Laighton stone , Roger Falkstone , the sign of the Huntsman . 

At Burnham , Robert Rowdon . 

At Hatfield Peverell , Abigail Lane.  

Hatfield Broadoake , so called , because a broad Oak , being a goodly fair tree grew there , that spread a great compass . It hath one Tavern kept by or for one john Earl . 

Chelmsford , a fair goodly Market-town , hath these 4 Taverns , Simon Wilmot , George Solme , Nicholas Sutton , and Tho. Freeman ; the signs are , the three Tons , the Cock , the Black boy , and the Lyon.  

At Bricksley Roger Greene.  

At Kelvadon , john Theedham . 

Harwich , hath an excellent good Road for shipping . It is a good strong Town , well strengthened by Natural situation , and Artificial Fortresses : it is not only full of people , but honestly peopled for the most part of them . The River Stour there divideth Essex from Suffolk . Harwich hath three Taverns , kept or allowed by Alice Farley , William Hart , and Margaret Moor . 

At Brookstreet at the Bull , Agmondesham Pickayes . 

At Chigwell one , allowed by Tho : Pennington 

At Plashie and St. Annes , William Chandler . 

At Much Parindon , Roger Worthington . 

Walden , or Saffronwalden , so called for the great quantity of Saffron that grows thereabouts . It hath had a fair Castle , which is now Ruinated . It is a very good Market town , and it hath a Corporation , with large Privileges : It hath three Taverns allowed , o●… inhabited by Simon Willmott , Katherine Bates and Thomas Watton . 

At Much Wakering , Maud Goldingham . 

At newport , john Sell.  

At Little-baddo , Abigail Lane.  

At Much Waltham , Abel White . 

Maldon was a City in the time of Calligula the Emperor , above forty years after Christ , It was then called Camallodunum : It hath been spoilt by the Danes , and since repaired by the Normans : but by the industry of the people there , it hath been and is still a town of great worth and reputation : it hath a good Haven , and a Tavern for a safe harbour kept or allowed by Ursula Edward's . 

This County of Essex ( in the Reign of King Henry 8. ) had at the suppression of Monasteries , Abbeys , Nunneries , Priories , Friaries , Colleges and Hospitals , 35.  Essex is divided into 20 several Hundred ; namely , Vltford , Hinckford , Rorchford , Chelmesford , Chaford , Winstree , Lexden , Dengie , Ougar , Tendring , Thurstable , Barstable , Dunmow , Waltham , Freshwell , Harlow , Havering , Clavering , Becontree , Wittham . 

Essex hath one and twenty Market towns , four hundred and fifteen Parishes , and one hundred and seven Taverns . 

Hartfordshire . 

Hartfordshire , is a County that surpasseth all Countries and Counties for making the best Malt ; and for good clean Highways , conscionable short Miles , meat , drink , lodging for travellers , kind men , women fair and honest , and with any thing that is necessary , this County is plentifully stored withal . 

Barkhamstead is a good Market Town , and it had once a Castle there of strength , the Ruins of it are there yet to be seen ; it hath been the habitation for Kings and Princes , for the most noble Prince Richard , Brother to the King of England , died there : which Richard was King of the Romans , and Earl of Cornwall . This Castle ruined , is also famous , for the residence there of that most Illustrious Royal Spark , Edward the Black Prince : and lastly , it is memorable for being the Birth-place of King Richard the third . Barkhamstead hath two Taverns allowed or kept by Stephen Besowth , and Francis Baker . 

At Tring , William Blacknall . 

At Stevenedge , john Nodes . 

At Whethamstead , Thomas Stepping . 

At Redburne , Prudence Miles . 

At Sabridgeworth , john Burr . 

At Walton , George Honor.  

At Colney or Coney , William Tompson . 

Barnet is a good Market town for Sheep and Beasts , it is a great thorough fare , and famous for the Battle fought near it ( on Easter day , the 14th of April , 1471 ) betwixt King Edward the 4 and the Earls of Warwick and Oxford , where Warwick was ●…ine , and with great slaughter of men on both sides , King Edward had a bloody victory . Barnet hath these Taverns : john Brisco at the Antelope , Henry Owen at the red Lion , Thomas Brisco at the Rose ; the Crown . 

At B●…ldock 2 , james Haiday and john Thurgood . 

At Stevenledg , john Nodes . 

At Stansted Abbey , john Giver . 

At the Bell at Richmonsworth , Sara Marsh.  

At Bishops Hatfield , William Walker , and Elizabeth Barefoot . 

Hartford is the Provincial town of this Shire ; there is a Castle ( as some write ) built by King Edward the first : this town hath been much larger , and in greater prosperity and account , for it had 4 Churches , namely , All-saints , and Saint Andrews , which are now standing ; the other 2 are decayed , or down , their names were Saint mary's , and Saint Michaels . Hartford hath these 3 Taverns : William Scant at the Bell , Anne Vinmunt , Tho : Noble , Henry Chalkley , and Henry Butler ; these 4 persons last named , do inhabit and allow , the other a Taverns there being the signs of the Glove , & the Angel 

At Hempstead 2 , Will : Smith , & Dorcas Goodwin . 

At Hitchin three , George Haiday , Thomas Harding , Priscilla Warner . 

At Hoddesden , john Sydes at the Black Lion , and Francis Williams at the Chequer . 

At Waltham Cross two , Katherine Holt at the Bell , and Rosamond Hawton . 

At Royston three , Leonard Hamond , Anne Crofts , and Thomas Hagger . 

At Watford 2 , Edward How , and Henry G●…ry . 

At Markatstreet , john Crane . 

At Wellwin , jesper Wiltshire . 

At Barkway , john Rawley , and Thomas Smith . 

Ware is a great thoroughfare , and hath many fair Inns , with very large Bedding , and one high and mighty Bed , called The Great Bed of Ware : a man may seek all England over , and not find a married couple that can fill it . Ware hath 3 Taverns : Will : Cross , or Will : Razed at the Crown , Shelton Amery , Christopher Robinson , widow Hall at the George , also she keeps a Wine-cellar at the Christopher . 

At Bishops-starford two , George Hawkins , and john Cheyny . 

At Buntingford two , Edward Bullen , and Anne Hensham . 

At Wormeley , Rich : Bishop at the Black Lyon.  

At Much-hadham , Edmund Rustat . 

At Puckridge two , Sir john Wats doth allow one , and the other is inhabited or allowed under one Will : Northage . 

Faint Albans is famous for Antiquity , and for the death of our English Proto-martyr St. Alban , he was martyred there in the raig●…e of Dioclesian the Emperor , Ann. 268.  After he had suffered many torments , lastly his head was struck off , and immediately the executioner was struck blind . off a king of the Mercians built the goodly Abbey Church there , An. 795. and the said Church was dedicated to Christ and St. Alban , from whom the town hath denomination . The Brazen Font in the Church was brought out of Scotland by Sir Richard Lea Knight , An. 1543. in the 36 year of the reign of k Henry the 8.  This town is also famous for two memorable bloody Battles there betwixt K. Edward the 4. and K. Henry the 6. where both the Kings had various fortunes : It hath these Wine taverns ; the Blow bore , the Lion , the King's Arms . 

Kingslangley is also famous for being sometimes the residence of Kings , Edmund of Langley , Son to K. Edward the third was born there , & K. Richard the second was first buried there : It hath a tau●…m kept or allowed by Rose Deacon . 

At Abbot's Langley , one Nicholas Breakespeare was born , who was afterwards Pope of Rome by the name of Hadrian the 4th , he died suddenly choked with a Fly in his Cup.  

This County of Hartford , had , at the suppression of Popery , 22 Religious houses , as Abbeys , etc.  It hath 8 divisions or hundred ; namely , Odsey , Caysho , Branghing , Hartford , Hiching , Edwinstree Broadwater , and Dacorum . This County hath 18 Market towns ; 120 Parishes , and 52 Taverns . 

Hampshire . 

Hampshire , or Hantshire , is a goodly rich County , abounding in Corn , Wood , Pasture , and much enriched with innumerable Commodities from the Sea 

Southampton is a fair , sweet & pleasant town , it hath had trial of both fortunes often , it was quite consumed by fire , in the reign of K. Edward the 3.  Anno 1337. since when it is better re-edified and much increased , well defenced with Walls , 〈◊〉 rets , a Haven , and a strong Castle built by K. Richard the second , it is rich in Merchants and Inhabitants , and by the grant of K. Henry the 6. it is a County of itself . It hath 8 Wine Taverns , either allowed or inhabited by Thomas Miles , Tho : Stoner , Tho. Smith , Augustine Reignolds , Oliver Stoner , Elizabeth King , Eliz : Nevey , and Eliz : Elzey . 

At Mew-church , Benjamin Newland . 

At Alton 3  Io. Butler , Io. Goldsbery , Basill Kemp.  

At Basingstoake three , Arm Cross , or Robert White at the Bell , Avis Tate , or Anthony spital at the Maidenhead , Thomasin Barrell , or Captain Marlowe at the George . 

Kingwood is a very ancient town , it was in estimation and prosperity more than 1100. years ago in the reign of Cerdicus , K. of West Saxons , Anno 508 it is now a good Market town , & hath 2 taver●…erss allowed by Will : Tarvar and john Wiseman . 

At Petersfield two , Richard Goodwin , and Agnes Wood  

At Stokebridge one , Francis Leison . 

At Hava●…t , William Woolgar . 

At Fareham , Anne Wilks . 

At 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Anne Tinkeridg , Rachel Tinkeridg , Mary Williams . 

At Buckland , Henry Fabyn . 

Tichfield , where K. Henry the sixth was married to the valiant Virago , Qu. Margaret , daughter to Reinard Earl of Anjou . & titularie king of Scicilia and jerusalem . There is a goodly house , the chief seat and residence of the honourable Earl of Southampton . Tichfield hath one Tavern , Rich : Brown.  

At Andover three , john Milier , john Hercy , and Mary So●…h . 

At Hook , Bridget Woolse , the sign of the B●…ll . 

At Romsey three , Alexander Elver , William Bloys , and Dorothy Loa●… . 

Christ-church , by the Saxons , it had once a Castle in it of a good strength ; the town was much repaired by one Ralph Flammard Bp. of Durham , Anno 1094. in the reign of K. Rufus , or William the 2. this Bishop was Deane of this Christ Church , and there he erected a fair Monastery . This town hath one Tavern , john Powson . 

At Warnford , Richard Woods , and Mabell Vin●… . 

At Limmington , George Castle . 

At Castbrooke , Margaret Hails . 

At Newport , in the Isle of Wight , one john james , may , or doth keep three Taverns . 

At N●…wtowne , 〈◊〉 Tailor . 

At Cowse three , Morgan Adams , Margaret Hails , William Edwards . 

At 〈◊〉 , Anne Garyre . 

At Brading , john james. So there are nine Taverns in the I 'll o●… W●…ght . This ●…and to the County of Hampshire , ●…s 2●… mil●…s in length & 12 miles in breadth in the broadest place ; it is a most plentiful strong defencible Country , Sea , Art & Nature made so . It is peopled with valiant and warlike inhabitants , Henry Bewchamp Earl of Warwick was crowned King of the I 'll of Wight , in the reign of King Henry the sixth . 

At Forthingoridg one Tavern , Richard Boen . 

At Hambledon one , Christopher Organ . 

At Bishops Waltham one , john Hawksworth . 

At Eastincon one , jane Loving . 

At Botley , Dorothy Doncastle . 

Winchester is a very famous and ancient City , it was the Royal seat of the West Saxon Kings ; it had 6 houses in it for coining and minting money in the reign of King Athelstane ; and long since that ●…ll the public Records & Evidences of the whole ●…ingdom of England were kept there . This City hath been twice fired by sudden misfortunes ; and in king Stephen's reign it was sacked and spoiled by rude Soldiers that belonged to the King , and Maud the Empress' factions ; but after it was much enriched by the royal favour of King Edward the 3 , who caused a Mart or Staple of Wool & Cloth to be kept there , but since ( as times hath altered ) this worthy City hath suffered many changes , yet still with Fame and Reputation she bears up her head . Winchester hath 4 taverns joan Prat , Anne Bud , Thomas Brexton , and Cornelius Brexton . 

At Soak , near Winchester three , William Pope , john Noake , and Walter Travers . 

At Lippock , Robert Palmer . 

At Sutton Sconey , Michael Nicholas . 

At Hartlerow , Anthony Maynard , or john Wild at the G●…orge . 

Portsmouth , so called , because it stands at the mouth of the Port or Haven ; it is a strong town and fortress , with a Garrison ; and it thrives better by War than by Peace : It hath 4 taverns , Richard james , Owen jennings , Dorothy jennings , and William Haberley . Portsmouth Liberties , one Anthony Haberly hath , or may keep two taverns . 

At Gosport , near Portsmouth two , Arm Clerk , and William Towerson . 

At Hartford bridge , Thomas Bickton , or William Wild at the Swan . 

At Milbrooke , Margery Strood . 

Odiam is a pretty Market town , where sometimes David King of the Scots was kept prisoner , in King Eward the third's reign ; since when , the Kings of England have , and do , now , & then lodge there in a royal Mansion of their own : there was a fortress there in the reign of King john , of such strength , that thirteen Englishmen , did hold it fifteen days against Lewis the Dauphin of France , who assaulted it with a mighty army , yet could not win it from the said thirteen men Odiam hath one tavern , kept by Bridget Dickenson , or one Mistress Keys , at the George . 

Hampshire had at the suppression of Popery , of Abbeys , Nunneries , Priories , Fricries , Colleges , Hospitals 30.  This Shire hath 18 Market towns , Parishes 253.  It is divided into 40 hundred , or divisions , as Crundon , Acton , Selburne , Odiam , Eastmean , Sutton , Bartenstacy , Finchdeane , Portsdown , Tichfield , Mansbridge , Meanstock , Fawley , Hambledon , Budlegate , Redbridge , Kings , Sombourne , Andover within , Andover without , Hornwell , Bosmere , Fareham , Averstock and Gosport , Waltham , Eringer , 〈◊〉 , King's Clear , Thoragate , Overton , Basingstoake extra Holdshot , Christchurch , Newforre●… , Ringwood , Barmanspi●… , Forthingbridge , Buntsborough , Mainsborough , Chutefey , and Michael ●…ever . Number of Taverns in this County seventy three . 

Berkshire . 

Barkeshire is a rich and plentiful County , and a great help to her neighbour Provinces for Wood and Corn ; which necessary commodities are the cause that no other thing fitting for man's use is wanting in this County . 

Windsor is a dainty , fair , and spacious town , with a royal Castle , of such mag●…cent structure , and so scited and seated , that for prospect it is unparallelled , & deserves respect transcendent beyond all the princely fabrics in Great Britain . That victorious Mars of men , King Edw. 3. was born in Windsor , & he founded the said Castle . He held prisoners King john of France , and David K. o●… Scots : since which time the Castle was made more stately and conspicuous by King Edw. 4. and a Noble Knight Sir Reignold Bray was at great charge in the augmenting of it ; since when the famous and worthy memorable Queen Elizabeth , beautified it with the stone Gallery , or Walk towards the Thames . The Right honourable Order of the Garter was first instituted by K. Edw 3. at Bordeaux in France , but since that time it hath been continued at Windsor for that noble installation : and in the beautiful Chapel there , are all the Arms and Hatchments of that noble Fellowship , placed in their degrees . Also in this famous Castle was born that good and pious King Henry the 6 who founded Aeton College , and the worthy structure of King's College in Cambridge . Windsor hath these Taverns , the Crosskeyes , the George , the Garter , and the White Hart.  

Wantage is a place of great antiquity , long before the Norman Conquest there was a house for the king , for Aelfred the 23 king of the West Saxons was born there , who reigned , Anno 872 : there is or may be two Taverns kept by Edward Gallant at the sign of the Elephant . 

At Buscot one , Adam Kirby . 

At Twyford one , Henry Millward . 

At Enborne one , Anne Plantin . 

At Wareseile one , Thomas Garson . 

Abendun , Abbington , or Abinton , the name was first derived from a famous Abbey built there by Cissa , one of the Saxon Kings , which Abbey was thrown down by the Danes , and after raised again by king Edgar Anno 995. since which time it grew to that state and greatness , that scarce any Monastery in England could top it either for wealth or pomp ; but there remains little or nothing of it now but Ruins and Rubbish , as Relics of the greatness which once it had , from it the Town was called Abby-town , now changed into the name Abington ; it is a fair and sweet situation , famous for a rare Cross in the Market place , and for plenty of Malt made and sold there : It hath but one Tavern kept by one john Prince , who at his pleasure may keep three Taverns there if he william  

At Theale one , john Bowyer . 

At Winfield one , john Hawkins . 

At Binfield , Richard Williams . 

At Thackham , Robert Humphrey . 

At Farington two , Simon Turner , and Margaret Handy . 

At Okingham two , Will : Hunt , and Rich : Thorp . 

At Lamburne one , kept by one Daintree at the two necked Swan . 

At Hungerford one , Thomas Smith . 

Wallingford was a good town in the reign of K. Edward the Confessor . An. 1042.  It hath been a walled town , as appears by the ruins of it , with a strong Castle near the river of Thames , which is now almost defaced into fragments . King Stephen with all his force could not win it from the besieged Empress Maud ; In the reign of K. Edw. 3.  An 1334 this town was of such greatness that it had 12 Churches , which now are demolished and diminished to 1 , or scarce two ; ( such are the changes of transitory things ) it is a good Market town , and stands commodiously , having two Taverns under William Donnington and john Smith . 

Newberry is a rich town for the trade of clothing , it sprang out of the C●…nsumption of an old town , which is near it , called Spene , or Spinhamlands ; there are three Taverns , under john Greenoway , Thomas Howes , and Anthony Linch . 

Spinhamland hath two taverns under Richard Cox , and james Garroway . 

Maidenhead is so called , as some say , of a Maid's head that was cut off at Colleyne in Germany , which from thence was brought thither , and worshipped ; the people supposing it to be the Head of one of the 1100 Virgins ( or Maids ) that suff●…ed wi●…h Saint Ursula , how certain it is I know not , but this I know , that there are good Inns , lodging and entertainment , half of it being in the Parish of Bray , having these taverns : the Bear , the Greybound the Lion , the White hart , the Saracens head : It may be one too many . 

Reading is the prime and principal town in this County of Berkshire , for fair buildings , large streets for clothing and other blessings : King Henry the first , with his wife , & his daughter Maud the Empress , were buried there . Reading hath these Taverns , kept or allowed by john Domelaw , Elizabeth Foster , john Bagley , Richard Alexander , john Skot , and George Duel at the George . 

This Shire had at suppression of Monasteries , of Abbeys , Nunneries , Priories , Friaries , Colleges and Hospitals , 14.  It is divided into 20 devisions , or hundred ; namely , Hormer , Farington , Ganfield , Shrievenham , Kentbury , Oak , Braye , Wanting , Riplemore , Compton , Morton , Cookeham , Barnelth , I am born , Wargrove , Reading , Sunning , Theale , Charleton , and Fairecrosse . 

Berkshire hath also 11 good Market towns , 140 Parishes , and 40 Taverns . 

Surrey . 

Surrey , or Southrey , because it lies South from the River of Thames , it is a rich County , and if the inhabitants do not want thank fullness to God , there is nothing wanting ( either pleasant or profitable ) for the life and maintenance of men . 

Farnham is a fine Town in the Road betwixt London and Winchester , it hath a fair Castle in it , which was built by Henry Earl of Bloys , Brother to King Stephen ; it stands lofty on a Hill , seeming to overlook the Town , as it overtops it ; it was thrown down by King Henry the third , in the Baron's wars ; but the Bishops of Winchester ( who are the owners of it ) hath from time to time raised and repaired it to that goodly structure . The town hath 3 taverns inhabited or allowed under john Folder , Anne Whore , and Anne Martin . 

At Haselmere one , Robert Palmer . 

At Cobham , john Perior . 

At Godstone two , the Bell and the Greyhound . 

At Peckham one , the Greyhound . 

At Linyvill , Thomas Chapman . 

At Lederhead , or Leatherhead two , john Rogers , Thomas Clark.  

At By●…eet one , john Baily . 

At Mowlsey , Anthony Powell . 

Chertsey is a pretty little Market town near the Thames , where there is a decayed left handed Bridge over the River , I wish it mended , the people are for the most part very kind and honest . It hath or may have 2 taverns , Ellen Day , & john Stare . 

At Croyden 2 , the George and the Greyhound . 

Guildford is a good Market town where Kings have kept their Court as appears by an old decayed house there to this day . Also , there are the ruins of an ancient Castle to be seen near the Brook : This town hath very fair inns , and good entertainment , at the Taverns , the Angel , the Crown , the White hart and the Lyon.  

At Wimble●…on , the two Lions and Wheat-sheafe . 

At Godalming ( corruptly called Godlyman ) are two , under Henry Westbrooke and George Bridger . 

At Bagshot are two , the Bush , Scipio le Squire , or Mr. Anthill , and Robert Battin at the Lyon.  

At Barnes , Richard Hill at the Bear . 

Rygate is anciently famous for affronti●…g and repulsing the Danes near there in Holensedale , near which is a ruinated Castle , called Holme Castle ; the Taverns may be two , but William Pistor hath the command , the Hart.  

At Little Monlesey , Parnell Nightingale , White hart . 

At Riple , Anne Stanton at the Dog.  

At Stretham , William Lads at the Antelope . 

At Barm●… street one , julian Haberley . 

At Ca●…halton one , Marry Rutleage at the White Lyon.  

At Lambeth and Lambeth Marsh , the Falcon , the King's head , the White Lion , the Three Squirrel●… , the Three Tuns , the Vine . 

At Egham , the King's head , & Katherine wheel , by Elizabeth Clerk , and Margaret Guy . 

At Micham one , William Holland . 

At Tooting one , Elinor Serient . 

At Mortlake two , Miles Bourne at the Prince's Arms , and Phebe Tucker at the Maidenhead . 

At Waddon one , Christian Weller . 

At Camberwell , john Stratfield , and jane Webb . 

At Bleechingles , Anne Fince . 

At Waybridge , Kate Williams . 

Kinston , a very commodious and good well governed Town , an excellent Market ( especially for corn . ) In old time it had a fair Castle belonging to the Earls of Gloucester . Three Saxon Kings were crowned there on a Scaffold in the Market place , namely , Edwin , Athelstane , and Etheldred , in memory of which there are the figures of those Kings in the Church . Before those Kings were crowned there , the town was called Mereford , & ever since those Coronations , it hath been called Kingston , or the King's Town . Parliaments have been held there diverse times : It hath many good Inns , and these Taverns , the Castle , the Crane , the King's head , the Saracens head , and the Hand in hand . 

At Meistham , Reignold Durkin . 

At Battersea , Henry Norton , Anne Boswell , the Mermaid . At Darking , Toby Ridge , Edward Goodman , and john Comber . 

At Ewell two , Katherine Umbrevile , and Francis Kendal : but one may serve that town , and doth ( as I think ) which is the sign of the Popinjay . 

At Newington , the Bull , and the King's Arms . 

At Putney 2. the white Lion , & the red Lyon.  

At Wandsworth , Mary Gibson , sith Brown , and William Sherlock . 

At Cobham , the Lion , the George . 

The Golden Lion near old Paris Garden . 

At Rederhith three , the Mermaid , the Sun , and the Rose . 

Richmond , was called Sheen before K. Henry the 7. built the stately Palace there . I here was a goodly House near the said foundation in old time , for K. Edw. 3. died there : so likewise did Queen Anne the wife of K. Richard 2.  King Henry 5. built much there , which being burned by casual misfortune , K. Henry 7. built upon the old groundwork . In that Palace that now is , died the said Royal founder of it , King Henry , and after that there died his grandchild Queen Elizabeth , both unmatchable Princes for internal and external endowments . There are two Taverns , the Lion , and the Prince's Arms . 

This County of Surrey had at the suppression of Monasteries , Abbeys , Nunneries , Priories , Friaries , Colleges and Hospitals , 14.  It hath 8 Market towns , and it is divided into thirteen Hundred or Divisions , namely , Chertsey , Woking , Farnham Emley Bridge , Darking , Croyden , Kingston , Black-heath , and Wooton , Capthome , and Effingham Godalming , Tanridge , Reygate , Brixton and Wallington . It hath 140 Parishes , and of Taverns 71.  

Buckinghamshire . 

Bvckinghamshire is a rich and fat soil , and by the bounty of heaven plentifully replenishe●… with the fruits of the earth . 

Marlowe , was so named because it stands in Chaulkie or Marle ground : it is a good Market town and hath one Tavern under john Farmour . 

At Winslow , Nicholas Brinsall . 

At Chaffant , Robert Duck . 

At Burnham , john Phipp.  

At Oney , Lewis Ablestone . 

Brill is so ancient , that King Edward the confessor had a house in it , and sometimes kept hi●… Court there . It hath been formerly a Market town●… it is a place most fertile and fruitful , and hath brave , beautiful , and pleasant prospect . It hath on●… Tavern , the King's Arms , kept by Christophe●… Gregory . 

At Brickhill two , john Hutchinson , and jane Holmes . 

At Cheneis , john Barefoot . 

At Hanslap , Richard Perry . 

At Newport Pagnell two , john Prest●… , and Elizabeth White . 

At Slowgh two , the Crown , and the White Hart , john Checkley . 

At Fenny streetford , john Kims . 

At Ever , William Atkins . 

Alesbery ( as some say ) so called for brewing of most mighty Capitol Ale , as brown as a Berry ; it is a good Market town , and hath these taverns , and fignes , joseph Sexton , jeffrey Standley and Anne Goldsworth , the George , the King's head , and the Bush.  

At Amersham , john Cr●…ss , Edward Bayly , and Tobias Saunders . 

At Challey , Robert Paine . 

At Marsh Gibbon , Mary Robins . 

At Beconsfield , Richard Bentley , Sara Hails , the Bell.  

East Wickham , or high Wickham is a fair town , and a Mayor town , with these taverns , the Lion , the Nagshead , and the Katherine Wheel ; but Mr. George Wells' may ( if he pleas●… ) keep one more . 

At West-wickham , Marry Wells' . 

At Farnham Royal , William Baldwin . 

At Chessham , Daniel W●…st , and Eliz : Wolf . 

At Aeton two , Francis Dickinson , and Peter Wiggor ; the signs there , are the Christopher , and the Su●… . 

At Missenden two , William Harris , and Thomas Gardner . 

At Whit-church , William Theed . 

At●…vinghoe ●…vinghoe , Edward Anthony . 

At Wendover two , Richard Rowell , and Ralpb Hill , the Lyon.  

Stonystretford is so named for the place where it stands , and much of the Country near it is very stony ; there is a Tavern there , the sign of the Cock , Lloyde . 

At Amelford two , the Saracens head , the Bush.  

Colebrook is a great thoroughfare , and hath these taverns , the George , the Ostrich , the Katherine wheel Thomas Meal , Thomas Charley , john Child . 

At Prince Resborow , William Hastlegrove . 

Buckingham is the Provincial Town of this Shire , and hath these Taverns , the Cock and the Bush : Alexander Stotusbury , and Elizabeth Pollard . 

This County had at suppression of Monasteries , Abbeys , Nunneries , Priories , Friaries , Colleges and Hospitals 22.  It hath 8 divisions , or hundred , Assenden , Stock , Newport , Burnham , Buckingham , Disborough , Collstow , Alesbery . It hath 11 Market Towns , 185 Parishes , and 47 Taverns . 

Oxfordshire . 

Oxfordshire is scarce second to any County in England for plenty of Corn and Pasturage , Wood and Fruits of all sorts , that this kingdom yields . It is also excellently watered with fine sweet Rivers , as Ouse , or Isis , which some do c●…ll the Thames ; and the little River Cherwell also glides into it , so that this Shire is furnished in plenty with fresh River fi●…h of sundry kinds . 

Banbury is a goodly fair Market town , and ( as the learned Cambden ) it is famous for Cakes , Cheese and Zeal : it hath three saverns kept by Martin Wright , Elizabeth Collins , and Matthew Alsop . 

At Stoken Church , Augustine Belson , the sign the White Hart.  

At Nettlebed two , john White & joh. Crouch . the signs are the Bull , and the Lyon.  

At Watlington , Elizabeth Colebrook . 

At Bampton , Simon Turner . 

Burfourd is a good Market town , but beware of a Burfourd Bait , for it may breed the Staggers : there are 3 Taverns inhabited or allowed under Edmund Hening , Agnes Dalby , and Simon Hator . 

At Chippingnorton two , Christopher Deane , and Henry Cornish . 

At Witney , Tho. Brook at the King's Arms . 

Dorchester was a fair and goodly City 1000 years ago , for in anno 642.  Oswald King of Northumberland , was a Godfather to one Cingilse , a king of the West Saxons , which king was converted from Paganism to Christianity , and was then and there baptised in this town of Dorchester . The Cuines whereof that are near it , do show in part how far the ancient greatness extended , it is now but a little Town ; the River of Tame doth fall into Isis' hard by this Town : it hath one tavern , inhabited or allowed by Elizabeth Bernard . 

At Stratton Awdley there is one Tavern , under the licence of john Burlace Esquire . 

At Enstone , Richard Canning , and Mary Ayldworth . 

Thame is a good Market town , and is so named from the River of Tame or Thame that waters it ; it hath two Taverns , Thomas Ballow , and Richard Kendal , the signs are the red Lion , and the Swan . 

At Benson one , Edward Snelling . 

Woodstock house , or the King's Palace there was built by King Henry the 1. and the Park there was also by him enclosed . This house was after made a Palace of private pleasure by King Henry the second , where he enjoyed his fading contentment with the fair Rosamond Clifford : The town is a pretty Market town , and chiefly famous for the breeding of the worthy jeffrey Chancer , the most ancient Archpoet of England . Woodstock hath sometimes but one Tavern , and sometimes two , according to the pleasure of Mr. Tho : Rayer . 

At Tatsworth two , john Poyner , and Elizabeth Tanner . 

At Paddington two , Katherine Bennet , and Mary ●…ker . 

At Is●…p two , Edward Stoakley , William Bradley , King's head , Prince's Arms . 

At Wheatley two , john Smith , and Athaliah Robinson . 

Hendley or Henly is an excellent Market town , with these Taverns , the White hart and the Elephant . Also , there is a Tavern with a Bush only , at the Bowling Green without the Town in Ox ford way . Robert Heyborne , Richard Pinder , and john Stevens . 

Oxford . 

AS the glorious Beams of the resplendent Sun cannot be made more coruscant by the light of a silly Taper , and as a drop of rain augments not the boundless Ocean , so would any thing that should be spoken , or written by me in the praise of this famous University and City be most needless or impertinent . The vigour of Hercules could not be increased with the strength of a Pismire ; it is high presumption to show Apollo the grounds of Poetry , or to teach the Muses ( whose habitation is there ) and there is the inexhausible Magazine of all Arts , Learning , and good littrature ; therefore , with that little parcel of Latin which is translated out of Greek , and spoken by Apelles the famous Painter , Ne Suitor Vltra Crepidam , I will take leave of the University , and speak of the Taverns , which are five , Francis Harris , William Turner , Thomas Hallom , William Grice and Humphrey Budwit ; the signs are the Mermaid , the Swan , the other three are only Bushes . 

This Shire had at the suppression of the Romish Religion , of Monasteries , Abbeys , Nunneries , etc. 26.  This County is divided into 14 hundred or devisions ; namely , Langtree , Bloxham , Tame , Banburie , Wootton , Binfield , Ewelme , Pitton , Chadlington , Bampton , Bullington , Plowghley , Dorchester , and Lewknor . Also Oxfordshire hath 11 Market Towns , 208 Parishes , and 40 Wine Taverns . 

The total of all the Taverns in all the ten Shires and Counties aforesaid , are 686 , or thereabouts . 

FINIS . 

