THE LIFE OF FAITH . By SAMVEL WARD Preacher of Ipswich . 

The second Edition , corrected and amended . LONDON Printed by Augustine Mathewes , for john Marriot and john Grismand , and are to be sold at their Shops in Saint Dunston's Churchyard , and in Paul's Alley at the Sign of the Gun , 1621.  

TO THE HONOUR AND USE OF THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THOMAS EARL of Suffolk , Lord of Walden , Knight of the Honourable Order of the Garter , one of his Majesty's most Honourable Privy Counsel . 

This Manual , I first consecrate to your Honor. The greatest greatness hath no greater honour belonging to it , then to be an Abrech , to persons , Books , and causes of this nature . Such Cedars have their spreadth and talenesse to shelter such Fowls of the Heaven under their shadow : And Faith is content in this valley of unbelief to receive defence and countenance : where it rather giveth both . As Christ in that old Allegory of Christopher seems to be supported by him , whom in truth he supporteth . And verily such Books as have life in them give a longer life to their Patrons , than the stateliest Buildings and largest Monuments . 

Principally I dedicate , and Devote it to your use ; Charity began at home . I first meditated , collected , and scribbled them for mine own benefit , carried them about me with Antoninus his title 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Notes for myself . That which with all my might in seeking I have sought to attain , is the truth and effect of that which many things promise , but Faith is only able to perform . Fullness of joy and constancy of content in the midst of the changes , wane , eclipses , and fools of all external things , and that one day aswell as another throughout the course of a man's life in that latitude and extent whereof this life is capable . To cry out , I have found it , I have found it , might savour of vanity and arrogancy : Altogether to deny it were an injury to the truth of God's Spirit , Word , and Grace . Such as have found out Sailing by the Compass , the Art of Printing , or should one man discover a speedier passage to the indies , or meet with a special Cordial in Physic , or any less profitable secret , should he not justly be sensured as envious and injurious to let such an one die with himself . What a sacrilege were it then to engross such a true Elixir of Spiritual life , as upon some proof , I am sure these prescripts contain . The substance therefore of them , I imparted first ot my Flock in Sermons . Nextly , considering how much I stood obliged to your Lordship , and what special use you might have of them , I translated , and copied them out in the form wherein now I humbly commend , and earnestly recommend them to your serious perusal and thorough trial . If upon both , good shall be thought the better , the more communicated , others shall account themselves beholding to your Honour , as the principal occasion of publication . more I would say , but I fear to spoil the elegancy of Augustine his Preface to Romanian , by englishing of it : Wherein is the sum of what I would say . whither referring your Lordship , I rest , and continue as ever I have done since my reference without intermission , publicly , and privately to pray to the Lord of Lords that you may find all favour in the eyes of God and man , and that all true happiness may be multiplied upon you , and yours in this life , and a better . 

Your Lordships in the Lord SAMVEL WARD . 

The Contents of this BOOK . 

The Justice shall live by his Faith.  Page . 1 
Christ the Fountain , and Faith the mean of Life . 6 
The third kind of the Life of Faith.  page 12 
The use of Faith. 16 
The first use of Faith ot newborn Babes , 24 
The use of Faith to young men in Christianity . 34 
An enforcement of the former use , with a reproof of the neglect and disuse of Faith.  43 
The use of Faith to a grown Christian . 51 
An objection answered , and passage made to the life of Sanctification . 60 
How Faith Sanctifies and Mortifies . 67 
How Faith Vivifies . 78 
How Faith upholds life in Affliction . 86 
An Epistle to the Reader pressing the use of Faith.  100 
THE LIFE OF FAITH . 

CHAP. I The Justice shall live by his Faith.  

THE basest life excels the best mere being , as much as Adam , the red lump of earth whereof he was made . The living Dog , the dead Lyon. Between life and life what a breadth of difference is there ? from the Mushroom to the Angels how many kinds of life ? Yea , in one and the same kind how many degrees ? The bondslave hath a life as well as the King , the sick man as the whole ; but such , as in comparison may rather be termed a death . One best there is in every kind as it approacheth nearest to that Fountain of Life and Being , with whom to be , and to be most happy is all one . Poor Man hath , or rather had a certain pitch and period of happy life , consisting in the Image and favour of his Creator , from which having once fallen , it would pity one to see how lamely and blindly he reaspires thereunto . The most part groping as the Sodomites after Lot's door , the blind misguiding the blind in the common Labyrinth of error ; each one imagining he hath found the way , and so tells his dream to his neighbour for a truth . The Covetous when he hath gotté goods , as if he had gotten the true Good , applauds his soul , as if it were the soul of some Swine , Soul thou hast many goods , now , etc.  The Voluptuous when he hath satiate himself with the husk of pleasure , cries out he hath lived the only royal and jovial life . The Ambitious when he hath climbed the pitch and slippery hill of Honour , builds his nest in the stars , thinks himself in the sky and highest sphere of happiness . Alas , alas , do not all these know they are in the Chambers of death ? Dead whilst they are alive , no better than walking ghosts in the shapes of living men : seeking and placing a spiritual and heavenly jewel , in earthly pelf , in watery Pleasures , in airy Honours , which being all dead , cannot afford that life which they have not themselves . Verily , if one live an hundreth years , beget children , plant and build , and see no other good but such as these , the untimely birth is better than he . What then ? Is this tree of life not to be recovered , no where to be found again , yes doubtless , though there be many bypaths , there is a Way ; though many errors , there is a Truth ; though many deaths , there is a Life . And behold , o man that standest upon the ways , enquiring after life . He that is the Way , Truth and Life that came from heaven to vanquish death , and by his death hath brought thee to life again , who only hath the words of life , He hath showed thee the true way to life . Hath he not twice or thrice showed thee in this lively Oracle of his , The Justice shall live by Faith. Yea , but if a man like to ourselves might come from the dead that hath made proof of this way and life , and would speak of his own experience : would we hear ? Behold Paul , slain by the Law , revived by the Gospel , what do we think of him ? Did he not from the time of his conversion to the time of his dissolution , enjoy a constant tenor of joy ; live , if ever any , comfortably , happily : And doth not he tell us , even while he lived in the flesh , that he lived by the Faith of our Lord jesus Christ. Surely he must needs be blessed that lives by the same faith with Bloffed Paul Come therefore , you which desire to see good days and lay hold on the ways of life . Believe and live . 

CHAP. II Christ the Fountain , and Faith the mean of Life . 

What then ? Commit we sacrilege against Christ in deifying of Faith ? Rob we the Lord to adorn the servant with his divine honours ? God forbid . Let that be given to Christ which is Christ's , and that to Faith which is Faiths . Let the power of life and death be entirely reserved ever ascribed to the Lord of life , the well of life , the light and life of the World , the breath of our nostrils , the life of our lives . Thy body , o man ! hath it soul which enlives it , and so hath thy soul its soul whereby it lives , and that is Christ the quickening spirit . Take away the soul from the body , and earth becomes earth ; sever Christ and the soul , what is it but a dead carrion ? Elementary bodies lighten and darken , cool and warm , die and revive as the Sun presents or absents itself from them , Christ is to our souls the Sun of righteousness : Sin parts us ; Faith reunites us : And so we live primarily and properly by Christ as by the soul : by Faith , secondarily , as by the spirits , the bond of soul and body : by a personal and special faith appropriating Christ to the believer , as the leg or arm lives by proper sinews , arteries and nerves , uniting it to the liver , heart and head , such an one as Paul had in Christ that died for him , whereby he engrosseth the common God to himself , as if his and no bodies else . 

Thus saith he himself that is the Truth and the Life , I am the Life and Resurrection of the World , he that believeth in me , though he be dead , yet shall he live and not die . And this is the testimony of those three heavenly and earthly witnesses . God gave life to the Son , And he that hath the Son hath Life . And he that hath Faith hath the Son. So that whatever we lend to Faith , it redoundes to the honour of Christ ; neither have we any sinister intent to praise the womb or the paps of Faith , but to cast all upon Christ who gives and works this Faith in us , vivisies and nourishes it , yea justifies the imperfection thereof by the perfection of his merit . Nay , let Faith know that if she should wax arrogant towards her Lord , or insolent over her fellow servants , she should Lucifer-like fall from her dignity , and in so doing , of the best of graces , become the worst of vices . Verily , what hath the habit of Faith in itself considered better or equal with love ? Is it not a poorer and meaner Act to believe then to love : more like a beggarly receiving , than a working and deserving hand ? Hail then o Faith freely graced , graciously exalted above all Christ's Handmaids . Thy Lord hath looked upon thy mean estate , because that having nothing of thine own , as other Virtues have , whence thou mightest take occasion to rejoice , thou mightest the better exclude that hateful Law of boasting , the more humbly and frankly reflect all upon thy Lord : who willingly emptied himself that he might fill thee with honour , whiles he says to the cured of the Palsy Go thy way thy Faith hath saved thee . Hence forth calls he thee no more servant or friend , but styles thee as Adam his Spouse , Chavah , the Mother of all Living : Count's it no injury to divide his praises with thee , likes it well that thou which dost nothing but by him , shouldst be said to do all things which he doth : To purify the heart , to over come the world , to save men , etc.  And è contra , he to do nothing without thee , which yet does all of himself . He could work no Miracles in Capernaum because they had no Faith. So glorious and wonderful things are spoken of thee : ( I had almost said ) so omnipotent is thy strength which hast said to the Sun and Moon , Stand ye still ; yea if but as big as the least grain , canst say to the greatest Mountains , Remove . What can God do which Faith cannot do if requisite to be done ? Questionless , justifying Faith is not beneath miraculous in the sphere of it own activity , and where it hath the warrant of God's Word . it 's not a lesser power than these , to say , Thy Sins are forgiven thee , thy person is accepted of God , whatever thou askest thou shalt have , etc.  wherefore we need not doubt under Christ without fear of Praemunire , or offence to his Crown and Dignity , to affirm of Faith , That it is God's arm and power to the enliving and saving of every believer , as it is written , The Justice shall live by Faith.  

CHAP. III The third kind of the Life of Faith.  

But lest we seem to speak swelling things , whiles we soar in the Cloud of generalities , let us descend to some solid particulars . Three things there are whence cometh Death to the Soul of Man , Sin with the guilt thereof gives the first deadly blow , exposing it to the wrath of God who is a Consuming fire , whose anger is the messenger of Death , whence came the first Thunderbolt striking through the Soul , that sentence of God to Adam , thou shalt die ; And such as Nathans to David , thou hast sinned and art the child of Death . 

The second , is the spott and corruption of sin depraving , yea , deading all the faculties of man to spiritual actions , which made Paul cry out , That which I would do , I do not ; And wretched man that I am , who shall deliver me from this body of Death . 

Thirdly , that swarm of plagues and army of punishments , in the rearward whereof comes first a second death . All which made job cry out , Why is light given to him that is in misery , and life unto the bitter in soul ? which long for death more than for treasures ; and joy when they can find the grave . 

Were it not for these three , man might live , fare , and do well , but sin having entered into the World , brought in Death with it , which reigneth and triumpheth over the sons of Adam with this threeforked Sceptre , of Gild , of Corruption , of Punishment . 

Here comes in Faith with a three fouled Antidote , brings us to the Tree of Life , whose fruit and whose leaves heal us of the sting and deadly poison of Sin : working in us a threefold life opposite to the forenamed deaths . 

The first is the life of righteousness , discharging us from the sentence of death , restoring the light of God's countenance appeased in Christ our surty : which made David cry out , Blessed is the man whose sin is covered . 

The second is the life of the Spirit , or new life , regenerating & reviuing every faculty , & quickening us to every good work ; which makes Paul glory , that he is able to do all things through Christ enabling him . 

The third , is the life of joy and comfort , cheering the soul in the midst of all trials and tribulations ; which made job in the valley of death exult and trust in his living Redeemer , and Paul insult over all kind of Calamities as more than Conqueror , romans 8.  

In these three , being contained whatever accomplisheth the life of the soul : may not Faith well be said to supply abundantly all things pertaining to life and godliness ? But what do I treating of the kinds of life ? what should I blot paper and tire my Reader in writing of the kinds of Faith , the degrees of Faith , or any other motions of Faith : things so well known of those that know any thing of Christ ? That nothing so much vexeth me to see so much spoken and written of faith , so little done by it , the Theory of it so thoroughly canuased and cleared in Controversies and Sermons , and the practice of it so obscured and disgraced in the lives of Christians . 

CHAP. FOUR The use of Faith.  

O Faith when I read of thee , when I meditate of thee , when I feel any part of thy virtue , I find thee to be a wonder-worker , I conceive nothing but high and stately things of thee . When I look into the World and upon the lives even of such as call themselves believers especially of the common sort , I begin to question my thoughts for dreams , and to say ; Faith , thou art but a name , a sound , a mere word , no powerful thing . Why are many of thy followers so dead , so mopish , so melancholy ? why are worldly men as merry , as jocund as they ? Yea , why are many civil men as righteous as they ? whence should this wrong and disparagement proceed ? Is thy Virtue exhausted , thy strength decayed in this old age of the World ? or is it because men know thee not ? verily neither of these . no drug , no herb so commonly extolled , so famously known . 

Paul of old , Luther of late , with infinite more , every Catechism have blazoned the name , described the nature , set out the properties and effects to the full . Only the misery is , the World either knows not the use , or forgets the practice of it . There wants a practical Luther which should deal by Faith , as Socrates by Philosophy , who brought it out of the Skies and Books into Cities and Houses , taught and urged the familiar and quotidian use of it . 

Doth not all the praise , beauty , and lustre of Faith , as well ; or more than of other virtues consist in action and not in motion ? Is not the gain and benefit of it in sense and feeling , not in knowledge or discourse ? Is not the throne and seat of it rather in the heart then in the head ? Who knows not there is a Doctrinal speculation and discourse of Faith easily by reading and hearing attained , such in one as Scholars , that never went out of their Studies and schools have , of remote Countries , of their commodious situation , pleasant rivers , high mountains , costly buildings , rich mines , jewels , and all other commodities : which , what a frigid and ieiune contemplation is it , in comparison of that delight and benefit which the Merchant and Traviler enjoyeth by a real sight and fruition of them ? What is the notionall sweetness of honey or sugar to the experimental taste of them ? And yet this Airy , windy stuff is all , the World at this day cares for and hunt's after . The Schoolmen and Casuists , what do they but languish into useless , needless , and endless questions , spending their thoughts about this magnificent virtue in cold and bloodless subtleties of the subject , object , kinds , etc.  

Preachers for the most part inuring themselves to declaim in praise of some moral virtue , and to inveigh against some vice of the times , happily sometimes find leisure to weave a curious spider's web in commendation of Faith , rarely showing or pressing the life , and use of it . 

In a word , will you see the fashion of the World. The Schools disputes of it , the Pulpit Preacheth of it , Profession talks of it , profane men swear by it , two or three , few or none live by it . I met with a story of an ancient Hebrew , a reverend Rabbi , who that he might the more lively convince the people in his times of their neglect of practice of this excellent Grace , put himself into the habit of a Mountebank or travelling Aqua-vitae-man , and made Proclamation of a sovereign cordial Water of Life he had to sell : being called in and demanded the show of it ; Turned them to the Bible , the Fountain of Life , and to several places of it , as the thirty four Psalm , etc. intimating , that if they would make use and daily drink of the water they had , they might ( as it should seem he did ) live far better , and more comfortably then usually they did . 

And indeed , why is there such a price put into the hands of fools that know not the worth and improvement of it ? As secrets and mysteries in good Artisens' , that have sometimes a faculty whereby they can earn ten or twenty shillings the day , and might live as well as landed men ; but then they have another boon withal , they love idleness , pastime and good fellowship , and so live like beggars : or as land and money in the hands of those ( whom we therefore aptly call misers ) to Have and to Hold , but never make good use of it : Who may well be said to use the World , as if they used it not , for they put it forth to use , or lock it from themselves and others ; go basely , fare hardly , live in debt to back and belly , as if they knew not it would buy them good meat and good clothes , and other necessaries and conveniences for their lives . It is possible a man may have a tool , a medicine , or an engine , and not have the skill or strength to use it . It is possible a man may have a gift of God , and not the gift to use it thoroughly , else needed not Paul call on Timothy to stir up the gift that was in him . Among all the gifts of God there is none more useful than Faith : others are profitable for some few things , this is for this life and the life to come , for all parts and purposes of our lives , in the use of it manifold and rich every manner of way . 

CHAP. v. The first use of Faith to newborn Babes . 

AND first , let me begin with thee that art beginning to live this life , thou Embryo that art in hatching , that hast so much life , as to know thyself dead in sin , and to desire to live in Christ , ( for what should I cast away speech upon scelets and skulls , carnal men I mean mere Strangers to this life of Faith , I expect not reading should put life and spirit into them , only I pray for such that they may hear God's voice in the Ministry , and live : ) but as for thee whom the Law hath wounded , and the Gospel is healing , who art even at the birth , and stickest between the knees , only wantest power to come into the light ; who livest but feelest not thy life , holdest Christ but with benumbed hands ; believest , but canst not yet believe thou hast Faith : What is the matter thou art still ensnarled in the cords of death ? Why losest thou not thy handkerchiefs and comest out of thy Grave , and walkest cheerfully in the Land of the living ? Suffer Faith to do her perfect work in thee , to form Christ in thee , suffer not thyself always to be detained in the throws and throbs of fear and doubt . 

The Common causes of this slowness of belief and snares of Death , I observe in most to be one of these three . 

First , Immoderate aggravation of sin . 
Secondly , Foolish and proud humility . 
Thirdly , Preposterous desire of Sanctification before justification . 
First , thou wouldst believe , but thou hast been a sinner . Whom came Christ to save but sinners ? And whom doth he justify but the ungodly ? Oh! but thy sins are Scarlet , crying , scandalous sins . Said I not all things are possible to Faith , only if thou canst believe . Are not all faults easily pardonable to an infinite mercy , which exceeds Man's , as Heaven doth Earth ; which can redilier forgive sevenfie , than Man seven offences . Well did Mar●●●ss answer the Devil , himself objecting his former life to him , that even his might be pardoned if he could believe . Did not Christ take the flesh of Rahab and Bathsheba , and did he refuse to take their sins upon him ? Did not his blood wash David's bloody sin as white as snow ? Doth not he delight to forgive much , that he may bind to love much ? Shall not his favour abound to the sense of thy Faith , where sin hath abounded to the wounding of thy heart ? But thou art an old habituate sinner . As if Christ came from Heaven to cure only small fearres , green cuts , and not deep invetorate wounds , diseases of eight , of twelve , of eight and thirty years old : to cast out single Devils , and not Legions also ? O then take heed thou add not to thy great and many sins , a greater than all : Cains sin , which was greater in infidelity then in fratricide . All thy help is to look of thyself an object of confusion , and to look upon Christ an object of consolation : And then how fiery and deadly so ever thy sting be , by mere looking ( a strange cure I confess , yet most approved ) that is , by sole believing thou shalt be cured and live . 

Secondly , But forsooth thou wilt be more mannerly than so with Peter thou wilt not suffer Christ's precious hands to wash thy foul feet . Take heed thy modesty turn not into pertinacy , lest he swear in his anger thou shalt have no part in him , if thou stubbornly refuse his gracious offer : he liked well the humility of that Cananitish that bore the term of dog , but better her confidence , that would not be said nay of the crumbs of his table . And shalt thou not ten times , more honour him and please him , in trusting his mercy and sealing to his truth , then in fearing his justice and dreading his power ? Take heed of pride in the clothes of humility . Be not deceived , It is pride and high pride , not to come when thou art called . Faith is obedience , and obedience is more acceptable than courtesy & compliment . The sooner thou comest the better welcome . It is rudeness and not good manners not to do as thou art bidden to do , yea , so often and earnestly charged to do . To do the work of God is to believe in him whom he hath fealed and sent to be thy Saviour . 

Thirdly , Oh! but thou wouldst fain first repent , amend and do some good works , and then thou wouldst be bold to come . That is , thou thinkest thou shalt not be welcome unless thou come with thy cost . thou wouldst accept of a pardon if thou mightst pay for it : but his are free , and he bids thee come and buy without silver , or else he says , thou and thy money perish . thou wouldst go the old and natural way to work . What shall I do to inherit everlasting life , but that is now farre-done and impassable through our infirmity : Besides , before thou canst walk or work , thou must be alive . Did Christ indent with Zacheus for Restitution and alms ? or Paul bid the jailor first repent , become a new man , and then believe ? no they knew that the one would voluntarily , necessarily , together , & immediately follow or rather accompany the other . wherefore swim out of these weeds , lay hold on the Rock , and to facilitate thy birth by the Act of believing , set before thy eyes Christ's freedom to all suitors in the time of his flesh , repelling none that truly desired the price of his blood : And especially , Gods esteem of Faith above all other Graces , Deeds , or Acts of thine . 

Study , strive , endeavour to believe , as thou dost in a difficult point to conceive . Pray for a faculty and for the act of believing . Be not ever believing , and never a believer ; ever beginning to live , and never living . Live to day , to day is Salvation offered , step from death to life , and write this day thy birth day , and number from hence the days of thy life , in which of a Child of perdition , thou are made the son of GOD through Faith , and so made forever . Dost thou believe this with thy whole heart ? Drive on the Chariot of thy life with joy and rejoicing till thou come to the mark . 

But what sign shall I have of the truth of my Faith ? May it not be presumption if without repentance and sanctity ? How shall I be sure it is not that vain and dead Faith Saint james speaketh of ? 

At the first , it shall suffice to find and feel a change of the mind , an unfeigned purpose , desire , and resolution of new universal obedience , which is contemporary with Faith , though the younger and a second brother in order of Nature : which where it is , sufficeth to warrant Faith , and to embolden the confidence in the first act of conversion . Zacheus , the jailor , and all new Converts had not any more , could have no experience of amendment of life , and yet relied upon the word Believe , and thou shalt be saved . 

CHAP. VI The use of Faith to young men in Christianity . 

PUT off now thy sackcloth and ashes , put on the garments of joy and gladness . Let not white raiment be wanting , nor oil to thy head . Live I say , live to day , live to morrow , live o Christian for ever . Not for one or a few days , But all the days of thy life . 

This thou mayst do , if thou wilt learn to use thy Faith , not as men use Wedding apparel , for a week or two after Marriage , and then lay it up for high and solemn days only . This indeed is the fashion of believers at their first conversion : being justified , to have peace and joy in believing the remission of their sins , and for a while to be glad of their estate ; but then to neglect and determinate the use of Faith , as if it had now done all it should or could do : except till they relapse again into some foul sin , then to recover life again , using it as Whisky and strong Waters for 'swounds and heart qualms only , not being acquainted with a daily and quotidian improvement of it : which ought to be as constant and continuate as is the use of Fire and Water , of Salt , of Bread , or Wine , or whatever is more ordinary and necessary than other : such as no part of our lives may well be without . Serves Faith for entrance and beginnings , and not for proceedings and encreasing . Are we not nourished by the same Elements of which we consist ? 

Is Faith the Midwife and breeder of joy and peace , and not the Nurse and Foster-mother of them . Cherishing and feeding thee till thou come to a full and perfect age in Christ ? Is not the fruit of it sweeter in the ear then in the blade ? 

Harken therefore to me , o thou of little Faith , and less use of it . Dost thou desire to have a continual feast , to rejoice always in the Lord ? I know thou desirest it with all thy soul . 

Let me prescribe a Diet , a daily diet without omission , strictly to be kept , ( The Lord give thee and me grace to observe it ) Look how duly thou refreshest thy bodily spirits by use of repast , or recreations ; so often at the least be sure to cheer up thy Soul by the use of thy Faith.  

Let thy soul have two or three walks a day up to Mount Tabor , that is , into some retired place of Meditation and Prayer , such as Isaaks Field , Gornelius his Leaded , David's Closet , etc.  

But what is there to be done ? I answer , Still make use of thy Faith.  

But what is that you call using of Faith ? I now come to the point , to the chief mystery of Spiritual life . Shore up thy soul in this Mount to converse with Christ. Look what promises and privileges thou dost habitually believe , now actually think of them , roll them under thy tongue , Chew on them till thou feel some sweetness in the palate of thy soul . View them ioyusly , severally : Sometimes muse of one , sometimes of another more deeply , and lest ( as Patients oft do in Physicians' Bills ) thou still complain of obscurity : thus do , think with thyself how excellent a thing it is to have all thy debts canceled , how sweet a thing to have God appeased , how glorious a thing to be the son of God , how happy and safe a condition for thee to be sure thy perseverance and salvation , how pleasant a state to be ●●●●● of the fiere of death 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , how 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 of glory . 

Feastmakers in ancient time had special officers that cheered up their guests , they thought it not enough to set store of meat before them , but one must come in and say , Fall too and be merry , Let us eat and drink , It is a good time , etc.  

Thus say thou to thyself , as Paul to the Corinth's ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) Let us feast and be merry . Christ hath made us Holidays , our Paschall Lamb is slain , Have any more cause to be merry ? With these Soliloquies mingle some Ejaculations to heaven , for grace and aid : And leave not , descend not this Mount till thou findest and feelest thy soul in some cheerly plight , revived and warmed with these spiritual Flagons of Wine , in the strength whereof thou mayest walk all the day following . 

This is that which the Sp●●se calls , Walking into the Gardens and eating of the fruits , etc. which in plain terms , I call , using of Faith , and living by Faith. Which if thou wilt duly enure thyself unto , thou wilt not marvel why I called it , Ascending Mount Tabor : thou wilt say thyself , upon good proof , It is good to be here , daily to be here , often to come hither . This is that exercise of Faith , which paul enjoins Timothy , and calls stirring up , or in kindling . 

Fire in the Emberss unstirred , glows not , heats not the house ; Sugar in the cup unstirred sweetens not the Wine . And in such it is all one not to have Faith , and not to use it . It may well be said of Money-hoorders , they have no quicksilver , no currant money , they have no more that which they have , then that which they have not . And so of such believers as do not thus use their Faith , they have no lively Faith , They were almost ( for matter of feeling , and for present benefit and comfort ) be without Faith. A man is little the better for a sleeping habit . It is a rare portion , saith Solomon , and that which GOD gives only to such as are good in his eyes , to make use of wealth , to eat , drink , and be merry : it is a much rarer to use Faith. What is a man the better for a Lock if he have not the Key to use it withal ? It is not a Trade , but a Trade well followed . It is not Land , but Land well tilled that maintains men . 

O that this did as clearly appear to the world in the matter of Faith , as it doth in all other habits , graces , gifts , virtues and good things whatsoever , that the principal beauty and benefit of them consists in use , fruition and action , not the bare profession , yea the very increase and perfection of them . Use limbs and have limbs , the more thou dost , the more thou mayest . The oftener the liberal man gives Alms and does good turns , the more his liberality grows , and shines . Use will breed perfectness , and through disuse things perish , and come to nothing ; as the Plowsheare laid up , rusts and consumes ; employed , glisters , doth good and lasts the longer . Let any man diligently and thoroughly improve , and great will be his faith and great the joy it will bring in . 

CHAP. VII . An enforcement of the former use , with a reproof of the neglect and disuse of Faith.  

Wherefore I say again , Live by Faith , again I say , always live by it , rejoice always through Faith in the Lord I dare boldly say , It is thy fault and neglect of this exercise , if thou suffer either thy own melancholy humour , or Satan to interrupt thy mirth and spiritual alacrity , and to detain thee in dumps and pensivenesse at any time . What if thou be'st of a sad constitution , of a dark complexion ? Is not Faith able to rectify nature ? is it not stronger than any ellebore . Doth not an experienced both Divine and Physician worthily prefer one dram of it before all the Drugs in the Apothecary's shop for this effect ? Hath it not sovereign virtue in it to excerebrate all cares , expectorate all fears and griefs , evacuate the mind of all ill thoughts and passions , to exhilerate the whose man ? But what good doth it any to have a Cordial by him , if he use it not ? to wear a sword soldier like by the side , and not to draw it forth upon an assault ? when a dump over-takes thee , if thou wouldst say to thy soul in a word or two ; Soul , why art thou disquieted ? know and consider in whom thou believest ? would it not presently return to it rest again ? would not the Master rebuke the Winds and Storms and calm thy mind presently ? Hath not every man something or other wherewithal he useth to put away dumps to drive away the ill spirit as David with his Harp : some with merry company , some with a cup of sack , most with a pipe of Tobacco , without which they scarce ride or go , if they miss it a day together , they are troubled with rheums , dulness of spirits , they that live in Fens and ill airs , dare not stir out without a morning draught of some strong liquor . Poor silly smoky helps , in comparison of the least taste , ( but for dishonouring of Faith , I would say ) whiff , or draught of Faith.  

Oh! that wise Christians would as often take the one , as idle Gulls do the other ? would not the drawing in of sweet air from the precious promises breed excellent blood and cheerly spirits ; It is a mystery in bodily health that to keep the arteries and the nostrils , veins , and other passages to the head , heart , and liver , clear and free from colds and obstructions , maintains a healthful and cheerful temper . The Pipe of Faith is the same to the soul . He that is Asthmatical , narrow breathed or strait breasted in his Faith , cannot be but lumpish and melancholy . wherefore as thou lovest thy mirth above all other , tend this vital artery above all keep , keep thy Faith and it will keep thy joy : It will keep it an even everflowing current , without ebb and flow , clouds and eclipses , turning ever upon the hinges of heavenly and solid mirth . And indeed , how or why should it be otherwise ? Do not Christians consider how unseemly it is for them , to go drooping , hanging the head ? Is any so simple to think because he is a Christian that he should affect a sad carriage , a dejected look , a demure countenance like an image ? Away with such Monkish hypocrisy . How doth it become the Righteous to rejoice ? Do they not consider how they wrong themselves of the main benefit of their justification ? what is a Christian but his mirth ? wherein doth the kingdom of Heaven consist but in joy ? Do they not see how they offend standers by and beholders ? Is not heaviness a check that drives away and mirth as a lure that wins to the liking of their profession ? Men wonder to see a rich man that hath the world at will , all things at hearts desire , to be but in a fit of heaviness . What , say they , should he ail ? The Irish ask such , what they mean to die ? but I wonder a thousand times more to see one that hath Christ to friend , that believes God to be his shepherd , that knows all must work for the best , to be at any time out of tune or out of sorts . For a N●abal to be all a mort like a stone , it is no news to me ; but to see Nehemiahs' countenance changed , there must needs be some extraordinary cause : should such a man as he fear , or cark , or grieve ? What if it do not yet appear what thou shalt be ? Is a young Ward prouder and gladder ( in his minority ) of an uncertain reversion , than a yeoman of his present estate ? And is not Faith an Hypostasis and evidence to thee of an infallible inheritance ? Canst thou be sad , which mayest say , not to thy belly , but to thy soul , thou hast , not many goods , but fullness of all treasures , laid up , not in the earth , where moth and canker and thieves may come , but in heavenly places , out of the Devil's reach , and that not for many years , but for ever and ever , never to be taken from thy soul , nor thy soul from them . O thou vain man ! show me thy Faith by thy joy : if thou livest dumpishly , and yet say thou livest by Faith , I will as soon believe thee as him , that shall say he hath the Philosophers stone , and lives like a beggar , If it were ever well with thy Faith , could it ever be amiss with thee : should not the temper of thy body follow the temper of thy soul , and the temper of thy soul , the temper of thy Faith ? The body may incline thy soul , but the soul commands the body , and Faith is the Lord of them both . According to thy Faith , so be it unto thee , so will it be with thee . Use thy Faith and have joy : increase thy Faith , increase thy joy . 

CHAP. VIII . The use of Faith to a grown Christian.  

Nay Christian , now I have gotten thee hither , I must draw thee yet a peg higher , and tell thee , it is a small thing for thee to come to an ordinary pitch of cheerfulness , except thy joys exceeds the mirth of a worldling , yea of a professed Epicure in the quality and quantity of it . If thy mirth be not a sweeter and more ravishing mirth of an higher kind , of a more pure defecate nature , of a more constant tenure , than any Carnal man what ever , thou disparagest Faith , thou art very little and young in the Kingdom of Heaven , which consists not in meats and drinks , but in joy unspeakable and glorious , in the joy of the Holy Ghost . And must not that needs be another manner of joy then ever entered into the heart of a natural man , than ever a Sardanapalus tasted of ? Yes undoubtedly . So must be construed that text , 1.  Cor. 2. not of the joys of Heaven , which here the spiritual man himself cannot tell what they shall be , but of the Gospel's joy , of the Wine and Fatlings already prepared and now revealed to the believer by the Spirit : which if the carnal man scorn and scoff at , thou canst no more help him or prove to him , than a seeing man to a blind man that he sees orient rich colours . It is enough for thee to secretly feel and enjoy it . Only it ought in thy life so to be expressed ; yea , so to shine in thy forehead , so to be read in the very face of thee , that their teeth may be set on edge , and that they may inquire , what is thy beloved above other beloveds ? what is that makes this man thus merry in all estates ? Thus let them envy at thine , let not thy soul descend to theirs . 

Are not the glean of Ephraim better than the vintage of Abiezer ? Shouldst thou that hast tasted of the grapes of Canaan , long after the Onions and Garlic of Egypt ? Is Pharphar like unto jordan ? hast not thou Rivers of water ever flowing out of thy belly ? and wilt thou stoop to their puddle waters , to their stolen waters , blousing , carding , dicing , whoring , etc. which should not thy soul altogether loath and abhor , after the taste of Faith's Nectar and Ambrosia . But even their ordinary and lawful delights , the wine and oil , music , hunting , hawking etc. to these God allows thee to stoop for thy body's sake , as the Eagle to the prey , or as Gideous soldiers to soup thy handful , not to swill thy belly full . If Plato could tell the Musicians , that Philosophers could dine and sup without them , How much more easy is it for Saint Augustine to wean himself from the childish rattles and may games of carnal delights , to be merry without the Fiddle . Good leave hast thou , yea , right and title to use all external recreations , whereof before thou wert but an usurper , but use them aright as if thou usedst them not , knowing how to put thy knife to thy throat , and how to be without them : to be as one that lives not by them but by Faith.  

Were it not odious to see a man that hath a spouse peerless for beauty , to live with a deformed blouse ? to see one professing some liberal Science , to live by some base manual trade ? no better fight is it to see a Christian upholding his joy by course and earthly pleasures , that hath more noble and generous , yea , Angelical delights ; than which , what hath heaven better but in degree only , and manner of fruition ? what hath this world comparable ? Alas poor Philosophers , when I read your Treatises of Tranquillity of mind , of consolation , of remedies against both Fortunes , though in some things you come near the kingdom of Heaven , yet how dull are your comforts to one of ours ? the highest of yours to the lowest of ours ? Had you but through a crevice or Lettuce seen the things which the eye of Faith seeth with open face , how would you in comparison of Christianisme have loathed your Stoicism and Epicurism ? Had you but with the tip of your tongue , tasted of Faith's dainties , how would you have magnified Faith above all your Cardinal virtues ? you that so composed your lives by ieiune and empty contemplations of an autarky in virtue by the rules of nature ; what stately lives would you have led and lived , if the grace and hopes of the Gospel had appeared to you by the rules of Faith ? As for you Poets of the lighter and pleasanter vein , when I read your odes and sonnets , chanting out your choice joys and loves , your wishes and vows , framing a conceited happiness to yourselves , as the highest you could imagine or desire : what low strains and mean air do I reckon them , in comparison , of our Christian and divine hymns ? what pitiful subjects for such sublimated wits ? what difference between your oaten pipes and our heavenly harps ? Solomon that loved both these loves , lived both lives , and sung songs of both sorts , when God raised his muse to an higher tune , and taught it to sing the song of songs , how despised he his former windy vanities in comparison of his new spiritual delicacies . wherefore , OH Christian , that hast such transcendent objects of thy thoughts above all other men , why shouldst thou not ever keep thy soul upon the wing , ever in a manner be in the third heavens , rolling and tumbling thy soul in these beds of roses : I mean these meditations of thy justification , sanctification and salvation through Christ , without which , why should one day pass thee ? why any one part of a day ? why should not thy soul have her due drinks , breakfasts , meals undermeales , bevers , and after-meals , as well as thy body ? Thus to redeem time , thus to task and tie thy soul to such heavenly round of work , would it not make the Mill of time pleasant , the yoke of business easy ? would not precious time glide swiftly and easily away like a boat with full wind and tide needing no oars ; or a free metaled horse needing no spurs , needing no idle pastime to drive it before thee ? shall it not be a pleasure to thee to want other pleasures ? Thus mayest thou make all thy day's Christ-tides , Easters , Whitsundays , Birthdays , and Holidays : not envying Foelix his felicity , Festus his festivitie , nor Dives his daily purple and delicious fare : but living a life kingly and Angelical , in comparison of the vulgar sort . 

CHAP. IX . An objection answered , and passage made to the life of Sanctification . 

Happily thou repliest , all this were possible and easy , were it not for that even amidst this diligent practice of Faith , even in the strictest watch , in many things the best faileth , many known frailties will escape , and more escape unknown : And how can mirth choose but be damped with frequent slips ? 

The answer is , such an one as keeps the watch of his God , and pretermits no day without the forementioned duties , shall seldom or never fall into any foul slough , and dash the ship of his Faith against any dangerous Rock , and if he do , long he cannot lie , but his Faith will set him on work to go out , weep bitterly , and make his peace presently with his Lord , and Conscience , that he may enjoy his wont repasts : And for his ordinary infirmities it will daily fetch him out a pardon of course , washing and scouring his soul every morning and eveuing , more duly than any Pharisie his face or hands : and set him on work every day as he runs into arrearages , to draw the red lines of Christ's Cross over the black lines of God's Debt Book . And what if as an Allseeing God he sees our violation of his Law , and knows better than our own Consciences every peccant Act of ours in thought , word , or deed ? what if GOD look upon the Handwriting against us ? Doth he not see the Bills canceled with the Precious Blood of his Son and our Surety ? Which for matter of guilt , defilement , and punishment is all sufficient to expunge , cover , nullify , abolish , and wholly to take away our sins , in such sort that he neither sees , will see , nor can see them as sins and debts bearing action against us , obliging us to any penalty ; no more than the Creditor who though he sees the Items in his Book , and knows what debts have been , yet sees them crossed , cleared : And what thought then need the Debtor take for such debts ? Why , but is not this to make Faith a Pander to sin ? And to make good the Papists and Worldlings slander of Solifidians . that make no more of it , but drink and take Tobacco ; sin , and believe ; get a pardon of the old , and a licence for the new . 

O peevish and froward Generation to whom it is not given to know the mystery of Faith , which is of the nature of Sovereign mundifying waters , which so wash off the corruption of the ulcer , that they cool the heat , and stay the spread of the infection , and by degrees heal the same : And of Cordials which so comfort and ease the heart , as also they expel the noxious humours and strengthen nature against them . 

These are ministered only to prepared bodies , these pearls are not for Swine , this Divinity we Preach not in Gath and Askelon to uncircumcised profane ones that will turn every good thing to their own destruction : But this belongs to the sealed Fountain , to the Spouse of Christ alone : which when she hath washed her feet how loath is she to foul them again ? When she hath appeased her Beloved , how doth she adjure herself and others by the Hinds and Roes , not to awaken and offend him again ? 

The Text sayeth , Not every hypocrite , every profligate professor of Faith that lives as he lists , shall live by his Faith , but the Just or Righteous ? Which golden sentence is indeed ambiguously enunciated of purpose by the Holy Ghost that it may either way be taken , The Just by his Faith , shall live : Or , The Justice shall live by his Faith , yet so as it hath but one right ear to be holden by , and that is only for the hand of the Righteous man : Implying , that whosoever believes , or lives by his Faith , is also and must of necessity be a righteous man , a Just man , not only imputatively , but inherently in part : such an one as unfeignedly loveth righteousness , studieth the practice of it , denieth and hates all unrighteousness , endeavoureth every day to be more and more righteous , and so deserveth the denomination of righteous . 

So that look how the rational Soul , includeth and implieth the animal , so doth justification , Sanctification , being individual . 

CHAP. X. How Faith Sanctifies and Mortifies . 

SO I slide into the second part or kind of Christian life , consisting in holiness and righteousness , which I shall easily demonstrate not only to be an individual companion , but a natural and necessary effect of Faith.  

For look how the strength of the heart breeds , not only cheerfulness but activeness : Motion as well as health ( whence it is that life , is put for liveliness and agility ) drives away all lassitude , hebetude , and indisposition , brings in aptness and delight to stir : the like doth Faith in the soul : which may as the former in the body , for a time stand with some sleight distempers , spots of the skin , atche of limbs , but not long with deadly diseases , either vanquishing them , or vanquished by them . This noble use of Faith will excellently appear in both the parts of this new life , Mortification and Vivification : And in each of these , two manner of ways doth Faith produce this effect ; partly as a moving , partly as a procreant cause . In the first kind admirable is the Pitho & Saada of Faith above all the Oratory in the World : All the common incentives taken from profit , pleasure and honour , all the Topicke places of Logic , Figures of Rhetoric , what poor and weak engines are they to the irresistible pe●arre of Faith , which sayeth , but Ephata , and presently our Everlasting Gates yield and stand open . 

For thus it goes to work with us , Hath Christ given himself for thee , forgiven thee so many debts , conferred , favours of all kinds upon thee , and what hast thou to retribute ? If thou give all thy goods to the poor , thy body to the fire , thy soul , to his service ; yea were every hair of thine head a man or Angel , were not all short of recompense ? Lovest thou , lovest thou this Saviour of thine , and darest thou , or wilt thou dare to venture upon any thing displeasing him , is there any thing too good , too heard or dear for him ? Marry , if thy tears will wash his feet , wilt thou not pour them out ? Is thine hair too good to be the towel ? Is there any Spicknard too costly for his head ? joseph , the LORD requireth the handsel of thy Tomb , and wilt thou deny him ? Zacheus , lovest thou thy wealth above his honour that hath saved thee ? Stephen , lovest thou thy life above thy Master ? Can , or did any Believer give the nay to these melting commands or commanding entreaties of Faith , will it take the repulse ? Doth it not constrain and extort more than all racks and strappadoes , allure more than all wages and prizes ? Doth not this Magnes as easily draw weighty iron as other jet doth straws ? So that when thou wouldst be sure to speed and obtain any thing of thine untoward heart , set Faith a work to make the motion , and that will be sure to speed , not only by this persuading faculty , but also by a Divine power secretly effecting what it requires , conveying into the heart , will , and ability unto the deed . It stands not without doors as a Mendicant Flexanimous persuader , but enters into the closerts of the heart , shoots the bars , unlocks the bolts , takes away all reluctation and redaction , infuseth a pliable willingness : of wolvish and dogged , makes the Will Lamblike , and Dovelike : of wild and haggard , morigerous and mansuete . 

no otherwise then the medicine curing the vicious stomach , and restoring it to health , makes it long for wholesome meat , as before for coals and ashes . 

All this it doth by fetching supernatural efficacy from the death and life of Christ ; yea , part of that mighty power where by Christ raised himself from the dead , cured all diseases , and wrought all his miracles : By the virtue whereof it metamorphizeth the heart of man , creates and infuseth new principles of action . Make trial of this in mortifying the flesh to sin , and quickening thy spirit to holiness . 

For example , complainest thou of some prevalent corruption , some violent passion that oft carries thee headlong against thy desire and resolution , as Castrusius to Hierom , who shall help me subdue Nebuzardan , Goliath , Holofernes , my raging lusts that are too mighty for me ? Answer thyself as David himself to the like : Through thee OH Lord shall we do valiantly , over Edom shall I cast my shoe , etc. yea , when thou hast spent all thou hast upon other Physicians , tried all moral conclusions of purposing , promising , resolving , vowing , fasting , watching , selfe-revenging , yet get thee to Christ , and with a finger of Faith , touch but a hem of his garment and thou shalt feel virtue come from him to the curing of thy disease . What if thou hast often encountered thy enemy , and received the foil , relapsed after victory : yet cast not away the shield of Faith , but with the Israelites against Beniamites the second and third time , set a fresh in the name of the LORD , and they shall fly before thee . 

Complainest thou with Augustine of his inbred , hereditary , habitual , inveterate vices , holding thee in the Adamantine chains of custom , against which thou hast often resolved , and resolved , modo & modo , now I will leave them , and now I will forsake them , why should I not as well as such and such , as Potitian and Victorinus , and yet they keep thee Prisoner still , full against thy will and endeavours . find out the cause , which he had revealed to him in te stas & non stas . 

thou standest upon thine own feet , and therefore fallest so foully , thou wilt like a child go alone , and of thyself , and therefore gettest so many knocks . Die to thyself , renounce the broken reed of thine own freewill which hath so often deceived thee : and put all thy trust in the grace of Christ , And it will crucify the old man , and give him his Hoc habet , his death's wound , pierce his sides , and break his knees in pieces . 

Be weak in thyself and strong in the Lord , and through Faith thou shalt be more than Conqueror . Leave tuggling and struggling with thy sin , and fall with jacob to wrestle with Christ for a blessing : and though thyself go limping away , yet shalt thou be a Prince with God , and be delivered from Esau's bondage . Yea , what if Satan , what if Legions of Principalities , and powers have long held possession in some strong fort of thy heart , begin to plead prescription , scorning as the jebusites to be ejected out of their impregnable tower : hast thou Faith , and canst thou believe , persist in resisting and he shall fly , and thou shalt see him fall like lightning before thee . Christ raised from the dead , not only the daughter of jairus which was yet within bed , not laid forth : nor the Son of the Widow newly carried out of the Gate to burial , but Lazarus that had four days lyen in the grave ; to that end , sayeth Augustine , That such as have long been dead in sin , yea such as upon whom Satan hath rolled the stone of Custom , and such as stink in the nostrils of the world through putrified sores of sins , should not yet despair , but know that which falls out in frequent experience , Faith can cure diseases past all other cures and hopes . Through Faith thou shalt roll away the stone from the Cave of Makpelah , and take out the five Kings that have domineered and tyrannised over thee , set thy feet in the necks of them and triumph over them . 

CHAP. XI . How Faith Vivifies . 

And what is there yet further , thou wouldst have Faith do for thee ? O sayest thou ! it is not enough to be healed of the disease , unless thou mayest take up thy bed and walk ; yea , leap and skip as the Lame restored to his limbs . Oh! that I could find that life of Grace which I see in some that can make it their meat and drink to do the will of God.  

Though I be not pestered and mastered with any reigning corruption , yet I find myself so dull and untoward , that I take no pleasure in my life . Know also that this quickening power , Faith only can help thee withal . To pray , to meditate , to have thy conversation in heaven , to keep a Sabbath cheerly is as easy to thee as to Iron to swim , and stones to ascend upward , but nothing is impossible to Faith : it can naturalise these things unto thee , metamorphize thee , make thee a new creature , of a mole of the earth a soul of heaven , of a snail a dromedary : such a change as the Sun works in the vapour , when of an earthy heavy substance , it makes it light and airy , apt to ascend into the middle Region . Such a change Cyprian saith he felt in his conversion : And how else came David to that high delight in God's service , that he loved the Commandments of God more than thousands of gold and silver , the honey and the honey comb , that he rose at midnight to meditate in them . The selfsame duties may be done by the Civil man , and by the believer ; for the outside and deed done , both may go to Church , hear a Sermon , read a Chapter , but the one goes as the Bear to the stake , as a slave to the mill , and the dullard to school , in comparison of the other who hath a different internal principle : which is as a spring and oil to the wheels , that makes them go smoothly and currently , makes the yoke light and easy . They that trust in the Lord shall renew their strength , lift up the wing as the Eagle , run and not be weary , walk and not faint . 

Faith it is that fetcheth sap from the root Christ , that makes every tree bring forth fruit in it kind , every Christian in his own calling . What else made David so worthy a Soldier ? what taught his fingers to fight , so that a bow of steel was broken in his hand ? What made Paul an able Minister of the Gospel , gave him the door of utterance , made his tongue as the pen of a ready writer ? He believed , therefore he spoke . What made Onesimus of a false eye-seruant , trusty to his Master , as to the Lord ? The like might be said of all trades and sciences . 

Look what a full treasury of all sorts of graces Christ hath stored up in him , Faith dreineth and deriveth them out of his fullness to the use of every several Christian , even Grace for Grace . 

Faith is the Conduit Cock that watereth all the Herbs and flowers in the Garden . All which the more I consider , the more I pity the preposterous care and unhappy travel of many well affected , who study the practice of this and that virtue , neglecting this cardinal and radical virtue ; As if men should water all the branches of a Tree and not the root : Feign would they abound and shine in patience , meekness , zeal , yet establish and root not themselves in Faith , that should maintain all the rest , are ambitious to do good works , build Hospitals , give Alms , but study not to do the work of the Father : And what is the work of the Father , but to believe in the Son whom he hath sealed and sent into the world to be relied on for Salvation ; which work is the gratefullest work that we can perform , and which will make grateful all that we do besides : without which all that we can do will not please him . 

What cares he for thy thousands of Rams , thy Rivers of Oil ? Hath he not showed thee , O man , that he that trusteh in his Son honoureth him most of all in putting to his Seal that he is true ? This honour if thou wouldst do unto him , he would honour thee with all other graces and withhold no ornament , no good thing from thee , if it be fit for thee . Meek thou shalt be as Moses , patients as job , zealous as David , thy soul and life embroadered with all kind of shining Graces , as the high Priests apparel with jewels wherefore add this prescript to the former when thou art on the top of Mount Tabor , solacing thy soul in thy Lord , and his favour through Faith : feasting and banqueting with him as Ester with Ahasuerosh . Bethink thyself what suit thou hast to him , what troublesome enemy thou wouldst be rid off , suppose it be some potent Haman of pride , make but thy complaint , and it shall be executed and crucified before thine eyes . Consider what grace thou standest in need of , and make thy petition as Achsah to Caleb , And he shall give thee the spring's above and the spring's beneath . 

This prescript if thou wilt daily observe , some days more largely and fervently , as the Spirit that blows how and where it lists shall assist , and as occasion shall require : but every day some what more or less ; though I will not promise thee thou shalt attain to perfection of degrees such as the perfected spirits of the Just enjoy in glory : because here thou shalt ever believe but in part , and therefore be holy but in part : yet this I dare promise , as thou growest from Faith to faith so shalt thou grow from strength to strength in all other graces , till by degrees thou attain to the fullness and maturity of Age in Christ , which shall make thee a Saint in earth , alight in this dark world , and make thee able to live in holiness and righteousness all the days of thy life , with much more comfort to thyself , and credit to the Gospel , than strangers to this life of Faith , either do , or imagine may be done . 

CHAP. XII . How Faith upholds life in Affliction . 

Say then , OH Christian , is there any thing yet behind that may impeach the complete happiness of a believers life , speak now if there be any thing that hinders it , which Faith cannot help ? 

Oh! yes says the Flesh ( which ever is cowardly and love's ease ) though a man be never so justified and sanctified , yet may he live in poverty , in crosses , yea in great & manifold pressures , and what a life can there be in such extremities ? O how doth Faith here lift up the Crest , shine and triumph above Nature , Reason and all Moral Virtues in her incomparable valour ? Being in all these not as they , only a patient perforce , or a mere bearer , but more than Conqueror ; not only , not daunted , but rejoicing to fall into manifold trials and tentations ; knowing itself to be the Adamant , that nothing will break ; the Palm , that sinks not under the weightiest of burdens ; the Oil , that ever over-swims the greatest quantity of water you can pour upon it , the sheate Anchor , that holds when all other Tackling breaks . Here is the Crown and Garland of Faith. Were it not for Conflicts , what superexcellent use were then of Faith ? Every Cockboat can swim in a River , every sculler sail in a Calm , in daily and ordinary gusts , every man of a patient temper or cheerly disposition can hold up the head , but when a black tempest comes , a tenth wave flows , and one deep calls another , nature yields , spirits faint , heart fails : then to stand erect , then to live and reign , that only can Faith do , which hath the Word for the Compass , and Christ at the helm . The greatest adversities that are , are but the exercise , yea the soil and lustre of Faith. Man glories when he can tame Tigers and Lions , thinks himself a stately king when he can make an Elephant bow and stoop to him , when he leads a Bear on the Ring , or can handle a Serpent without hurt ; but what a small conquest is this to that of Faith ? When it makes shame , poverty , sickness , persecutions , banishment , yea death itself , not only , not dreadful and harmful , but tractable and serviceable ? Questionless , great and sundry advantages hath a Christian by virtue of his Faith , above any Naturian or Politic by all his reason ; only , here is the defect of Christians that they want skill , or else forget to hold up their shield when a Dart comes suddenly upon them . Like him that was robbed by a Thief with a staff only in his hand , having himself a Pistol at his back ready charged , but surprised upon the sudden , altogether unmindful , or unable to use it . And if a man hath a Target that is impenetrable , what is he the better if his heart or Art fail him when he should defend himself by it ? This makes Christians when they ail any thing , with Saul to run to Endor , with Asa to send out to the Physicians , as if Faith could stand them in no steed . When therefore a storm rises , presently run and awaken thy sleeping Faith , knock at Faith's door , ho Faith , help at a pinch , now do thy office , and Faith will presenly aid and relieve thee with one of these special cordials . 

First , whereas sense and reason did but dimmely and cloudily suggest to their followers certain broken and confused opinions , little better than dreams of destiny and providence . Faith will confidently and evidently assure thee of this ground of comfort , that the least tick befalls thee not , without the overruling eye and hand , not only of a wise God , but of a tender Father , and fellow-feeling elder brother , who knowing thy mould doth more exactly measure out every Cross unto thee , than the carefullest Apothecaries do their Scruples and Dams of dangerous Physic . 

Secondly , out of this Principle , Faith will , extract these infallible conclusions , this estate is not the Axe of Perdition but the Pruning Knife of Affliction : this Cup is not a potion baneful , but medicinable , how bitter and wring soever . Whatever befalls , being in Christ , it cannot bend to thy confusion , condemnation or utter undoing , but an issue shall be given out of it . What terrible noise soever the storm shall make over thy head , it shall be but as Hailstones upon the Tiled or Leaded House that rattle more than hurt . thou art kept by the power of his might the evil one shall not touch thee : thou art in safe harbour under the Rock Christ , and mayest know in whom thou hast trusted , and art sure never to be confounded . If it be sickness or poverty , it is in thy Fathers own hand : if the rod be in some malicious enemy's hand , if he turn thee over to a servant to scourge thee , and dress him in the Devil's habit to scare thee , yea though Satan himself buffette thee , yet he stands by , looks on , will moderate and number the stripes : the Devils could not go one inch beyond commission in the Swine : he knows thy strength is not the strength of Whales or stones , and therefore will not permit them to lay on more , than thou shalt well bear : his wisdom & grace will be sufficient for thee . He that is in good terms with a Prince , fears not the approach of Heralds or Pursuivants : he that is out of debt fears not Bailiffs or Sergeants , but imagines they come upon some good Messages . 

Afflictions are scarrbugges to wicked men , as bushes to thieves , but if thou be a believer , at peace with GOD in Christ , they lay off their terrible Vizard , and come with an amiable , countenance . GOD thy Father hath given the whole Host and Army of afflictions more inviolable charge than Danids , Do the young man , my Son Absalon , no harm . Do my anointed no harm . 

Thirdly , Faith will further assure that he hath not only given them a prohibition or negative commission but an affirmative iniwction to do thee all good that may be : he hath said unto them , purge , refine , try , exercise , breed the quiet fruit of righteousness , give him experience of his faith , make him bring forth more fruit : so that though there be in thy Physic some malign or poysonful ingredients , yet being administered by him that knows thy temper and disease , and entirely affects thy health , it shall be so mingled with alleys and correctors that the confection shall be good , and all together shall and must work for the best . When thou feelest thy bowels wring , or ( as in a Sea-sicknesse ) are dead sick for the present , remember thou shalt be the better many days after . And though with job and David thy querulous flesh complain , and grunt , and groan , yet when it is over a little , thou shalt be able to say , O this was good for me ! I would not for any thing but I had born the yoke in my youth , that I may live the more comfortably in age : Considering that sick thou art , and that of many humours , thy Father should not love thee , if he should feed thee with sweet meat , and mingle no Aloes with them : much folly is bound up in thy back , and if thy indulgent father should forbear the rod he should hate and not love thee . 

Fourthly , Moreover Faith will remind thee of Christ's partnership in thy affliction , and of thy conformity with him , the first born , only begotten , and entirely beloved son of God , if he that was without sin , yet was not without stripes , wilt thou look to be a cockered Adoniah ? And what if the Cross be heavy , and thou a weak Child , yet Christ a Giant at one end , bears part of it , and makes it light and easy , he is quick of feeling , when Stephen is stoned , saith , Saul why persecutest thou me ? Besides what more honourable Badge and Cognisance canst thou have of thy Sonship , than this resemblance of him , not as now glorified in the heavens , which thou must stay for till thou come there , but as in the way to glory , when he despised the shame , suffered the Crown of thorns , the Sceptre of Reed , the spittings , buffet , mocks and mows , and all reproaches of vile sinners , the piercing of the Spear , and showed himself to be the Son of God , not by descending from the Cross but by enduring the Cross : And shall I not ( saith he ) drink the Cup which my Father hath tempered ? and if thou wilt be his Disciple , the first lesson in his School is , Christ's Cross , Deny thyself , take it up and follow him , And glory with the Martyrs , now am I like my Lord and Master . 

Lastly , Faith will set before thee as before him the infinite recompense of reward , not only renown in this World , which yet by Faith the patience , not only of job , but of all Martyrs have obtained , but that far most excellent Hyperbolical weight of glory : Which Paul eyeing , counted his afflictions ( which to us would have been intolerable ) light and momentany , not worthy the naming in comparison : which made him not only , not weep and howl , but sing in the Dungeon , and reckon it a special favour and honour to be counted not only a believer , but a sufferer for Christ. And God forbid , that a believer should glory in any thing so much as in the Cross of Christ , in his wounds and scars for his Lord and Master : As that worthy Vincentius said to the Tyrant , Threaten these things to your Courtiers and Carpet Knights ; Racks , Strappadoes , torments , are but a play to us , we Soldiers choose to be in Christ's Garrison , rather than in the Court , in the Field and forefront of the battle , then in the Palaces of Princes . The more hazard and peril , the more glory and honour . And what else desire we but to die daily , that the life in Christ may be manifested in us ? Yea , in the very instant of Death , Faith helps the believer to live , so as he may be said not to see death , & never to die , ( but that requires a just Treatise by itself . ) Let all the complaints , greevances , wants , and miseries of the world be searched and gauged ; the bottom will be found either to be want of Faith , or of the use and practise of Faith : So that we may well say with Augustine , to any christian sinking under his cross , or shrinking at his enemy , Hast thou lost thy Faith ? And conclude with that worthy Ensign-bearer of Christ , Many are the troubles of the Righteous , but by Faith we stand , by Faith we fight , by Faith we overcome . 

CHAP. XIII . An Epistle to the Reader pressing the use of Faith.  

Now Reader , for so I choose to call thee in a Postcript , when thou hast read the Book , rather than in a Preface , when thou mayst there leave as many do . Give me now leave to grapple with thee , and minister to thee an jutergatory or too . 

How many dost thou know within thy conscience , live this life of Faith ? Many thou seest live by their Lands , by their wits , by their shifts : but how many by their Faith ? For the want of this use of Faith , Do not many poor christians think , and say of it , as a poor labouring countryman said to his neighbour in serious private talk , That he never believed there was any such sum as a thousand pounds of money , but that only rich men gave it out so , in boasting , or policy to excite others to labour : so saith the common Protestant , out of doubt there is no such sweetness in the life of Faith : for we see not believers so cheerful and contented above other men . If Attists and Tradesmen did no more daily and duly follow their work , than most Christians do practise their Faith , would they not be stark beggars ? But to ask thee a more profitable question , Leave judging of others , and answer me in good serious sooth between God and thy soul , Hast , and dost thou thyself live by thy Faith ? Let me a little put thee to it , prove and examine thyself , and take for instance this present week or day past wherein thou readest this little Manuel . How hast thou and usually dost thou spend the day ? what thought didst thou awake withal ? what was thy morning draught for thy soul next thy heart ? what hath cheered and made thee merry in private and in company ? whether thy sports and meals , more than thy heavenly ejaculations ? Deal plainly , not with me and this book ( which yet shall witness against thee , if thou refuse to practise it when thou hast read it ) but with thyself . Hast thou , or hast thou not challenged some time more or less , half , or quarter of hour at the least , for this exercise of thy Faith ; hast thou not troubled thyself about the many things , that this one only needful hath been forgotten ( that which only should be called work and business ) hast thou not melted the day , yea , it may be the week , or month past , and made thy soul wholly to fast and pine for want of these refeshing : if so , as I most justly fear it in most of my Readers , how much more in such as are usually no readers ? why then let thy heart smite thee for thy folly , smite thou thyself upon the thigh , and say , how have I lived , or rather not lived , but consumed precious days in time-eating Vanities ? How comes it about that the greatest part of my life is the least part wherein I have lived . 

O then recover and recollect thyself before thou go hence , and be no more . wilt thou die before thou hast lived , as Boys slubber out Books before they learn their lesson . O learn to live this life , It is never too late , it is never , I am sure , too soon ; it is no shame to learn it what age or condition soever thou be of . Be thou Prince , Potentate , Nobleman or Gentleman , though few such Readers I look for : remembering well what Bradford tells the Earl of Bedford , and Augustine tells Romanian , whiles he was in the mouths of all men , most honourable , most munificent , most fortunate , in the full of his prosperity , in the source of pleasures in the top of greatness , etc. who durst lisp a word of a better life , of true happiness , or what boot was it for any man to make mention of any such matter . Yet if any such God will persuade to make trial of this life , thou which sayest , what is a Gentleman but his pleasure ? shalt then tell me , as Solomon of his youth such gentry is but vanity ; true pleasure there is none but in this life . What is a Christian but his Faith ? and what is his life but the use of his Faith ? Be'st thou a Scholar , a Prophet , or Son of the Prophets , what is thy work ? what is thy scope ? or what should it be in thyself and others , but this life of Faith ? What is Paul or Apollo's but such as by whom you have believed ? What ever you teach , before you have taught this you were as good Preach to the stools and stones of your Churches ? What are your Auditors but dead bones , and skulls , till they , believe , and till Christ be form in them . Get first an hold whereon you may fasten your Engines to draw them to virtues and good works . You which would do that in souls which Elisha did in bodies , raise them from their graves : Interpreters one of a thousand get the tongue of the learned to declare their righteousness unto them , the righteousness I say of Faith : show yourselves skilful workmen , such as have been brought up not only in morals of the heathen , subtleties of Schoolmen , sentences and conceits of Postilers , rosaries , destructories , Anthologies , but in the wholesome word of Faith , which are the Arm and power of God to the salvation of every believer . Above all let it be our wisdom to live ourselves by that which we teach others to live by ; we that have , or might , or should have more Faith than common Christians , is it not a shame if we live not more happily , and cheerfully then private Christians ? not by our livings wherein the Laity hath now gotten the start of us for the most part , but by our Faith , wherein we have the advantage of them , or else shame be it to us.  

Is it not a shame to see an honour of a thousand pound a year live as meanly as a poor Farmer , a Master and professor of an Art , as a mean practisioner . Yet this I must say even to the meanest tradesmen and poorest people , this life belongs not to such only that are book learned , but is equally obvious and open ( as the King's high way ) to all sorts of Travellers to Heaven . Honourable lives , Pompous lives , voluptuous lives , poor folks have small hope to atteyne unto : but a true happy life they may and do live as well as the learnedest Cleakes and greatest Princes , if they get the gift to practise that , which , such for the most part do but study and talk of . To conclude , what ever thou art , or who ever that desirest to mend thy condition , to better thine estate , to multiply thy life , to change thy few and evil days of thy pilgrimage , into good and many : behold here is the Art of living well and living long . Life is not to be numbered by the hours , but measured by cheerfulness , as monies not by tale but value . A little piece of gold contains a great many pieces of silver . Manhood consists not in the bulk of the bones , but in the mettle and spirits . Is not one week of an healthy man , better , than a year of a crazy ; one Sunshine hour , than a gloomy day ? I have often mused how a man might come nearest to that life which Adam lost , and recompense in this latter age of the World , ( wherein the lives of men are so contracted ) the longaevity of those that lived before the Flood . And this is the best help I find : To live well is to live twice . A good man doubles and amplifies his days : one may speak as much in few words as another in many . Persius wrote more in a few leaves than Marsus in large volumes . One day led by the rules of Faith is better than an immortality of vanity . A man may live to as good content to himself and others , in a short space , as others in a long life ; some are old in years tediously drawn out , others in hours cheerfully spent , some have been long , and others have lived long , and they only are such as have lived this life ; of whom I conclude as doth the story of the Kings , jeremiahs' Prophecy , touching Zedekiah upon his advancement by the King of Babel , His portion was a continual portion , a Kingly portion , every day a certain all the days of his life , such I say it is , or might be , if Christians might be persuaded not to content themselves to profess or think they have Faith , but to live by their Faith : only before I part with thee , take from me one Caveat , one advice , one request , and so an end . 

First , take heed thou mistakest me not in all this , as if I had spoken of an absolute perfection in this life equal to vision & fruition in the life to come , confounded Heaven with earth , as if I thought myself , or any other to have comprehended . If any man thinks he believes any thing , he believes nothing yet as he ought to believe , but all things in part , and imperfectly . We cannot by all our assiduousnesse in Reading , Prayer , and Meditation have God's Spirit at an absolute command , no more than Mariners the wind , or Husbandmen the showers , so as the most observant believer hath his turbida interualla , his buffet , lest he be too much exalted , his desertions wherein his beloved will hide himself behind the grates , not to be found of him for a while , that he seek him more eagerly , and prize his presence more thankfully , more heedefully keep him when he hath him , and be wholly dependant on his grace ; yet so as this remains most sure and certain , that the constant and daily Practiser of his faith shall constantly , and congruously be seconded with the gusts and gales of his spirit , the only true Zephyrus and Favonius , shall have Satan tied up from long and frequent molesting him , shall not have such tedious absences of the Spirit , such uncertain fits and moods of his joy and comfort , as the negligent and loose believer , but a more steadfast frame and tenor of joy , than any other kind of man in the world that takes not this course . 

Provided that thou take this advice , that for the better and stronger use of this Faith , thou seel up thy senses and chain up thy reason . Walking by sight , and walking by Faith are opposite things : and therefore as men fortify the visual beams of one eye by closing the other ; so must thou wink and close up the eye of thy soul to all worldly things , that thou mayest by the prospective of Faith fix thy spiritual eye upon heavenly delights : not that thou needest go out of this world and sequester thyself like an Eremite into Dens and Caves , retired from all society , but even in the midst of all glistering objects see them as if thou sawest them not ; that is without being deeply affected with them . So looked Paul from off the things that are seen even in the midst of Rome , and looked upon things which were not seen : and Moses in Pharaohs Court saw him that was invisible . 

A right believer goes through the world , as a man whose mind is in a deep study : or as one that hath special haste of some weighty business , goes through a street ; that gazeth on nothing , here 's nothing , minds nothing that is in the way , but only that which his head is taken up withal : Our conversation is in heaven , our treasure is in heaven . Oh! that all our thoughts were there , so as no earthly object might detain , or distracted them , no more than must needs be in our callings , so that the main bent and intention of all that is within us might be set upon the daily nourishing of our Faith.  

For which purpose I make this parting and farewell suit unto thee , as thou meanest to receive any good by this Book . That thou wouldst even from this very hour wherein thou endest the reading of it , determine and covenant , betwixt God and thy soul , never whilst thou livest on the face of this earth to omit one day ( God enabling thee by his Spirit ) wherein thou wilt not vindicate and redeem , at the least , one half or quarter of an hour , either twice or once in the day , at the least : Wherein all other affairs laid aside , thou mayest withdraw thyself apart from all company , and occasions , with a non obstante , to practise the exercise formerly prescribed . That is , by Prayer , Reading , and Meditation , to put some strength and life into thy Faith , till thou hast cheered , and revived , and warmed thy soul therewithal . This if thou shalt inviolably observe , the strength , the feeling , the comfort , and the fruits of thy Faith will by little and little insensibly , and in a little while , most sensibly thrive and grow till thou comest to the ripeness of age in Christ.  

What hurt can it be to thee if thou shouldst bind thyself by vow hereunto , or if thou fearest thy strength , yet by full purpose thus to do all and every day of thy life : that so in the lees and Dregss of time , whiles fleshly protestants are raising contention about matters of Faith , or making Sects and Schisms in the Church about needless trifles , thou mayst edify thyself in thy most holy Faith and whilst thou livest in the dark womb of this world , live by the Navel of Faith till thou come to have thy mouth satiate with fullness of all good things at the right hand of God. When , as Elizabeth Folk said , Faith shall cease to be Faith and be turned into fruition , and we receive the end of our Faith , the salvation of our souls . 

These things have I written that your joy may be full . 

The Justice shall live by his Faith.  

According to thy Faith so be it to thee . 

Lord increase our Faith.  

The Bookeseller to the Reader . 

Gentle Reader , I pray thee take Notis that Master Ward , hath lately published a most Remarkable Monument , of the Invincible Navy of 88 & the unmatchable Powder Treason 1605.  Necessary to be had in the House of every good Christian , to show Gods loving and wonderful providence , over this Kingdom , when the Papists twice sought their utter ruin & subvertion . These Monuments are to be sold where these Books are sold in Saint Dunston's Churchyard , and Pauls-ally . Vale. 24 of january . 1621.  

FINIS . 





Lib. 1. contra Academicos . 

Heb. 2 4.  Rom. 1. 17.  Galliard 3. 11.  Heb. 10. 38.  Gal. 2. 20 , 

Chrysost. in 1 Cor. 1. 10.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . john 11. 25.  1 john 5.  Act. 15. 9  1 joh. 5. 4.  1 Pet. 1. 9  

job 3. 20.  Psal. 32.  Phil. 3  

joh. 6.  

Doct Bright of Melanch . 

esay 40. 31.  judg. 1.  14& . 

1 Sam. 28 7.  2 Chr. 16. 12.  Fox in 14.  Apoc.  

1.  Cor. 3.  A needful Caveat . A profitable advice . An earnest request . 