Monuments of Honor. Derived from remarkable Antiquity , and Celebrated in the Honourable City of London , at the sole Munificent charge and expenses of the Right Worthy and Worshipful Fraternity , of the Eminent MERCHANT-TAYLORS' . Directed in their most affectionate Love , at the Confirmation of their right Worthy Brother JOHN GORE in the High Office of His Majesty's Lieutenant over this His Royal Chamber . Expressing in a Magnificent Triumph , all the Pageants , Chariots of Glory , Temples of Honour , besides a specious and goodly Sea Triumph , as well particularly to the Honour of the City , as generally to the Glory of this our Kingdom . Invented and Written by john Webster Merchant-taylor . 

— Non norunt haec monumenta mori . 

Printed at London by Nicholas Okes. 1624. ▪ 

TO THE RIGHT Worthy Deserver of this so Noble a Ceremony this Day Confirde upon Him , JOHN GORE Lord Maior and Chancellor of the renowned City of London . 

MY Worthy Lord , these presentmentes which were intended principally for your Honour , and for Illustrating the worth of that worthy Corporation ( whereof you are a Member ) come now humbly to kiss your Lordship's hands ; and to present the Inventor of them to that service , which ( my ability expressed in this ) may call me to ( under your Lordship's favour ) to you , do you honour , and the City service in the quality of a Scholar : assuring your Lordship , I shall never either to your ear , or table press unmannerly , or impertinently . My endeavours this way have received grace , and allowance from your worthy brothers ( that were supervisors of the cost of these Triumphs ) & my hope is , that they shall stand no less respected in your eye , nor under valued in your worthy judgement : which favours done to one born free of your Company , and your servant ; shall ever be acknowledged by him , stands interrested 

To your Lordship in all duty , JOHN WEBSTER . Monuments of Honor.  

I could in this my Preface ( by as great light of Learning as any formerly employed , in this service ) can attain , to deliver to You the Original and cause of all Triumphs , their excessive cost in the Time of the Romans : I could likewise with so Noble Amplification make a survey of the worth , and glory of the Triumphs of the precedent times in this Honourable City of London : That were my work of a bigger bulk , they should remain to all Posterity : but both my Pen , and ability this way are confined in too narrow a Circle : Nor have I space enough in this so short a Volume to express only with rough lines , and a ●aint shadow ( as the Painter's phrase is ) First the great care and alacrity of the right Worshipful the Master and Wardens , and the rest of the selected and Industrious Committees ; both for the curious and judging election of the Subject , for the present Spectacles ; and next that the working or mechanic part of it might be answerable to the Invention : Leaving therefore these worthy Gentlemen to the embraces , and thanks of the right Honourable and worthy Praetor ; and myself under the shadow of their Crest , ( which is a safe one ) for 't is the Holy Lamb in the Sunbeams : I do present to all modest and indifferent judges these my present endeavours . 

I fashioned for the more amplefying the show upon the water two Eminent Spectacles , in manner of a Sea-triumph . The first furnished with four persons ; In the front Oceanus and Thetis , behind them , Themesis and Medway : the two rivers on whom the Lord Mayor extends his power , as far as from Stanes to Rochester . The other show is of a fair Terrestrial Globe , Circled about in convenient Seats , with seven of our most famous Navigators : as , Sr. Francis Drake , Sr. john Haukins , Sr. Martin Furbisher , Sr. Humfery Gilbert , Captain Thomas Cavendish , Captain Christopher Carlisle , and Captain john Davis' . The conceit of this Device to be , that in regard the two Rivers pay due Tribute of waters to the Seas . Oceanus in grateful recompense returns the memory of these seven worthy Captains , who have made England so famous in remotest parts of the world . These two spectacles , at my Lord Majors taking water at the Three Cranes , approaching my Lords Barge : after a peal of Sea-thunder from the other side the water ; these speeches between Oceanus and Thetis follow . 

Oceanus and Thetis . Thetis .  What brave Sea Music bids us Welcome , hark ! 
Sure this is Venice , and the day Saint Mark , 
In which the Duke and Senates , their course hold ▪ 
To wed our Empire with a Ring of Gold.  


Oceanus .  no Thetis y' are mistaken , we are led 
W●●● infinite delight from the Lands h●ad : 
In ken of goodly shipping and yo● bridge , 
Venice had near the like survey that ridge , 
Of stately buildings which the river Him , 
And grace the silver stream , as the stream them : 
That beauteous seat is London so much famed , 
Where any Navigable Sea is named ; 
And in that bottom Eminent Merchants placed , 
As rich , and venturous as ever graced , 
Venice or Europe these two Rivers hear , 
Our followers may tell you where we are ; 
This Thamesis , that Midway who are sent , 
To you most worthy Praetor to present , 
Acknowledgement of duty near shall err , 
From Stanes unto the Ancient Rochester ; 
And now to grace their Triumph in respect , 
These pay us tribute , we are pleased to select 
Seven worthy Navigators out by name , 
Seated beneath ▪ this Globe ; whose ampl● fame 
In the remotest part of the earth is found , 
And some of them have circled the Globe round : 
These you observe are living in your eye , 
And so they ought , for worthy men near die : 
Drake , Hawkins , Furbisher , Gilbert , brave Knights , 
That brought home gold , and honour from sea fights , 
Candish , Carlisle , and Davis' , and to these , 
So many worthies I could add at Seas , 
Of this bold Nation , it would envy strike , 
I th' rest a th' World , who cannot show the like ; 
't is action values honour as the flint , 
Look black and feels like ice , yet from within 't , 
Their ar● struck sparks which to the darkest nights , 
Yield quick and per●ing food for several lights . 


Thetis .  You have quickened well my memory , and now 
Of this your grateful Triumph I allow , 
Honour looks clear and spreads her beams at large , 
From the grave Senate seated in that Barge , 
Rich Lading swell your bottoms , a blessed Gale ▪ 
follow your ventures that they never fail ; 
And may you live successively to wear , 
The joy of this day , each man his whole year . 


This Show having tendered this service to my Lord upon the Water , is after to be conveyed a Shore , and in convenient place employed for adorning the rest of the Triumph . After my Lord Majors landing , and coming past Paul's Chain , there first attends for his Honour in Paul's Churchyard , a beautiful Spectacle , called the Temple of Honour , the Pillars of which are bound about with Roses , and other beautiful Flowers , which shoot up to the adorning of the King's Majesty's Arms on the top of the Temple . 

In the highest seat a Person representing Troynovant or the City , in throned in rich Habiliments , beneath her as admiring her peace and felicity , sit five eminent Cities , as Antwerp , Paris , Rome , Venice and Constantinople : under these sit five famous Scholars and Poets of this our Kingdom , as Sir jeffery Chaucer , the learned Gower , the excellent john Lidgate , the sharp witted Sr. Thomas Moor , and last as worthy both Soldier and Scholar , Sir Philip Sidney , these being Celebrators of honour , and the perseruers both of the names of men , and memories of Cities above , to posterity . 

I present riding afore this Temple , Henry the Royal , the first Pilgrim or Gatherer of quarterage for this Company ; and john of Yeacksley , King Edward the thirds Pavilion maker , who purchased our Hall in the sixth year of the aforesaid King's government : These lived in Edward the firsts time likewise , ( in the sixth of whose Reign , this Company was confirmed a Guild or Corporation by the name of Tailors , and Linen Armores , with power to choose a Master and Wardens at Midsummer ) these are decently habited and hooded according to the ancient manner : My Lord is here saluted with two Speeches , first by Troynovant in these lines following . 

The speech of Troynovant . 

History , Truth , and Virtue seek by name , 
To celebrate the Merchant-taylors fame ▪ 
That Henry the Royal , this we call 
Worthy john Yeacksley purchased first their Hall ; 
And thus from low beginnings their oftsprings 
Societies claim Brotherhoods of Kings . 
I Troynovant placed eminent in the eye 
Of these admire at my felicity : 
Five Cities , Antwerp and the spacious Paris , 
Rome , Venice , and the Turks Metropilis : 
Beneath these , five learned Poets worthy men , 
Who do eternize brave acts by their pen ; 
Chaucer , Gower , Lidgate , Moor and for our time 
Sr. Philip Sidney , glory of our clime , 
These beyond death a fame to Monarches give , 
And these make Cities and Societies live . 
The next delivered by him , represents Sir Philip Sidney . 

TO Honour by our Wrighting Worthy men , 
Flows as a duty from a judging pen , 
And when we are employed in such sweet praise , 
Bees swarm and leave their honey on our bays : 
Evermore Musically Verses run , 
When the loathed vain of flattery they eat . 
Survey most Noble Praetor what succeeds , 
Virtue low bred aspiring to high deeds . 
These passing on , in the next place , my Lord is encountered with the person of S. john Hawkwood in complete Armour , his plume and Feather for his Horses shafforne of the Companies colours , white and Watchet : this worthy Knight , did most worthy service , in the time of Edward the third in France , after served as General . 

Diverse Princes of Italy , went to the Holy-land , and in his return back , died at Florence , and there lies buried with a fair Monument over him : This worthy Gentleman was Free of our Company ; and thus I prepare him to give my Lord entertainment . 

Sir john Hawkwoods' Speech . 

MY birth was mean , yet my deservings grew 
To eminence , and in France a high pitch flew , 
From a poor common Soldier I attained , 
The stile of Captain , and then Knighthood gained ; 
Scrud the Black Prince in France in all his wars ; 
then went t' the Holy-land , thence brought my scars . 
And wearied body which no danger feared . 
To Florence where it nobly lies Inteerd , 
There Sir john Hawkewoods memory doth live , 
And to the Merchant-taylors fame doth give . 
After him follows a Triumphant Chariot with the Arms of the Merchant-taylors , coloured and gilded in several places of it , and over it , there is supported for a Canopy , a rich and very spacious Pavilion , coloured Crimson , with a Lion Passant : this is drawn with four horses , ( for Porters would have made it move tottering and Improperly . ) In the Chariot I place for the honour of the Company ( of which Records remain in the Hall : ) Eight Famous Kings of this Land , that have been free of this Worshipful Company . 

First the Victorious Edward the Third , that first quartered the Arms of France with England , next the Munificent Richard the Second , that kept Tenthousand daily in his Court in Checkroult , By him the Grave and discreet Henry the Forth , in the next Chairs the Scourge and Terror of France , Henry the Fifth , and by him his religious , though unfortunate Son , Henry the sixth : the two next Chairs are supplied with the persons of the Amorous and Personable Edward the Fourth ( for so Philip Commineus , and Sir Thomas Moor describe him ) the other with the bad man , but the good King , Richard the third , for so the Laws he made in his short Government do Illustrate him ; But lastly in the most Eminent part of the Chariot I place the wise and politic Henry the Seaventh , holding the Charter by which the Company was Improved from the Title of Linin-armorers into the name of Master and Wardens of Merchant-taylors of Saint john Baptist. The Chairs of these Kings that were of the House of Lancaster are garnished with artificial red Roses , the rest with white , but the Vniter of the division and houses , Henry the Seaventh , both with White and red , from whence his Royal Majesty how reigning took his Motto : for one piece of his Coin , Henricus rosas regna jacobus . 

The speaker in this Pageant is Edward the third , the last Line of his speech is repeated by all the rest in the Chariot . 

Edward the Third .  View whence the Merchanttaylors' honour spring's 
From this most Royal Conventicle of Kings : 
Eight that Successively wore England's Crown 
Held it a special honour , and renown : 
( The Society was so worthy , and so good ) 
T'vnite themselves into their Brotherhood . 
Thus Time , and Industry attain the prize , 
As Seas from Brooks , as brooks from Hillocks rise ▪ 
Let all good men this sentence oft repeat , 
By unity the smallest things grow great . 


The Kings .  By unity the smallest things grow great . 


And this repetition was proper , for it is the Companies Motto : Concordia paruaeres crescunt . 

After this Pageant rides Queen Anne , wife to Richard the second , free likewise of this Company , nor let it seem strange , for besides her , there were two Duchess , five Countesses , and two Barronnesses free of this Society , s●uenteene Princes and Dukes , one Archbishop , one and thirty Earls , ( besides those made with Noble Prince ) Henry , one Viscount , twenty four Bishops , sixty six Barons , seven Abbotts , s●uen prior ; or subprior , and with Prince Henry in the year 1607. the Duke of Linox , the Earls of Nottingham , Suffolk , Arundel , Oxford , Worcester , Pembroke , Essex , Northampton , Salisbury , Montgomery , the Earl of Perth , Viscount Cranborne : Barons , the Lord Euers , Hunsden , Hayes , Borley , Mr. Howard , Mr. Sheffield , Sir john Harrinton , Sir Thomas Chaliner , besides States of the Low-countrieses , and Sir Noel Caroone their Legier Ambassador . 

And in regard our Company are styled brethren of the Fraternity of St. john Baptist , and that the ancient Knights of St. john of jerusalem , ( to which now demolished House in St. johns' Street , our Company then using to go to offer , it is recorded Henry the seventh then accompanying them , gave our Mr. the upper hand , ) because these Knights , I say , were instituted to secure the way for Pilgrims ; in the desert , I present therefore two of the Worthiest Brothers of this Society of St. john Baptist I can find out in History . The first Amade le Graunde , by whose aid Rhodes was recovered from the Turks , and the order of Anuntiade or Salutation instituted with that of four letters FERT , signifying , Fortitudo Eius Rhodum Tenuit ; and the other of Mounsieur jean Valet , who defended Malta from the Turks invation , and expelled them from that impregnable Key of Christendom this styled , Great Master of Malta , that Governor of Rhodes . 

Next I bring our two Sea Triumphs , and after that , the Ship called the Holy-lambe , which brings hanging in her Shrouds the Golden-fleece , the conceit of this being that God is the Guide and Protector of all Prosperous Ventures . 

To second this , follow the two beast , the Lion and Cammell proper to the Arms of the Company ; on the Camel rides a Turk , such as use to Travail with Caravans , and one the Lion a Moor or wild Numidian . 

The fourth eminent Pagiant , I call the Monument of Charity and Learning , this fashioned like a beautiful Garden with all kind of flowers , at the sour Corners , four artificial Bird Cages , with variety of Birds in them : this for the beauty of the Flowers , and melody of the Birds , to represent a Spring in Winter : in the midst of the Garden , under one Elme-tree , sits the famous and worthy Patriot Sir Thomas White ; who had a dream that he should build a College where two bodies of an Elm sprang from one root , and being inspired to it by God , first rod to Cambridge , to see if he could find any such , Failing of it there , went to Oxford and surueighing all the grounds , in and near the University , at last in Gloster-hallgarden , he found one that somewhat resembled it , upon which he resolved to endow it with larger revenue , and to increase the foundation , having set men at work upon it , and riding one day out at the Northgate at Oxford , he spied on his right hand the self same Elm had been figured him in his dream , whereupon he gives o'er his former purpose , of so amply enlarging Gloster-hall ( yet not without a large exhibition to it ) purchases the ground where the Elm stood : and in the same place built the College of Saint john Baptist , and to this day the Elm grows in the Garden , carefully preserved ; as being under God a motive to their worthy foundation . 

This I have heard Fellows of the House of approved credit , and no way superstitiously given , affirm to have been delivered from man to man , since the first building of it , and that Sir Thomas White inviting the Abbot of Osnye to dinner in the aforesaid Hall , In the Abbot's presence , and the hearing of diverse other grave persons affirmed by God's Inspiration in the former receited manner , he built and endowed the College . 

This relation is somewhat with the largest , only to give you better light of the figure : the chief person in this is , Sir Thomas White , sitting in his Eminent Habit of Lord Maior , on the one hand sits Charity with a Pelican on her head , on the other Learning with a book in one hand , and a Laurel Wreath in the other , behind him is the College of St. john Baptist in Oxford exactly modelled , two Cornets which for more pleasure answer one and another interchangeably , and round about the Pageant sit twelve of the four and twenty Cities , ( for more would have overburdened it ) to which this worthy Gentleman hath been a charitable Benefactor ▪ when my Lord approaches to the front of this piece : Learning humbles herself to him in these ensuing verses . 

The Speech of Learning .  TO express what happiness the Country yields , 
The Poet's feigned Heaven in th' elysian fields ; 
We figure here a Garden , fresh and new , 
In which the chiefest of our blessings grew : 
This worthy Patriot here , Sr. Thomas White , 
Whilst he was living had a dream one night , 
He had built a College and given living to 't , 
Where two Elme-bodies sprang up from on root ; 
And as he dreamt , most certain 't is he found , 
The Elm near Oxford , and upon that Ground , 
Built Saint johns' College , Truth can testify 
His merit , whilst his Faith and Charity 
Was the true compass , measured every part , 
And took the latitude of his Christian heart ; 
Faith kept the centre , Charity walked this round , 
Until a true circumference was found ; 
And may the Impression of this figure strike , 
Each worthy Senator to do the like . 


The last , I call the Monument of Gratitude , which thus dilates itself . 

Upon an Artificial Rock , set with mother of Pearl ▪ and such other precious stones , as are found in quarries , are placed four curious Paramids charged with the Prince's Arms , the three Feathers , which by day yield a glorious show , and by night a more goodly , for they have lights in them , that at such time as my Lord Mayor returns from Paul's , shall make certain ovals and squares , resemble precious stones , the Rock expresses the riches of the Kingdom Prince Henry was born Heir to , the Pyramids , which are Monuments for the Dead , that he is deceased : on the top of this rests half a Celestial Globe , in the midst of this hangs the Holy Lamb in the Sunbeams , on either side of these , an Angel , upon a pedestal of gold stands the figure of Prince Henry with his Coronet , George and Garter ; in his left hand he holds a Circklet or Crimson Velvet , charged with four Holy Lambs , such as our Company choose Masters with ; in several Cants beneath sits , first Magistracy tending a Bee Hive , to express his Gravety in Youth , and forward industry to have proved an absolute Governor : Next Liberality , by her a Dromedary showing his speed and alacrety in gratifying his Followers : Navigation with a Jacob's Staff and Compass , expressing that his desire that his reading that way , might in time grow to the practice & building , to that purpose one of the goodliest Ships was ever launched in the River : in the next Unanimity with a Chaplet of Lillies , in her lap a sheaf of Arrows , showing he loved Nobility , and Communality with an entire ▪ heart . Next Industry on a hill where Ants are whording up Corn , expressing his forward inclination to all Noble exercise : Next Chastity , by her a Unicorn , showing it is guide to all other virtues , and clears the Fountain head from all poison : justice with her properties : then Obedience , by her an Elephant the strongest Beast , but most observant to man of any Creature : then Peace sleeping upon a Canon , alluding to the eternal Peace he now possesses : Fortitude a Pillar in one hand , a Serpent wreathed about the other , to expect his height of mind , and the expectation of an undaunted resolution . These twelve thus seated , I figure Loyalty as well sworn Servant to this City , as to this Company , and at my Lord Majors coming from Paul's , and going down Woodstreet , Amade le Graunde delivers this Speech unto him . 

The Speech of Amade le Graunde . 

OF all the Triumphs which your eye has viewed 
This the fair Monument of Gratitude ; 
This chiefly should your eye , and ear Employ 
That was of all your Brotherhood the joy , 
Worthy Prince Henry fame's best precedent , 
Called to a higher Court of Parliament , 
In his full strength of Youth and height of blood , 
And which Crowned all , when he was truly good : 
On Virtue , and on Worth he still was throwing 
Most bounteous showers , where ere he found them growing , 
He never did disguise his ways by Art 
But shooted his intents unto his hart , 
And loved to do good , more for goodness sake , 
then any retribution man could make . 
Such was this Prince , such are the noble hearts ; 
who when they die , yet die not in all parts : 
But from the Integrity of a Brave mind , 
Leave a most Clear and Eminent Fame behind . 
Thus hath this jewel not quite lost his Ray , 
Only cased up against a more glorious day . 
And be 't remembered that our Company 
Have not forgot him who ought never to die : 
Yet , wherefore should our sorrow give him dead , 
When a new Phnaeix spring's up in his stead : 
That as he seconds him in every grace , 
May second him in Brotherhood , and place . 
Good rest my Lord , Integrity that keeps 
The safest Watch and breeds the soundest sleeps . 
Make the last day of this your holding seat , 
joyful as this ▪ or rather more complete . 
I could , a more curious and Elaborate way have expressed myself in these my endeavours , but to have been rather too tedious in my Speeches , or too weighty , might have troubled my Noble Lord , and puzzled the understanding of the Common People ; suffice it ▪ I hope 't is well , and if it please his Lordship , and my Worthy Employers , I am amply satisfied . 

FINIS . 

