THE CITY'S ADVOCATE , 

IN THIS CASE OR Question of Honour and Arms ; Whether Apprenticeship extinguisheth Gentry ? 

Containing a clear Refutation of the pernicious common error affirming it , swallowed by Erasmus of Rotterdam , Sir Thomas Smith in his Commonweal , Sir john Fern in his Blazon , Ralph broke York Herald , and others . 

With the Copies or Transcripts of three Letters which gave occasion of this work . 

Lam. jerem. cap. 3. ver . 27.  

Bonum est viro cum portaverit jugum ab adolescentia sua . 

LONDON , Printed for William Lee , at the Sign of the Turks Head next to the Mitre and Phoenix in Fleet street . 

Monsieur FLORENTIN de THIERRIAT , Escuyer , Seigneur de LOCHEPIERRE , LONOVET , SAINT NAVOIR , RAON AU. BOYS , etc.  

De la Noblesse de Race , Num. 99  

En matiere de Noblesse il faut observer la Coustume du lieu , et les moeurs des peuples ; dautant que les uns estiment une choose honneste et Noble que les autres tiennent pour sordid et dishonneste . 

Num. 118.  

Les choses que derogent a la Noblesse , qu'il faut tousiours mesurer , sur les Coustumes des lieux , parce qu'un peuple approwe sowent un exercise pour honneste , qu'un autre defend et prohibe comme sordid , et vicieux au Gentilhomme . 

HONORATISSIMO SENATVI POPULO QVE , AUGUSTAE VRBIS LONDINENSIS . 



RIGHT HONOURABLE : 

The Author of this work , styling himself according to the nature of his part therein THE CITY'S ADVOCATE , after ten , or twelve years' space from the first date of the accomplishment , resolving at last to permit the edition , doth reverently here advance and present to the honourable good acceptance of your Lordship , of all the Lords , and other the worthy persons , to whom , in the quality of the cause , the consideration reaches ; The clear refutation of that pestilent error , which having some authority for it , and many injurious partakers , lays upon the hopeful , and honest estate of APPRENTICESHIP in LONDON , the odious note of bondage , and the barbarous penalty of loss of Gentry : to the great reproach of our Kingdom's policy , and to the manifold damage of the public . In this one act of his , the Advocate therefore doth not only seem to be the Patron or Defendor of birthrights , and of the rights of fortunes , but the Champion also of civil Arts , & of flourishing Industry among you : the sinews , and life itself of Commonweal . The occasion which induced him to enter the lists single against a multitude , in this good quarrel , was private , as appears by the Letters at the end of the work , but the cause , is absolutely such ( according to his best understanding ) as he should not refuse to abett & second with his sword , the strokes of his pen , to that purpose . For , though the Schools , and Camp , are most proper for Honour and Arms , yet the ancient wisdom , and the like ancient bounty of our Sages , did ever leave the gates of Honour open to City-arts , and to the mysteries of honest gain , as fundamental in Commonweal , and susceptive of external splendour : according to the most laudable examples of rising Rome , under her first Dictator's , & Consuls . By which their such moderation and judgement , they happily avoided two opposite rocks ; tyrannical appropriation of Gentry to some certain old families , as in Germany , and the confusion of allowing hereditary Nobleness , of Gentry , to none at all , as under the Sultan , in Turkey . With how true and entire a good will this free service is performed by the Author may easily be gathered from hence , that he willingly gives the oblivion of his own name into the merit ; conscience of the fact , sufficing . Now , for him to inform your Lordships and the rest ( out of the title de origine iuris , in Caesarean Laws ) how the noble people of oldest Rome accepted the book which Gnaeus Flavius dedicated to their name , and uses , what were it else , but inofficiously to dictate your part , and not humbly to offer his own ; which nevertheless here he most officiously doth , being truly able to say , upon his own behalf , that he hath purloined no man's labours ( as that Flavius did ) but is through all the true and proper owner . 

The Author is your humble servant . Valete in Christo jesu.  XI . Cal. November . MCICXXVIII . 

To the Gentlemen of ENGLAND in general . 

BE not displeased with this bold enterprise , as if it were in favour of the evil manners of a multitude , who pass under the title of APPRENTICES . For neither the incorrigibly vicious , who are pestilent to moral and civil virtue ; nor the incorrigibly forgetful of their betters , whom insolency maketh odious , have any part herein at all . For first , it wholly belongs to such , among masters , or Citizens , as are generously disposed , & worthily qualifide , men who say with Publius Syrus , Damnum appellandum est cum mala fama lucrum ; and then to such among Apprentices , as resemble Putiphars chaste joseph , or Saint Paul's converted Onesimus ; youngmen , who say ( with Statius Caecilius , in his Plotius ) 

Libere seruimus , salua urbe , atque arce , meaning by the City , and the Citadel , the body and the head of man  

Valete . 

To the happy Masters of Laudable Apprentices in LONDON . 

Right worthy Citizens , you shall not for this work find your honest servants the less serviceable , but the more . For , in good bloods , and good natures , praise , and honour prevail above rigour and blows . And because yourselves , for the most part , were Apprentices once , you may therefore behold herein , with comfort , the honesty of your estate when you were such , and the splendour of what you are now in right . The unthankful ( if any such should happen to rankle among you ) may be warned ; that the juice of Ingratitude doth forfeit liberty , and that they are truly bondmen ; if not according to the letter , nor in their proper condition , yet according to the figurative sense , and in their improper baseness . 

VALETE . 

TO THE MODEST Apprentices of LONDON , Scholars , and Disciples in Citie-arts , during their seven or more years' Noviceship . 

The principal objection against publishing either this or any other book of like argument , hath always been grounded ( by the most wise and noble ) upon a fear , that the insolences of the youth , and irregular fry of the City , would thereby take increase : which having heretofore been intolerable ( in common policy ) and in no little measure scandalous to the Kingdom , were hateful to cherish , or to give the least way unto . But it hath already been elsewhere answered ; that those Apprentices are of the dregss , and bran of the vulgar : fellows void of worthy blood , and worthy breeding , and ( to speak with fit freedom ) no better then merely rascal ; the ordinary balls , played ( by the hand of justice ) into the Bridewells , in or about the City : yea perhaps , not Apprentices at all , but forlorn companions , masterless men , tradelesse , and the like , who preying for mischief , and longing to do it , are indeed the very Authors of all that is vile ; discourteous to honourable ( all travelling strangers ought to be generally used as such ) rude towards Natives , seditious among their own , and villainous everywhere . But you ( none of that caitive and untrustie number ) are the parties , for whom this labour hath been undergone , whose behaviours ( full of gentleness , and of bounden duty to superiors ) commend you to the present times , and maintain in you that stock of good hope , out of which are in due time elected those successions of the whole , which make the political body or state of a City immortal . Think therefore with yourselves , that by how much this most friendly office tends to your more defence , and praise , by so much you are the more bound to bear yourselves honestly , and humbly . In your so doing , the City of London , which ( before Rome itself was built ) was rocked in a Trojan Cradle , by the founder , and Father thereof ( as the most ancient extant monuments , setting all late fancies aside , bear witness ) heroic Brutus , or Brytus ; under Claudius Caesar , the Metropolis of the Trinobants ; under other Caesars afterwards , Augusta , or the majestical City ; which , for hugeness , concourse , navigation , trade , and populosity , very hardly giving place to any one in Europe , doth absolutely excel all the Cities of the world for good government , or at least doth match and equal them ; that very London so venerable for the antiquity , so honourable for the customs , so profitable for life , noble in renown , even beyond the names both of our Country itself , and of our nation , the birthplace of Constantine the Great , and inmost recess , or chamber of her Kings , that very City , that very London whether your local parent , or loving foster-mother , shall not grace , or honour you more , than you shall grace , and honour her , and England also . 

VALETE . 

From Sir WILLIAM SEGAR Knight , GARTER , principal King of Arms of ENGLAND , a special Letter to the Author , concerning the present work . 

Sir : 

I Have viewed and reviewed your book with good deliberation , and find , that you have done the office of a very worthy Advocate to pled so well for so famous a Client as the City of London in her generality , which as I gratulate unto her , and to all interested parties , so I shall much more gratulate to her , and you , the honour and use of so fair a labour , if I may once see that public : And for my part , considering that you define nothing , but lie only upon the defensive , and affirmative , against assailers , and deniers , with due submission for the judicial part to the proper Court of Honour , the illustrious high I see no cause why your learned work , may not receive the glory of public light , and that most renowned City the benefit of honour's increase , for encouragement of enriching endustrie ; And so with my hearty respects I rest . 

Your very loving friend WILLIAM SEGAR Garter . 

THE TRUE COPIES OF the Letters mentioned after the Book . 

The first letter , from the Citizen in the behalf and cause of his elder son , to a special friend , of whose love , and learning he rested confident . 

Right Worthy Sir , 

IF having been at no small charge , and some care , to breed my son up in Gentleman like qualities , with purpose the rather to enable him for the service of God , his Prince , and Country , I am very curious to remove from him as a Father , all occasions , which might either make him less esteemed of others , or abate the least part of his edge ; I say , not towards the honesty of life only , but towards the splendour thereof , and worship also , my hope is , that I shall not in your worthy judgement , seem either insolent , or vain glorious . 

Truth and justice are the only motives of my stirring at this present . For , as I mortally hate that my Son should bear himself , above himself so should I disclaim my part in him , if being unjustly sought to be embased , he sillily lost any inch of his due . He hath been disgraced as no Gentleman born , when yet not he but I his Father was the Apprentice , thanks be to God for it . They cannot object to him want of fashion ; they cannot object to him the common vices , badges rather of reprobates then of Gentlemen : They cannot object to him cowardice , for it is well known that he dares defend himself : nor any thing else unworthy of his name , which is neither new , nor ignoble : But me his poor father they object unto him , because I was once an Apprentice . 

Wise Sir Thomas Moor teacheth us , under the names , and persons of his Eutopians , that victories , and achievements of wit are applauded , far above those of forces : and seeing reverence to God , & to our Prince , commands us , ( as his Majesty's book of Duels doth affirm ( not to take the office of justice from Magistrates , by private rash revenges , I have compelled my son , upon God's blessing , and mine , to forbear the sword till by my care he may be found not to be in the wrong . For if it be true , that by Apprenticeship we forfeit our titles to native Gentry : God forbid that my son should usurp it . And if it be not true , then shall be have a just ground to defend himself , and his adversaries shall stand convicted of ignorance , if not of envy also . 

These are therefore very earnestly to pray you , to clear this question . For , in the City of London there are at this present many hundred of Gentleman's children Apprentices , infinite others have been , and infinite will be : and all the parts of England are full of families , either originally raised to the dignity of Gentlemen out of this one most famous place : or so restored , and enriched as may well seem to amount to an original raising . And albeit I am very confident , that by having once been an Apprentice in London , I have not lost to be a Gentleman of birth , nor my son , yet shall I ever wish , and pray rather to resemble an heroic Walworth , a noble Philpot , an happy Capel , that learned Sheriff of London Mr. Fabian , or any other famous Worthies of this royal City , out of any whatsoever obscurest parentage , then that being descended of great Nobles , to fall by vice far beneath the rank of poorest Prentices . 

In requital of your care in this point , you shall shortly receive ( if I can obtain my desire ) out of the records & monuments of London , a Roll of the names , and Arms of such principal friends as have been advanced to Honour , and Worship , throughout the Realm of England , from the degree of Citizens . A warrantable design , by the example of the Lord chief justice Cook , who hath bestowed upon the world ( in some one or other of his books of reports ) a short Catalogue of such as have been eminently beholding to the Common Laws , and if I should fail in that , yet do I promise you a list or Alphabet of Apprentices names , who by their enrollments will appear upon good Record , to have been sons of Gentlemen from all the parts of England . 

Neither let your approved virtue doubt , but that in the mean time you shall find us very ready to show our free , and honest minds , in all commendable , and disenuious emulations , with the best Gentlemen whosoever . Which disposition measure not by the few Angels you receive in this Letter . For what are twenty in such a case ? 

If this my suit , and request , carry the less regard , because it comes but from a private Citizen , be pleased I pray to understand , that in me , though being but one man , multitudes speak , and that out of a private pen , a public cause propounds itself . And yet I come not single . For with this Letter of mine , I send you two other . The one from a worshipful friend , and kinsman of mine , written to me , and the other of my Cousin his second son , much what of one nature with this of mine . And so with my love , and best respects remembered , I commit you to God's holy keeping , and rest , etc.  

The true Copies of those two other Letters , whereof in the former there is mention . 

The Father's Letter . 

Cousin , I pray peruse the enclosed , which troubleth me as much as it doth my son , and seek satisfaction of such as are skilful indeed . I care not for charge , for look whatsoever it costs I will bear it . In the mean while comfort my child , for if it be so as he writes , he shall not stay in London , though it cost me five hundred Pounds . And so in great hast I leave you to our Lord Christ , etc.  

The Apprentices Letter to his Father . 

Most dear , and most loving Father , my most humble duty remembered unto you . These are to give you to understand , that my body is in good health , praised he God , but my mind , and spirits are not , for they are very much troubled . For , so it is Sir , that albeit my Master be a very worthy , and an honest Citizen , and that myself , doing as an Apprentice ought ( which I do willingly , not refusing any thing , as remembering Saint Peter's precept , Serui , subditi estote in timore Domini ) an as well used in this house , as if I were with you ; yet by reading certain books , at spare hours , and conferring with some who take upon them to be very well skilled in Heraldry , I am brought to believe , that by being a Prentice , I loose my birth right , and the right of my blood both by father , and mother , which is to be a Gentlemen , which I had rather die , then to endure . This is my grief , and this the cause why my mind is so troubled , as I cannot eat , nor sleep in quiet : Tears hinder me from writing more , and therefore most humbly craving pardon , and your most fatherly blessing , I commit you to God , etc.  

From London , etc.  

THE CITY'S ADVOCATE , In a question of Honour , and Arms . 

Whether Apprenticeship extinguisheth Gentry . 

The Contents of this first part . 

1 The present question very important for many great causes . Two Crowned Queens of England , & much of the Nobility parties to it . Bullen & Calthorpe L. Majors of London ; their interesses in royal blood . What Quaestio status , and what the least capitis diminutio is . Only the base neglect it . Honour a fair Star . Disparagement odious . Prevention of mischiefs by determining this question . Proud Citie-races unworthy of the City . 
2 The City's Honours in Arms proved out of ancient Monuments . The L. Fitz Walter , Standard-bearer of London . Claurie and Biallie two terms in old blazon . 
3 The transcendent power of opinion . To derogate from the splendour of birth , reputed a wrong . Whence comes the present question of Apprenticeship . 
4 The main reason why some do hold , that Apprenticeship extinguisheth Gentry . Apprenticeship no bondage either in truth , or at all . The case truly propounded . The skill of honest gettings a precious mystery . What kind of contract that seems to be , which is between Master and Apprentice . 
5 An objection that Apprenticeship is a kind of bondage . The fine folly of Erasmus in his Etymology of an Apprentice . The comparison between Seruus among Civilians , and Apprentices among Englishmen , holds not . What the word Apprentice means . Sir Thomas Smiths error in confounding servitude and discipline . 
6. 7. 8.  Particular points touching Seruus . Sanctuary at the Prince's image . Manumission , and Recaptivitie by Law. None of those points concern Apprentices more than Soldiers , Scholars , or religious novices . 
9 10.  The final cause denominates the action , and proves Apprenticeship not to be base . The contrary opinion pernicious to manners , and to good Commonweal among us , chiefly now . The different face of both opinions in daily experience . 
The First Part.  

THE present question , Whether Apprenticeship extinguisheth Gentry being now not so much a paradox , as grown in secret to be of late a common opinion , I am bold to call a weighty and important question unjustly grounded upon the learned folly of Erasmus of Rotterdam , and the incircumspection of Sir Thomas Smith Knight , in his book de Republica Anglorum , and out of certain wand'ring conceits hatched among trees & tillage , as shall appear hereafter . Weighty and important I am bold to call it , and it is so . Because in looking out upon the concern of the case , I find that prospect so spacious , that within the compass thereof , as well the greater as the lesser Nobility of England are very notably , and very inexplicably enwrapped . What do I say of the subalternal Nobility , when the Royal name itself ( with all humble reverence be it spoken ) was deeply interested in the proposition ? For Queen Elizabeth , though a free Monarch , and chief of the English in her turn , was a party of the cause , which she ingenuously , and openly acknowledged , calling Sir Martin Calthorpe , kinsman , ( as indeed he was ) being at that time Knight , and Lord Mayor of London : Yea Sir Godfrey Bullen ( Knight also and Lord Mayor of London ) was lineal Ancestor to Queen Anne her mother ( saith Camden in his Annals ) no longer before then in the reign of Henry the sixth King of England . Both which Knights ( being also Gentlemen born , & of right Worshipful Families ) ascended by due degrees from the condition of Apprentices to the greatest annual honour of this Kingdom . It is weighty and important , because without much impropriety of speech , it may be called quaestio status , which in the ancient phrase of the Emperor justinian , is as much to say as a trial , whether one is to be adjudged bond , or free , servile , or ingenuous , and implieth that odious , and unnatural sequel , which by Textuists hath to name , Capitis diminutio : whereof though the Roman laws make a threefold division , yet in this our question , if but only the third and lowest degree were incurred , which happeneth , cum qui sui juris fuerunt , coeperunt alieno iuri subiecti esse , that alone should keep us from neglect . It is weighty and important , and can appear none other , because it directly tends to darken , and as it were to intercloud the luminous body of that beauteous planet HONOUR , with not only foul but lasting spots . For what can lightly be a more disparagement , then for the free to become a kind of bondmen , or to be come of such ? Nay , there is nothing without us , which can be of so great disparagement . Finally , it is weighty , and important for very many other reasons , and particularly because it is not only fit that states of opinions should be rectified in this kind , as breeding bad affections among people of the same nation ( from whence great mischiefs often rise , even to hatred , quarrels , and homicides ) but that such also , as through vanity , or other sickness of the wit , or judgement , disdain to seem either City-born , or Citie-bred , or to own any thing of their worship , or estate , either to the City , or to Citizens , may understand their own place , and true condition , lest they be convinced to be among them , who are unworthy of so honest either original or accession as the City yieldeth . 

But let us first behold the City's Honour in Arms , as it stands displayed in ancient Heraldry , and as it is commented upon out of authentic Monuments in that worthily well commended Survey of LONDON , composed by that diligent Chronologer , and virtuous Citizen M. john Stowe ; The present figure with the same words as here they stand , is a copy of that which an old imperfect larger volume at the Office of Arms containeth . 

〈◊〉 BADGES LONDON 

OF THE CITY OF LONDON THE LORD FITZ-WALTER BANNERER 

There needs no greater demonstration of the Cities ancient honour , and of her people's free quality , than this , that a principal Baron of the Realm of England was by tenure her Standard-bearer . The figure of St. Paul ( titularie patron of London ) advanced itself in the Standard , and upon the shield those famous well-known Armouries of the Cross , and Weapon . The like picture of which Apostle was also embroidered in the comparisons of that horse of war , which for the purpose of the City's service he received of gift at the hands of the Lord Maior . Upon the Standard-bearers coat armour are painted the hereditary ensigns of his own illustrious Family , that is to say , Or , a Fez between two Cheverns Gules . Which kind of field the ancients called Claurie , perhaps à claritate , because such fields as were all of one colour made their charges the more clearly seen , and perspicuous . And as they gave to that species of blazon a peculiar name for the dignity , so did they also assign to this manner of bearing two Cheverns , the term Biallie , or a coat Biallie , a numero binario . In which brave times had that noble Gentleman , but slightly , and far off suspected , that he displayed that banner , for a kind of bondmen , or as for their service , his great heroic spirit would rather have trodden such an office under foot . In good assurance therefore of this common causes justice , we proceed . 

Sound opinion ( meaning doctrine ) is the anchor of the world , and opinion ( meaning a worthy conceit of this or that person ) is the principal ingredient which makes words , or actions relish well , and all the Graces are , without it , little worth . To take the fame from any man that he is a Gentleman-borne is a kind of disenablement , and prejudice , at leastwise among the weak ( who consider no further then seem ) that is to say among almost all . Consequently a wrong . And if a wrong then due to be redressed . To find injury , we must first inquire 

Whether Apprenticeship extinguisheth Gentry . 

4 The main reason , certainly the most general , used to prove , that it doth , is , That Apprenticeship is a kind of bondage , and bondage specially voluntary ( in which case the Imperial law-rule , non officit natalibus in seruitute fuisse , may be perhaps defective ) extinguisheth native Gentry . But I deny that Apprenticeship is either vera seruitus , or omnino servitus . 

For explication of this difficulty , I will set before your eyes the case as it is . A Gentleman hath a son , whom he means to breed up in an Art of thrift , not rising merely out of a stock of wit , or learning , but out of a stock of money , and credit , managed according to that Art ; and for this cause he brings his child at 15. or 16. years old , more , or less , to the City of London , provides him a Master , and the youth , by his father's counsel , willingly becomes an Apprentice , that is to say , interchangeably seals a written contract with his Master by an indented instrument . That he , for his certain years true and faithful service , shall learn that precious mystery of how to gain honestly , and to raise himself . Let the legal and ordinary form of that instrument ( extant in Wests Precedents , and familiar every where ) be duly pondered , and it will appear a mere civil contract , which as all the world knows , a bondman is uncapable of . If you would know under what kind , or species of contract that doth fall ; I answer : That it seems to be a contract of permutation , or interchange : In which mutual obligation , or convention , the act of binding is no more , but that ( as reason and justice would ) the Master might be determinately for the time , and sufficiently for the manner , sure to enjoy his Apprentice . Apprenticeship being therefore , but an effect of a civil contract , occasioned , and caused by that prudent respect which the Contrahents mutually have to their lawful and honest commodity , and such only as are freeborn , being capable to make this contract with effect , Apprenticeship doth not extinguish Gentry . 

On the contrary , it is urged : That although Apprenticeship be not a true bondage to all constructions , and purposes , yet , that it is a temporary bondage , and equal ( for the time it lasteth ) to very servitude . In which opinion Erasmus is , making his Etymology of our Prentices to be , for that they are like to such as are bought with money , pares emptitijs , which conceit , as it is more literate , then happy , so , if it were set to sale , would find few Chapmen , but to laugh at it . For Erasmus is aswell proved to be errans mus in obscurorum virorum Epistolis , as Apprentices in England to be pares emptitijs . But we absolutely deny that Apprenticeship is in any sort a kind of bondage . For notwithstanding that to prove it be so , they make a parallel between the ancient Roman servitude , and the London apprenticeship , yet will these comparata , be found disparata , if not disparatissima . For seruus among the old Romans , was so called of seruando of preserving or saving , and not of seruiendo , of serving , saith the Lawmaker himself , the Emperor justinian . But the word Apprentice cometh of Aprenti , the French word , a raw soldier , or young learner , Tyro , rudis discipulus ; or of the French verben , which signifies to learn , or of the Latin word apprehendo , or apprendo , which properly is to lay hold of , and translatively to learn , which derivations are consonant to the thing , and true howsoever Sir Thomas Smith in his books the Republica Anglorum , not remembering to distinguish between servitude and discipline , bondage , and regular breeding , injuriously defined them to be a kind of bondmen ( meaning mere slaves , and not as in some places of England , bondsmen are taken for such as are in bonds for actionable causes ) and such bondmen as differ only thus from very bondmen ( whose like words for signification are those foulest ones , slaves and villains ) that Apprentices be but for a time certain . An oversight which I could have wished far off from so grave and learned a Gentleman , as that Knight , who was of privy Counsel , in the place of Secretary , to Queen Elizabeth . 

Again , that which did constitute a bondman among the old Romans , was such a power and right , vested in the Lord , over the very body of his bondman , or slave , as descending to him under some received title , or other iure gentium , was maintained to him , iure civili Romanorum . By virtue whereof he became proprietary in the person of his bondman , as in the body of his ox , horse , or any other beast he had , which proprietariship was indeterminable , but only by manumission , and that act merely depended upon the will of his Lord , without any endentment , or condition on behalf of the slave , which a right Roman would never endure to hear of from his bondman . Finally ( which in the quality of that servitude was most base , ) seruus among them , nullum caput habuit , had no head in law , and neither was in censu , nor in lustro condito ; as much to say , that they were out of the number of men , their names being neither put , as among such as had wherewith to pay , in the Rolls of their Exchequer , or tables of their Capitol , nor , as bodies wherewith to serve in the general musters of their Commonweal , but ( to be brief ) were reputed civilitèr mortui , dead in Law , death , and bondage being alike among them , without any more reputation of being members in the body politic , than brute cattle , for bondmen were reputed no body , serui pro nullis habiti . 

And albeit the authority of the commonweal upon this good ground of State , interest reipublicae ne quis re sua male utatur , and the Majesty of Sovereign Princes , merely as in honour , and as moved with commiseration of human miseries , did sometime interpose itself upon just causes ; as , where the Lord did immeasurably tyrannize , or the bondman took Sanctuary at the Emperor's statue , and image , or , at the altar of some one or other of their gods ( an example whereof is in Plautus ) yet the bondman after manumission , continued in such relation to his late Lord , that in certain cases , ( as ingratitude ) he who was once enfranchised was adjudged back to his patron , and condemned again to a far more miserable servitude then ever . 

These things considered , and nothing being like in Apprenticeship , who lives so careless of the honour of the English name , as to bring the disciples of honest Arts , and Scholars of mysteryes in civil trade , and commerce for virtuous causes , all called by the fair title of Apprentices , into the state or quality of bondmen ? Fair I call it , because that title is common to them with the Inns of Court , where Apprentices at Law , are not the meanest Gentlemen . Apprenticeship therefore is no voluntary bondage , because it is no bondage at all , but a title only of politic or civil discipline . Apprenticeship therefore doth not extinguish Gentry . So then , Apprentices , whether Gentlemen of birth or others , whatsoever their Indentures do purport , and howsoever they seem conditional servants , are in truth not bond to do , or to suffer things more grievous than young soldiers in armies , or scholars in rigorous schools , or novices in noviceships : each of whom in their kind usually do , and suffer things as base and vile in their own quality , simply , & in themselves considered , without respect to the final scope , or aim of the first institution , as perhaps the very meanest of five thousand Apprentices in London . 

The final cause therefore of every ordination qualifies the course , and the end denominates the means and actions tending to it . For if that be noble , no work is base prescribed in ordine , or as in the way to that end . Though abstracting from that consideration , the work wrought , in the proper nature of it , be servile . As , for a soldier to dig or carry earth to a rampire , or for a student to go bareheaded to a fellow of the house within the College , as far off as he can see him , omitting the more deformed necessity , of suffering private , or public disciplines : or for a novice in a noviceship to wash dishes , or the like seeming-base works , as by report , is usual . If then the general scope , or final reason of Apprenticeship be honest , and worthy of a Gentleman ( as will appear hereafter that it is ) what can be clearer than that Apprenticeship doth not extinguish Gentry ? 

I am the more fervent in this case ; because this one false conceit ( at all times hurtful , but chiefly in these latter times , in which the means of easy maintenance are infinitely straitened ) that for a Gentleman born , or one that would aspire to be a Gentleman , for him to be an Apprentice to a Citizen , or Burgensis , is a thing unbeseeming him , hath filled our England with more vices , and sacrificed more serviceable bodies to odious ends , and more souls to sinful life , than perhaps any one other uncivil opinion whatsoever . For they who hold it better to rob by land , or sea , then to beg , or labour , do daily see , and feel , that out of Apprentices rise such , as sit upon them , standing out for their lives as malefactors , when they ( a shame , and sorrow to their kindred ) undergo a fortune too unworthy , even of the basest , of honest bondmen . 

The Contents of this second part . 

1 Apprenticeship a laudable policy of discipline , not a bondage . The contrary opinion over throws one main pillar of Commonweal Severity of discipline more needful to be recalled , then relaxed . 
2 The adversary's conceits brand our founders . Mechanical qualities Gods special gifts . 
3 Of Tubal-cain , and the dignity , and necessity of crafts . Hiram , the brass founder . S. Paul's handy Art , and the cause showed out of the Rabbins . Of other ennoblements touching them . 
4 The wisdom of instituting Apprenticeship defended by the argument a minori ad maius . 
5 London the palace of thriving Arts. Concerning Hebrew bondmen . The quality of Master's power over Apprentices . Masters nos Lords , but Guardians and Teachers rather . 
6 The adversaries manifest folly . Of corruption in blood the only means of extinction , and disenablement to Gentry . Of bondmen , or villains in England . 
The Second Part.  

These things considered , how should it fall into the mind of any good , or wise discouser , That Apprentices are a kind of bondmen , and consequently , That Apprenticeship extinguisheth native Gentry , and disenableth to acquisitive ? For , if that opinion be not guilty of impiety to our Mother Country , where that laudable policy of Apprenticeship necessary for our nation , is exercised as a point of severe discipline , warrantable in Christianity ; certainly it hath in it a great deal of injurious temeritie , and inconfiderance ; and why not impiety also , if they wilfully wrong the wisdom of England , their natural common parent , whose children are freeborn ? Surely , notorious inconsiderance is apparent , because there are but two main pillars of Commonweal , PRAEMIUM & PAENA , Reward and Punishment . Of which , in civil rewards , Honour is highest , according to that of the most eloquent Tully in his perished works , de republica , ( as S. Augustine citeth them ) as that thing with which he would his Prince should be fed , and nourished ; and in his Philosophy hath uttered that famous sentence concerning the same , Honos alit arts , omnesque accenduntur ad studia gloria . Among us therefore coats of Arms , and titles of Gentlemen ( which point the Knight beforesaid , howsoever erring in Apprentices estate , hath truly noted to be commodious for the Prince ) being the most familiar part of Honour , they rip up , and overturn the principal of those two pillars of commonweal , from the very basis . A strange oversight , specially of professors of skill in the Arts of public government , unless perhaps they speak it because they would have things reform , or changed in this particular of Apprenticeship . But we do not remember , that either Sir Thomas Eliot in his Governor , or Sir Thomas Chaloner , ( Leaguer Ambassador for Queen Elizabeth in Spain ) in his books of Latin Hexameters the rep . Anglorum instaurandâ , ( published with the verses of the Lord Treasurer Burghley's before it ) or any other Author rightly understanding our England , and her generous people , did ever once tax our Country's policy in this point . Yea , some make it a quaere , whether the City's discipline had not more need to be reduced nearer to the ancient severity thereof , considering with what vices London flows , and overflows , then that it should be abduced , though but a little , from it . 

Now then let any one but rightly weigh with what conscience , or common sense , the first institutors , or propagators of the English form of government could lay upon Industry , and civil Virtue ( whose subject are the lawful things of this life , and whose nearest object is honour , and honest wealth ) so foul a note as the brand of bondage , or any the least disparagement at all ? whereas to quicken , & inflame affections in that kind , all wise Masters in the most noble civil Art government , and all founders of Empire , and States , have bend their counsels , and courses , to cherish such as are virtuously industrious , yea , God himself , ( the only best pattern of governors ) hath made it known , that even Mechanical qualities are his special gifts , and his infused , as it were charismata . 

3 For Moses having put into eternal monuments , that jabel was pater pastorum ( the most an-art of increase ) and that jubal was pater canentium ( the first of which inventions was for necessary provisions of food , and raiment , & the second to glorify God , and honestly to solace men , towards sweetening the bitter curse which Adam drew upon human life , ) it is thirdly under added in accomplishment of the three main heads to which mortals use to refer all their worldly endeavours ( necessity , profit , & pleasure ) that Tubal Cain was Malleator , and faber ferrarius , an hammersmith , or worker in iron , that being one of those Arch-mysteries , sine quibus non aedificatur civitas , as the words are in Ecclesiasticus , Nay , there belonged in Gods own judgement so great praise to the particular excellency of some artificers , as that , in the building of Salomon's Temple , they are registered to all posterities in Scripture ; and their skill is not only made immortally famous , but a more curious mention is put down of their parentage , and birth place , then of many great Princes , as in Hirams case , not he the King , but the brasse-founder . And in the new Testament , S. Paul , ( being a Gentlemen born of a noble family , as the Ancients write ) had the manual Art of Scoenopoea , commonly englished , Tentmaking : upon which place of St. Paul's trade ( whereof in his Epistles he doth often glory ) it is declared to us out of the Rabbins , that S. Paul ( who himself tells King Agrippa that he had lived a Pharisee ; according to the most certain way of jewism ) was brought up so , by a traditional precept , binding such a would study sacred letters , to learn some one or other mystery in the Mechanics . And at this present among other things which the Turks retain of the jewish rites , this seems one , when even the Sultan himself , or Grand Signior ( as all his progenitors ) is said to exercise a manual trade , little , or much , commonly once a day . And in fresh memory Rodulphus the Emperor had singular skill in making Dial's , Watches , and the like fine works of Smith-craft , as also a late great Baron of England , which they practised . 

4 If than such honour be done by God ( as beforesaid ) not only to those which are necessary handicrafts , but to those also which are but the handmaids of magnificence , and outward splendour , as engravers , founders , and the like ; he shall be very hardy who shall embase honest Industry with disgraceful censures ; and too unjust , who shall not cherish , or encourage it with praise and worship , as the ancient excellent policy of England did , and doth , in constituting corporations , & adorning Companies with banners of Arms and special men with notes of Noblesse . 

5 And , as of all commendable Arts all worthy Commonweals have their use , so , in London they have as it were their palace . But into the body of the City none generally are encorporated , but such only as through the straight gates of Apprenticeship aspire to the dignity and state of Citizens . That Hebrew bondmen were not , in MOSES law , among themselves , like to our Apprentices ( howsoever the seventh year agrees in time with the ordinary time of our Apprentices obligation ) is evident both in the books of Exodus , and Deuteronomie . For , first , their title to their bondmen grew to their Lords by a contract of bargain , and sale , which was indeed a kind of servitude . For , when the seventh year , in which the bondage was to determine , and expire , if then he resolved not to continue a bondman for ever , he was compelled to leave his wife ( if married in his Lord's house during bondage ) together with his children , born in that marriage behind him , though himself departed free , but withal rewarded also . So that voluntary bondage is not only de iure gentium ( as the Roman laws import , by which a man might sell himself , ad participandum precium ) but also the iure divino positivo . By which notwithstanding it doth not appear , that such a bondage was any disparagement , or disenablement in jewish blood among the jews , because in Exodus we read of a provision made for the Hebrew bondwoman , whom her Lord might take in marriage to himself , or bestow her upon his son , if he so thought good , but might not violate her chastity , as if he had ius in corpus . But the condition of an Apprentice of London resembles the condition of no persons estate in either of the laws , Divine or Imperial ; For he directly contracteth with his Master to learn his mystery , or Art of honest living , neither hath his Master ( who therefore is but a Master , & not a Lord ) Despoticum imperium over his Apprentice ( that is , such a power as a Lord hath over slave ) but quasi curaturam , or a Guardianship , and is in very truth a mere Discipliner , or Teacher , with authority of using moderate correction as a Father , not as a Tyrant , or otherwise . Immoderate correction whosoever doth use , is ( by a gracious statute of the fifth of Queen Elizabeth ) subject to be punished with the loss of the Apprentice , by absolutely taking him away . 

6 Which things , so often as I deeply ponder , I cannot but hold it as lose , and as wand'ring a conceit , and as uncivil a proposition in civil matters as any : That Apprenticeship should be imagined either to extinguish , or to extenuate the right of native Gentry , or to disable any worthy , or fit person to acquisitive Armouries . For how can it in God's name work that effect , unless it be criminal to be an Apprentice ? Because no man loseth his right to bear Arms , or to write Gentleman , unless he be attainted in Law for such a cause , the conviction whereof doth immediately procure corruption in blood , which as in this case no man yet hath dreamt of . 

Again , when by the old common Law of England there are only two sorts of bondmen , that is to say , villains in gross , and villains regardant to a Manor , and it is most certain , that our Apprentice , or Scholar in Citie-mysteries , is neither one nor other of them , what ignorance then , or offence was mother at first of this , not paradox , but palpable absurdity , that Apprenticeship extinguisheth Gentry , or that Apprentices are as with us a kind of bondmen ? 

The Contents of this third part . 

1. 2.  For clearer understanding the question , the service of an Apprentice described . 
3 The four main points of the Indenture discussed , the service , the time , the contract , the condition . 
4 The case of Laban , and jacob weighed . 
5 Of the mutual bond between Master and Apprentice . 
6 An Apprentice proved to be in no respect a bondman . Of the right of blood in Gentry , and of the right of wearing gold-rings among the Romans . 
7 The Master's power over the Apprentices body , objected and solued . Aristotle's error about bondmen . Of young Gentlemen , Wards in England . Of University Students , and of Soldiers , in respect of their bodies . 
8 Apprenticeship a degree in commonweal . 
9 Of the tokens , or ensigns of that degree , the flat round cap , and other . 
10 Unwisely discontinued . 
11 Resumption of Apprenticeships marks , or habits , rather wished then hoped . 
12 The injurious great absurdity of the Adversary's opinion , and the excellency of London . 
The third Part.  

1 Though in the premises we seem to ourselves , to have said enough for establishing our Negation in this important question , that is to say , That Apprenticeship is not a kind of bondage , consequently , that it cannot work any such effects as is before supposed , yet to leave no tolerable curiosity unsatisfied , we will set before us , as in a table , the whole condition of an Apprentice . Meaning chiefly such an Apprentice as being the son of a Gentleman , is bound to a Master , who exerciseth the worthier Arts of Citizens , as Merchants by sea , Assurers , Whole-sale-men , & some such few others which may more specially stand in the first class of the most generous mysteries , as those in which the wit or mind hath a far greater part then bodily labour . 

2 Such an Apprentice therefore when first he comes to his Master is commonly but of those years which are every where subject to correction . His ordinary services these . He goes bareheaded , stands bareheaded , waits bareheaded , before his Master and Mistress , and , while as yet he is the youngest Apprentice , he doth perhaps ( for discipline sake ) make old leather overnight shine with blacking for the morning , brusheth a garment , runs of errands , keeps silence till he have leave to speak , follows his Master , or ushereth his Mistress , and sometime my young Mistresses their daughters ( among whom some one , or other of them doth not rarely prove the Apprentices wife ) walks not far out but with permission , and now , and then ( as offences hap ) he may chance to be terribly chidden , or menaced , or ( which sometime must be ) worthily corrected ; though all this but only in ordine , and in the way to Mastership , or to the estate of a Citizen , which last worst part of this Apprentices condition continues peradventure for a year , or two , and while he is commonly but at the age of a boy , or at the most but of a lad , or stripling . And , take things at the very worst , he doth nothing as an Apprentice under his Master , which , when himself comes to be a Master his Apprentices shall not do , or suffer under him . Such or the like is the bitterest part of an Apprentices happy estate in this world , being honestly provided , at his Master's charge of all things necessary , and decent . The Master in the meanwhile serving his Apprentices turn with instruction , and universal conformation , or moulding of him to his Art , as the Apprentice serves his Master's turn with obedience , faith , and industry . 

3 Here have we a representation of an Apprentices being , or rather the well-being of a child under his father , who hath right of correction . Upon view whereof we demand , why it should be supposed That Apprenticeship extinguisheth Gentry ? For if an Apprentice in London ( since to have Apprentices is a power not derived to corporations out of prerogative , and royal privilege , but out of common Law ) be in their conceits a kind of bondman , it must either be , ratione generis obsequij , or ratione temporis adiecti , or contractus , or conditionis , or for all together ; a fifth cause being hard to be either assigned , or imagined . 

For the first point ( which is in regard of the kind of service ) that is but an effect of the contract , or bargain , and consequently depends thereon , or participates in nature with it ; which not importing any kind of bondage , neither can the service itself , due by that agreement , be the service of a bondman . So that as on the one side we grant , that Apprentices , as Apprentices , do some things , which Gentlemen would not do , that lived sui iuris , specially upon a necessity to obey , yet on the other side we constantly deny , that they do any of them , either as servile , or as servilely , but propter finem nobilem , that is , to learn an honest mystery to enable them for the service of God and their Country , in the station , place , or calling of a Citizen . 

For the second ( which is in respect of a certain time ( as of seven years at least ) added and limited in the contract , that is merely but a circumstance of the agreement , and per consequens cannot alter the substance of the question . For if Apprentices are not a kind of bondmen , abstracting from the time which they are bound to serve , the addition of time , addeth nothing to the quality of the contract , to make it servile . 

For the third ( which is in regard of the contract , as it raiseth a relation , or the titles between two , of Master , and servant ) if the very act of binding to performance , be a sufficient reason to make Apprentices a kind of bondmen , and so to disenable them to Gentry , either derivative , or acquisitive , the Masters themselves are also a kind of bondmen , because , suo genere they aswell are bound as the Apprentices . 

For the fourth ( which is in respect of the condition either vocally expressed , or virtually implied in the contract ) there is in it no proof of bondage , but the contrary . For in that the obligation is mutual , it proves the Apprentice free as from bondage , though ( for the Apprentices own good ) not free from subjection to discipline . Because only free men can make contracts , and challenge the benefit of them . The verb , not , seruire , but the verb , deseruire ( which is of far less weight ) comprised in the instrument , or Indenture , and containing the whole force of the obligation , hath only in that place the sense of obsequi , & facere , to obey , and do as an Apprentice , and not according to the ancient sense , which it had among the Romans . This ought not to seem a paradox . For the word dominari , to which seruire is a relative , and the word dominus , have in tract of time been so softened , and familiarised , as they are grown to be words of singular humanity . And what so common among the noble as to profess to serve ? But the relation constituted in this case , is peculiar , and proper , the odious word dominus is not there at all , nor seruus , no nor famulus ; the relation constituted is directly named between Master , and Apprentice : a clear case that all injuries to blood , and nature , are of purpose avoided in those conventions ; and conventiones they are called in the interchangeably sealed instrument itself . So clear a case , that in the Oath which all freemen make in the Chamber of London at their first admission , this clause among many others , is sworn unto by them , That they shall take None Apprentice , but if he be Free born , that is to say , no Bondman's son : which are the very words of the oath . Thus carefully open was the eye of institution in this noble point of the City's policy , to prevent that no stain , no blemish , nor indignity should wrong the splendour thereof . A thing which could not but follow inevitably , if they who provided against admission of bondmens' issue , into the estate of apprenticeship , should themselves by making apprentices , make bondmen ; or should in any sort embase their blood , whose Masters they were to be , as to the purpose of coming to be Citizens in time . They never meant to make any man bond , who would have none but the sons of freeborn persons bound apprentices . It shall be wilful ignorance or malice from hence forth to maintain the contrary . 

4.  A most memorable example in Scripture to the purpose of the present question is that of jacob and Laban in the nine and twentieth Chapter of Genesis , where the time ( seven years ) yea , & the very word ( seruire ) are plain in that contract which was made between the uncle , and the nephew : yet who did ever say that jacob was for this a kind of bondman ? The reason why he was not , rises from consideration of the final cause , or intention of the contract , which is recorded to have been honourable ; the obtaining of a worthy wife , and of an estate to maintain her with . Neither , when he was no longer defrauded of Rahel then seven days after his first seven years , and when in the fruition of Rahel he served also other seven years , was he a kind of bondman , by as it were a relapse , or as by a cessation of expecting his reward , which he enjoyed in enjoying her . Out of which it followeth , that as jacob was no kind of bondman though he served , and served out all his time twice over , so neither are Apprentices . And from this place of the Bible it is unanswerablie proved that bodily service , is a laudable means to achieve any good , or honourable purpose ; a means truly worthy of a Gentleman . 

5 Hereunto we finally add , and repeat , that as an Apprentice ties himself to his Master in the word deseruire , that is , to obey , and do , restrictively to the ancient reason , and traditional discipline of Apprenticeship in London , so the Master ties himself to his Apprentice in the word docere , in lieu of his honest service , to teach him his Art to the utmost . Which Masters part is grown to such estimation as that Apprentices now come commonly like wines with portions to their Masters . If then Apprenticeship be a kind of servitude , it is either a pleasing bondage , or a strange madness to purchase it with money . 

6 An Apprentice therefore , as an Apprentice , being neither ratione obsequij , temporis , contractus , nor conditionis in any kind a bondman , is in no respect a bondman : and hath therefore no more lost his title , and right to Gentry , than he hath done to any goods , chattels , lands , royalties , or any thing else , which , if he had never been an Apprentice , either had , might , or aught to have come unto him . Nay , much less can Gentry be lost in this case , then right to lands , and goods , how much more inherent the rights of blood are then the rights of fortune . For , according to the law-rule , iura sanguinum nullo iure civili dirimi possunt ; whereas those other may be dissolved . And , that Gentry is a right of blood may appear by this , that no man can truly alienate the same , or rest another in it , though legally he may , in case of Adoption , which is but an human invention in imitation of nature , and therefore , in rei veritate , no alienation at all , but a fiction , or an acception in law as if it were such . So that none can any more pass away his gentry , to make another a Gentleman thereby , who was not a Gentleman before , than he can pass away any habit , or quality of the mind , as virtue , or learning , to make another honest , or learned , who was unlearned , or dishonest before . For Gentry is a quality of blood , or name , as virtue , and learning are of the mind . Upon which reason that rule of law is grounded , which teacheth us , that annulus signatorius ornamenti appellatione non continetur . 

7 To all this if it be replied : That Apprenticeship is a kind of bondage , for that if an Apprentice abandon his Master's service ; his Master may both fetch him back , as Lord for the time over his servant's body , and compel him also to live under obedience . We answer thus . That such a power over the body of an Apprentice is not sufficient to constitute a bondman , though the service of the Apprentice belongs to the Master , God's partin him , and the Commonweals being first deducted . 

Aristotle held , that only the Grecians were free , and all the barbarous , that is to say , all not Grecians , were bond . Some among us seem Aristototelians in this point , who as he gloriously overvalued his Countrymen , so these overvalue their paragon-gentry , and repute none worthy of Arms , and Honour but themselves , we supposing on their behalf , that they are indeed not vaine-pretenders only , but true descendants from the most unquestionable noble razes , howsoever troubled perhaps with some little of the spirit of vanity , and of too too much scorn of others . But as the Italians in our time , notwithstanding they think meanly of all who are not Italians , calling them ( in Aristotle's humour ) Tramontani , and in that word implying them to be barbarous , do commit an error , aswell as that great Philosopher , so those Gentlemen ( how eminently noble soever ) will be likewise found to live in error , for that others also may be truly Gentlemen , for any thing which as yet is spoken in the former Sophism : videlicet ; The Master hath power over his Apprentices body : Ergo , Apprentices are a kind of bondmen . Because if such a power be enough to constitute a bondman , we will say nothing of those freeborn persons being in minority , whose bodies their Guardians , may not only by a right in law , fetch back after escape , or flight , but give away also in marriage . Nay , if for that reason Apprentices , born Gentlemen , shall be thought to have forfeited their Gentry , in what estate are all the sons , and children of good houses in England , whose bodies their parents by a right of nature , may fetch back after flight , & exercise their pleasure , or displeasure upon them , even to disinherison ? Nay , in what case are soldiers ( to whom most properly , and most immediately the Honour of Arms doth belong ) who for withdrawing themselves from their banner , or Captain without leave , may not only be forced back to serve , but ( according to the usual discipline of war ) may be martial Law be hanged up , or shot at the next tree , or wheresoever , deprived of breath at once , and of brave reputation together ? So absurd it is to dispute , that the power of a Master , by the title of a contract over the body of an Apprentice , in case of discipline , doth convince a servility of condition in the sufferer . For if the right to exercise corporal coerction should absolutely constitute a state of bondage in the subject , the injury of that untrue assertion would reach to persons of far higher mark than City-prentises , as is most plainly proved . And therefore they must allege somewhat else besides subjection of body to draw the estate of Apprenticeship into that degree of reproach , which as they cannot do , we having prevented those objections , so must they leave it clear from taint , or scandal . 

8 We lay it down therefore out of all the antecedences for a clear conclusion : That Apprentices are so far from being a kind of bondmen , as that in our Commonweal they than first begin habere caput , and to be aliqui : to be of account , and some body . For Apprenticeship in London is a degree , or order of good regular subjects , out of whose as it were Noviceships , or Colleges , Citizens are supplied . We call them Colleges according to the old Roman Law-phrase , or fellowships of men , for so indeed they are , comprehended within several corporations , or bodies of free persons , intended to be consociated for commerce , according to conscience , and justice , and named Companies , each of them severally bearing the title of their several worthy Monopolies , as Drapers , Salters , Clothworkers , and so forth . We say as before , that Apprentices in the reputation of our Commonweal , when first they come to be Apprentices then first begin to be some body , and that Apprenticeship is a degree , to which out of youth , and young men , who have no vocation in the world , they are advanced and that out of Apprentices , by other ascents or steps , as donari civitate , to come to be free of London , or Citizens , from thence to be of their companies Livery , the governors of Companies , as Wardens , and Masters , and governors in the City , as Common-counsel-men , Aldermens-deputies , Sheriffs , and Aldermen ; and lastly the principal governor , or head of the City , the Lord Maior ; yea sometimes also Counsellors of Estate to the Prince ( whereof Master Stowe hath examples ) are very orderly elected ; and the whole policy disposed after as excellent a form as most at this day under heaven . 

9 True it is , that Apprenticeship , as it is a degree , so is it the lowest degree , or class of men in London . Lowest we say , that it may come to the highest , according to that of S. Augustine , and of common sense , that those buildings rise highest , and stand fasteth , whose foundations are deepest . And as Apprentipish is the first in order , & meanest in dignity , so can that be no title to embase the vocation , because there must be a first in all things . Of this degree the flat round Cap , hair close-cut , narrow falling-band , course side-coat , close-hose , cloth stockings , and the rest of that severe habit was in antiquity , not more for thrift , and usefulness , then for distinction , and grace , and were originally arguments , or tokens of vocation , or calling , which point of ancient discipline the Cato's of England , grave common Lawyers , to their high commendation therein , retain in their profession , and professors at this present , even to the partie-coulored coats of serving men at Sergeants Feasts . An object , far more ridiculous among the new-shapes of our time ( enemy of rigour , and discipline ) then that of Apprentices . At which retained signs , and distinctive notes among Lawyers , though younglings , and frivolous novices , may somewhat wonder , till the cause be understood , yet is the thing itself so far in itself from deserving contempt , as that they who should offer it , would themselves be laughed at . For the late Lord Coke , in the preface of his third book of Reports , hath affirmed for the dignity of the word Apprentice , that an Apprentice at Law is a double reader , whose degree is next to that of a Sergeant at Law , who is only inferior to a judge , and to no other degree of Lawyers . 

10 Here now let me be bold to say , that Apprentices seem to have drunk and sacrificed too deeply to their new Goddess , Saint Fashion ▪ An Idol which was always noted fatal to the English . As at the periods , or universal concussions of Empire in our portion of great Britain , may in old Writers be observed . This they do not without wrong in our opinions to the honesty of their degree , at leastwise in so far abandoning their proper ornament , the Cap ( anciently a note of liberty among the Romans ) as not to have one day at least in the year , wherein to celebrate the feast of their Apprenticeship in the peculiar garb thereof , which they should do well and wisely to frequent for downe-bearing of contumely , and scorn , by making profession in this wise , that they glory in the ensigns of their honest calling . 

11 For revocation of which into use though we see no manner of hope , yet are those late Magistrates of the City who laboured to reduce Apprenticeship to practise this laudable point of outward conformity , not the less to be commended : and it were to be wished perhaps , that instead of scattering Libels , and of discovering inclinations to tumult , Apprentices had rather submitted their understandings , and resigned their wills in this particular to their loving superiors , making humble , and wise obedience the glory of their persons , much rather than apparel in the fashion . For they who are not ashamed of their profession , ought not to be ashamed of the ensigns , and tokens of their profession , or degree . They indeed are out of fashion who are not in that fashion which is proper to their quality . The flat round Cap , in itself considered as a Geometrical figure , is far more worthy than the square , according to that ground in the Mathematics , figurarum spaerica est optima , and in Hieroglyphickes , is a symbol of eternity , and perfection , & a resemblance of the world's rotunditie . But I will make no encomium for caps . This I say , that as the square cap is retained not only in the Universities , but also abroad among us , as well by Ecclesiastical persons in high places , as by judges of the Land , so the round cap being but a note in London , of Apprentices , and Citizens of London , as it is of Students , Barresters , Benchers , and Readers , in the Inns of Court , so the wearing thereof by Londoners cannot be a reproach , but an ornament . But communis error facit ius , and how freely soever these thoughts come from me out of abundant love to the preservation of virtue in that most honourable City , which civil discipline is ablest to do , yet as much piety as it is to wish the best , so great is the vanity to think to stop the general stream of predominant custom by private wishes . Apprentices moreover , and Citizens , because they are always conversant in the light of action , and concourse , and not shut up in Colleges for studies sake , may think by this contrary way the more to honour their City , and to enjoy themselves . 

12 Well may they in the mean time blush at their temeritie , who by teaching that Apprentices are called Apprentices , as if they were pares emptitijs , do dishonour and highly wrong the excellent old policy of this land . For they ( as much as lieth in the credit of their words ) most dangerously discourage flourishing Industry , who cast such an aspersion upon any civil profession , and order of men ( assembled to uphold a kingdom by commerce , according to justice ) as the least conceit of so hateful a note as bondage . And if it be temeritie to cast it upon any renowned , or other corporation unjustly , it is singular iniquity ( let it not be called madness ) to lay it upon London , which shines among all Cities within the Empire of Britain . — velut inter ignes ; 
Luna minores — 




The Contents of this fourth part . 

1 The Author means not to erect a new Babylon by confounding degrees . Horace's monster . The common law's distinction . 
2 Citizens' as Citizens' not Gentlemen , but a particular species . The Gentleman the natural subject of all Nobility . The Author's meaning explained . Encouragement of honest Industry . Ius annulorum , that among the Romans , which bearing of Arms among us. The causes compared . The distinction of a mere Citizen . Disparagement of Wards how to be understood in this case . King Edward the first his displeasure an efficient of what effects . Armouries to symbolise with the first bearers quality . Antiquities sacred care in point of ennoblements . 
3 The Author's Apostrophe to Fathers , whether they be Gentlemen born , or not . no cause why the Great should be ashamed of City-beginnings . Martial virtue principal owner of Armouries . The Chamber of the King.  
4 Kings of England ennoble the Companies of London with their persons , by a singular favour . Henry the seventh his admirable sociabilitie , or configuration of himself to popular forms . Clothworkers his late Majesty's brotherhood . 
5 London-companies denominated of their Monopolies , but not embased thereby . Of Circensian-games and colours . Plinius his complaint . Gentleman's means if properly entitled are as mean as London-mysteries . Nor , in that respect , any great disparilitie between Country , and Citie-gentlemen . 
6 The Ecclipticke line of London's Zodiac . The mind , and not names is essential to qualifications . 
7 The Authors second Apology for his meaning in this case . His scope to beat down injurious vanity , not to wrong vocations . London Companies best so called as they are . The first Roman Consul , not being a Patrician , free of Butchers . Where Majesty is , there can be no baseness . The glory of wit , and arms due to London . 
8 All honest nature's love glory , and no glory good but as subordained to God.  
The fourth Part.  

Though thus I have been the Advocate , and Defender of the credit of the City , yet desire I not to be mistaken . For it is very far from my thoughts , by this Apology , or patronisation , to confound degrees in commonweal , so to set up as it were a new Babylon of mine own . I am not ignorant therefore , that Citizens , as Citizens' , are not Gentlemen , but Cizens ; To hold otherwise were to take one order , or degree of men out of the Realm , or like Horace's monster ( a man's head , and a birds body ) to create a thing which had half one , and half another , and our laws give a proper name both to the tenure , and person , calling the tenure of Citizens in Cities , Burgages , and their persons , Burgenses , among whom the more eminent of them in London had of old not only the honour of the title of Citizens , or Burgesses , but of Barons also . 

2 The ordinary Citizen therefore , is of a degree beneath the mere Gentlemen , as the Gentleman is among us in the lowest degree , or class of Nobility in England . And all Citizens as Citizens , yea , the Lord Maior himself , simply as a Citizen , is not a Gentleman , but Burgenfis . As the greatest Princes , and Despots that ever were , or ever shall be in the world , considered in their first natural condition , are at most but Ingenui , or freeborn , in which respect all are equal , for omnes natura aequales , and their first civil degree , or general state , which either comprehends all the orders of Nobility , or is capable of them , is among us the Gentleman . In which respect he who shall say , That this or that King , or Emperor is a Gentleman , speaks rightly , and as the thing is . For Gentleman is the title , about which all other titles , as they concern honour , and convey no jurisdiction , are put as robes and ornaments . This therefore is my meaning ; That some Citizens may be a Citizen , and yet truly a Gentleman , as one , and the same man may in several respects be both a Lord and Tenant . Citizen in regard of his incorporation in London , Gentleman in regard of birth , or of Armouries assigned for encouragement of Industry , to ennoble his honest riches and titles of honour , or worship , in that City , whereof he is a qualified member . Neither is the communication of rewards , which consist of painted distinctions , composed according to the received rules of Heraldry , injurious to ancient Gentry any more than the promiscuous permission of wearing gold-rings on their fingers alike to freedmen , as to freemen , granted by the Emperor in the authentics : the reason of gold-rings among Romans , and of Armouries among us being the same . Nor is it a new thing in our Commonweal , that special Citizens , not born to armouries , but the sons of yeomen , or not of Gentlemen , should have arms assigned them . For there is perhaps scarce any record of Arms granted in England more ancient than testimonies in the Halles of London , that special Citizens have been honoured with particular bearing . And these are advanced upon the Lord Mayor's day by the speare-men of that company of which his Lordship is a member , not all of them specially given of old , but some undoubtedly born by right of blood , as descendants of Gentlemen , but other again as undoubtedly assigned for excellency in City-arts . Of which number there are at this day not a few , whose seri nepotes whose great-grand-childrens' children are reputed among the oldest and best families of their Shires , without any relation to London , which notwithstanding raised them . Hence it follows , that as an Apprentice being a Gentleman-borne remaineth a Gentleman , which addition of splendour , and title , as God blesseth his labours , so a worthy Citizen is capable of honour and Arms , notwithstanding his Apprenticeship . And by this distinction made between a Citizen merely as a Citizen , and of a Citizen , as he may also be a Gentleman , that objection which some bring out of a Statute enacted under one of our Kings , which forbidding the disparagement offered by the Guardian to marry the Ward born gentle , to a Burgensis , may easily be salved and answered . For in that Statute the word Burgensis is spoken in the native , and more narrow sense thereof , that is of one who is simply Burgensis , without any consideration of him as he may otherwise be a Gentleman , Esquire , or Knight , which in some places happens , as in the famous corporation of Droit Wiche in Worcestershire . But howsoever , cerainely Burgensis hear nothing concerns Citizens of London , who by an excellency of their calling had the honour in antiquity to bear the name of Barons , and were styled so ; and weighing that , the Citizen is a distinct degree from Burgensis , and above it ; and therefore that law concerns them not . For the proof of their title to the appellation of Barons , by way of Hexoche ( as artists in eloquence call it ) most famous is that place in the Histories of Matthew Paris , where speaking of the Londoners of his time , under King Henry the third , these words are eminent in him : Londonienses quos propter civitatis dignitatem , & civium antiquitatem , Barones' consuevimus appellare . As for the distinct degree of a Citizen from a Burgensis , that appears in this , that the City of London doth not send Burgesses to the Parliament , but Knights , or Citizens ; and the enumeration of the ranks is clear in a Statute of King Richard the second , enacted the fifth year of his reign , and the fourth Chapter of the same , where they are , Count , Baron , Banneret , Chevalier de Count , Citizen de City , Burgeiss the Burgh . The Princes before that time , but specially the Princes following ( as the worthiness of Citizens invited ) did ennoble them exceedingly , and continue more and more so to do . Yet , in conferring Arms , and arguments of honour upon Cizens , not born Gentlemen , reason requireth that they should not have coats of the fairest bearing assigned to them , but such as either in Canton , Chief , Border , or otherwise might carry some testimony , mark , or sign to show the Art by which they were advanced , as Merchant-aduenturers to bear Anchors , Grocer's Cloves , Clothworkers a Tezel , Merchantaylors a robe , and so forth ; which those Gentlemen ought in honesty , and thankfulness to choose , and not only to accept ; and rather strive to match the best in goodness , and worth of spirit then in the silent tokens of it . Posterity thriving , there may then some change be also made in the coat for the better . Specially considering what pretty riddance hath been in our times made of surcharges in armouries granted about the end of King Henry the eight ; what encroachments upon old Gentleman's rights , by new ones , because their names only have been the same ; and many other inventions to blanche or beautify newness . According to which notion and dictamen , coats of Arms have been delivered from their original deformities , surfeits , and surcharges , by their proper Physician , the provincial King of Arms ; So Sir Thomas Kitsons of Suffolk , whose Chief , now simply gold , was heretofore overladen with three ogresses , and they with an Anchor ( the badge or argument of the original ) and two Lions rampant argent ; as at this hour is publicly extant to be seen in Trinity Hall at Cambridge , whereunto he was a benefactor : and besides that Gentleman's , the coat armours of some of the Peers of this land , and of others also , not a few : very many more needing the like relief , or remedy . The rule of proportion seems diligently observed in antiquity among us , where the principal , and most noble charges , and forms of Armouries were not appropriated but to analogical competencies of honourable quality . 

3 Such therefore being the nature of Apprenticeship , and such the condition of Citizen's estate , as to the purposes of honour , and arms , let Fathers who are Gentleman put their children , who are not rather inclining to Arms , or letters , to Apprenticeship , that is to say , to the discipline , and Art of honest gain , giving them a title of being somewhat in our Country . For it is a vocation simply honest , and may prove a stay to posterity , and give credit to their names , when licentious and corrupted elder sons have sold their birthrights away . For albeit many Citizens thrive not , but break , yet those fathers , or such who are in place of Fathers , work more probably , who put their children , or Orphans into a certain method of life , then others who leave them at large . And as some riotous , foolish , or unfortunate Citizens miscarry , so ten to one more younger brethren in the Country . And fathers , such of you are not gentlemen , put your children to be Apprentices , that so as God may bless their just , true , and virtuous industry , they may found a new family , and both raise themselves and theirs to the precious and glittering title of Gentlemen bearing Arms lawfully . For which cause no Lord , nor Peer of this Land , who may perchance own his worldly estate , and as well the completive , as the fundamental greatness , or amplitude of means , to such as have been Citizens of London ; nor those other , whose originals were from chivalry , and martial service ( the most pure , and proper Noblesse of all , as to the purpose of bearing Arms ) and yet since have been mixed with Citie-races , aught to think it the least disparagement to own their benefactors and ancestors , Citizens of London . On the other part it will worthily well become them , freely and thankfully to acknowledge so honest originals , and accession to originals , as all this Realm from thence is filled with . Because among them the virtues of commutative justice , and of commendable industry flourish , and , the sinews of war , and peace , abundance of treasure , are stored up , as in the Chamber of the King.  

4 Which acknowledgement , besides that it is in the laws of honour , an act of bounden duty , they may the rather take it for a glory , because our Princes have vouchsafed to be incorporated ; as members of several Companies in the City , coming thereby as it were under that banner . Nor only so , but Henry the seventh ( whom all of us will easily confess to have well enough understood what he did ) is credibly said to have been in person , at the election of Master & Wardens , and himself to have sitten openly among them in a gown of crimson velvet , Citie-fashion , with a Citizen's hood of velvet on his shoulders a la mode de Londres , upon their solemn feast-day , in the common hall of his Company , Merchantailers . Moreover , his grandchild , Queen Elizabeth ( no way inferior to her ancestor in high policy ) was free of Mercers . Lastlie ( which is more to our present purpose ) our late dread Sovereign himself King james more learned than they both ( though learning hath been a Royal ability in our ancient Princes , & so flourishing in Sebert , King of East-england , that our venerable countryman BEDE , affirms him to have been , per omnia doctissimus ) encorporated himself into one the most important society of this kingdom Clothworkers , as men dealing in the principal and noblest Staplewares' of all these Lands ; wool , and cloth . 

5 Nor let the names of Companies , because they seem not to sound honourably enough as appellations of degrees in Gentry , and Nobility , avert the mind from them as things ignoble and unworthy the dignity of generous dispositions , a thing erroneously holden in Fernes Blazon of Gentry . For all renowned Cities ever had in them urbana nobilitas , and yet their citizens could not but be distributed into orders , tribes , or titles of professions , yea sometimes also in their games , For the Circensian companies in Rome , called factiones , that is to say , companies , and denominated from the several colours of their several clothing , White , blue , green , and red , to which Domitian added two other , purple , and gold , were the special delights and exercises of Prince & people ; which grew to such excess , no longer after then in Traian's time , that Plinius secundus held it a matter worthy of his complaint , and censure , as in one of his Epistles is extant , where he saith nunc panno favent , nunc pannum amant . Again , such of the Gentry , who live not in the city , and do most of all elevate themselves with contempt of others in respect of the Arts , and ways of maintenance , were they but incorporated under the true titles of their means , in which we will not speak of the prodigious eating up of whole houses , towns , and people , by a thousand wicked devices proper to the mystery of depopulation ( against whose consuming works so many statutes of this land have long time warred in vain ) the names of those citie-brotherhoods , or Companies would easily sound , in a most curious ear , full out as fair , and well . Corn , Cattle , Butter , Cheese , Hay , Wood , Wool , Coals , and the like , the materials of their maintenance , all of them inseparable to Countrey-commonweales , and without which they can no more subsist then Drapers , as Drapers without cloth , Glodsmiths , as Goldsmiths without jewels , or plate , and so forth . Neither doth it create any great odds in this point touching honour between parties in this dispute , that Gentlemen , by their officers , as Bailiffs , Reeves , or the like , do order their affairs for their more ease , & dignities . For besides , that the wisest among them exercise that superintendency in their own persons , so herein the worthy Citizen is no way behind , dispatching his businesses by Factors , journeymen , or expert Apprentices , reserving only to himself the overuiew , and control all their doings . Citie-noblesse so apparent , that the Knights or Gentlemen of Rome , professing Merchandise , and others among them that way bend , had their Hall , or seat of their College , or company upon Mount Capitoline itself , dedicated to their patron Deity , or tutelarie Godhead , Mercury . Other encorporated societies there also were , as Goldsmiths , and the rest , who lived so far from being excluded out of the power of commonweal , or from honours , and signs of nobleness , that they had right in some cases even to overtop the Lords , and out of their own body to choose not only Consuls , but even Dictator's also , their super-soveraigne & most absolute Magistrate before their Emperor's times . Yea so mighty were they grown in respect of elections and negative authority , that Clodius to be revenged upon Cicero , left his own rank of Patritians , and Lords , and turned Commoner . 

6 To conclude , such Gentlemen are much deceived , which no sooner hear one named to be of this , or that Society , or College of trade in London , as of Grocers , Haberdashers , Fishmongers , or of any other of the twelve principal Monopolies ( the Zodiac of the city , in whose Ecliptic line their Lord Mayor must ever run his year's course ) but they forthwith entertain a low conceit of the party's quality , as too too much beneath their own rank , and order , without further examination ; when it often happens , that he who is titularlie of this , or that Fraternity , never was bred up in it , nor understands any more what it means then the remotest Gentleman , their Masters themselves having been Merchants , or of other profession of life divers from their title , under which they are marshaled , the law of the city imposing an absolute necessity that all who are free of the city should carry the name of some one , or other of their brotherhoods . Again , what do the constellations of heaven shine the worse , or the less , because they carry the names of Ramm , of a Water-bearer , of fishes , and so forth ? Or how many the fewer are their several lights for that ? Answerably to which I say , that if the party's mind be adorned with the starre-lights of virtue and honour , what baseness is it for him to be marshaled under any of the names comprehending one , or other of the honest Arts of worldly life ? 

7 In disputing thus , let me not be thought to set up an envious comparison between these two worshipful degrees , or qualifications of men . That is very far from me . For it must ever be granted , to the authority of general opinion founded upon custom among us , that the true Countrey-esquire caeteris paribus , is in his proper place before the Citie-esquire , which with the perpetual clause beforesaid of caeteris paribus holds also , throughout the other degrees of the inferior Noblesse in England . I reason here , as reason bids , not against the right , or dignities of persons either as in parallel , or as in disparagement , but against the vanity , and offences rising out of causeless elation , and arrogance , and against their errors , who not understanding the things of their own country , are indeed mere Meteoroscopers , and hover in the cloudy region of admiration upon rude , and unlearned fancies , for which cause as minds needing to be healed , so would I sincerely that they were healed . Such are theirs , who would perhaps think the Companies , or Monopolies of the city more worthy of their acknowledgement , if where now they are denominated of some particular ware , or craft , they were named of Eagles , Vultures , Lions , Bears , Panthers , Tigers , or so forth , as the several orders of the Noble in Mexico ( which josephus Acosta writes ) under their Emperor : yet much better , because more truly , these fellowships of London carry the names of men as they have vocations in professions , which only men can execute . Or they would peradventure think more nobly of them , if those societies were denominated of Eyes , ears , hands , feet , or of other members , as Philostratus , in the life of that impostor Apollonius Tianaeus , saith , the officers , and instruments of a Philosophical King in India were . But as those were called of their King his eyes , ears , and so forth , so have these mysteries some one , or other professor in each among them , from the higher trade to the lowest eminently designed out with the addition of King , as the King's Mercer , the King's Draper , and so forth . Again , how much more worthy the whole is then the parts , because the parts are in the whole , so by that argument it is more honourable to be marshaled as a man among societies of civil men , then to be distinguished by allusions to particular members . At leastwise , those singular Gentlemen might certainin their most contempt of the City remember that of Plato , Nemo Rex non ex seruis , nemo non seruus ex Regibus ; and that also rare and real worth may be in the persons of Citizens themselves , seeing Terentius ( Consul of old Rome , with that noble Paulus Aemilius ) was free of the Butcher's company , and our Walworth Lord Mayor of old London was free of the Fishmongers . And they were not only the Lords , Knights , and Gentlemen of Rome , who had voice in election of their principal yearly Magistrates , but even handycraftsmen ▪ and Artificers , as is most manifest by that place of Sallust in his jugurthine war , where Marius was chosen Consul , by the special affection of that sort of Roman Citizens , who ( saith he ) sua necessaria post illius honorem ducebant , preferred his election by their voices , before the trades by which they earned their livings . Finally , they may remember , that in the posterity of Citizens many right noble , and worthy Gentlemen are often found , and that , besides the universal mixture with Citie-races thorough the Kingdom , it may not be denied that true nobless shines often very bright among them . For they are Companies of free Citizens , in which , sovereign Majesty itself is incorporated , making them at once to be sacred as it were , and certainly magnificent . For even as where the Sun is , there is no darkness , so where sovereign Princes are interressed parties , there is no baseness . And as the Philosopher's Medicine purgeth vilest metals , turning all to gold , so the operation of Prince's intention to ennoble Societies with his personal presence , transmetalls the subject , and clearly takes away all ignobility . Which things as they are most true in London , so , for that , the Emperor Constantinus magnus ( if our ancient Fitz Stephan reports the right ) Henry King of England , son of king Henry the second , and that brave great Prince Edward the first , and whosoever else , were born in the City , they give to it the glory of Arms : and jeffrey Chaucer , Sir Thomas Moor knight , with others born in London , communicate thereunto the glory of wits and letters . To nourish up both which most excellent titles to real nobility in the City , the Artillery-yard , and Gressam College were instituted . 

8 Thus this question of Honour , and Arms , undertaken at the instance of interested parties , but more for love to that great City , and her children , being by God's assistance , and , as we hope , sufficiently discussed , the end of all is this , that albeit the love of human praise , and of outward splendour in the marks , and testimonies of it , are very vehement fires in all worthiest natures , yet have they no beatitude , nor ( so to say ) felicitation , but only as with referment to this of the blessed Apostle , 

Soli Deo Honour , & Gloria . 

Amen . 

I have viewed this book , and perused the same , and find nothing therein dissonant to reason , or contrary to the Law of Honour or Arms . 

William Segar Garter princip . King of Arms . 

Errata . 

In the Epistle to the Masters . 

For juice of ingratitude , read vice of ingratitude . 

In the Epistle to the Prentices . 

For preying , read prying . 

For honourable ( all , read honourable strangers ( all . 

Page 5 For larger volume , read leger volume . 

17.  For discouser , read discourser . 

19  For civil Art government , read civil Art of government . ●ad For most an - Art of increase , read most ancient Art of increase . 

20.  For a would , read as would . 

23.  For over-slave , read over his slave . 

38.  For fasteth , read fastest . 

51.  For you are read you as are . 

55.  For control all read control of all . 

57  For Ram , read a Ram . 

58.  For certain , read certainly . 

