AN EPICEDE OR Funeral Song : On the most disastrous Death , of the High-born Prince of Men , HENRY Prince of WALES , etc.  With The Funerals , and Representation of the Hearse of the same High and mighty Prince ; Prince of Wales , Duke of Cornwall and Rothsay , Count Palatine of Chester , Earl of Carick , and late Knight of the most Noble Order of the GARTER . Which Noble Prince deceased at St. james , the sixth day of November , 1612. and was most Princely interred the seventh day of December following , within the Abbey of Westminster , in the Eighteenth year of his Age.  

LONDON : Printed by T. S. for john Budge , and are to be sold at his shop at the great south door of Paul's , and at Brittanes Burse . 1612.  

TO MY AFFECTIONATE , AND TRUE Friend , Mr. Henry jones . 

My truest Friend : 

THE most unualuable and dismaifull hope of my most dear and Heroical Patron , Prince HENRY , hath so stricken all my spirits to the earth , that I will never more dare , to look up to any greatness ; but resolving the little rest of my poor life to obscurity , and the shadow of his death ; prepare ever hereafter , for the light of heaven . 

So absolute , constant , and noble , your love hath been to me ; that if I should not as effectually , by all my best expressions , acknowledge it ; I could neither satisfy mine own affection , nor deserve yours . 

Accept therefore , as freely as I acknowledge , this unprofitable sign of my love ; till God blessing my future labours , I may add a full end , to whatsoever is begun in your assurance of my requital . A little , blessed , makes a great feast ( my best friend ) and therefore despair not , but that , out of that little , our loves always made even , may make you say , you have rather been happy in your kindness , then in the least degree , hurt . There may favours pass betwixt poor friends , which even the richest , and greatest may envy . And GOD that yet never let me live , I know will never let me die an impair to any friend . If any good , more than requital succeed , it is all yours as freely , as ever yours was mine ; in which noble freedom and alacrity of doing ; you have thrice done , all I acknowledge . And thus knowing , I give you little contentment , in this so far unexpected publication of my gratitude ; I rest satisfied with the ingenuous discharge of mine own office . Your extraordinary and noble love and sorrow , born to our most sweet PRINCE , entitles you worthily to this Dedication : which ( with my general Love , unfeignedly protested to your whole Name and Family ) I conclude you as desertful of , at my hands , as our Noblest Earl ; and so ever remain 

Your most true poor Friend , GEO : CHAPMAN . 

The Hearse and Representation of our late High and Mighty HENRY Prince of Wales . etc ▪ 



AN EPICED , OR Funeral Song : On the most disastrous Death , of the High-born Prince of Men , HENRY Prince of WALES , etc.  

IF ever adverse Influence envied 
The glory of our Lands , or took a pride 
To trample on our height ; or in the Eye 
Struck all the pomp of Principality , 
Now it hath done so ; O , if ever Heaven 
Made with the earth his angry reckoning even , 
Now it hath done so . Ever , ever be 
Admired , and feared , that Triple Majesty 
Whose finger could so easily stick a Fate , 
'twixt least Felicity , and greatest state ; 
Such , as should melt our shore into a Sea , 
And dry our Ocean with Calamity . 
Heaven opened , and but showed him to our eyes , 
then shut again , and showed our Miseries . 
OH God , to what end are thy Graces given ? 
Only to show the world , Men fit for Heaven , 
then ravish them , as if too good for Earth ? 
We know , the most exempt in wealth , power , Birth , 
Or any other blessing ; should employ 
( As to their chief end ) all things they enjoy , 
To make them fit for Heaven ; and not pursue 
With hearty appetite , the damned crew 
Of merely sensual and earthy pleasures ? 
But when one hath done so ; shall straight the tresures 
Digged to , in those deeps , be consumed by death ? 
Shall not the rest , that error swalloweth , 
Be , by the Pattern of that Masterpiece , 
Helped to instruct their erring faculties ? 
When , without clear example ; even the best 
( That cannot put by knowledge to the Test 
what they are taught ) serve like the worst in field ? 
Is power to force , who will not freely yield , 
( Being great assistant , to divine example ) 
As vain a Pillar to thy Manly Temple ? 
when ( without perfect knowledge , which scarce one 
Of many kingdoms reach ) no other stone 
Man hath to build one corner of thy Fane , 
Save one of these ? But when the desperate wane 
Of power , and of example to all good , 
So spent is , that one cannot turn the flood , 
Of goodness , 'gainst her ebb ; but both must ply , 
And be at full to ; or her stream will dry ; 
Where shall they meet again , now he is gone 
Where both went foot by foot ; & both were one ? 
One that in hope , took up to topless height 
All his great Ancestors ; his one sail , fraught 
With all , all Prince's treasures ; he like one 
Of no importance ; no way built upon , 
Vanished without the end , for which he had 
Such matchless virtues , & was Godlike made ? 
Have thy best works no better cause t' express 
Themselves like men , and thy true Images ? 
To toil in virtue's study , to sustain 
( with comfort for her ) want , & shame , & pain ; 
no nobler end in this life , than a death 
Timeless , and wretched , wrought with less than breath ? 
And nothing solid , worthy of our souls ? 
Nothing that Reason , more than Sense extols ! 
Nothing that may in perfect judgement be 
A fit foot for our Crown eternity ? 
All which , thou seem'st to tell us , in this one 
Kill discomfort ; apt to make our moan 
Conclude 'gainst all things , serious and good ; 
ourselves , not thy forms , but Chimaeras brood . 
Now Princes , dare ye boast your vig'rous states 
That Fortune's breath thus builds and ruinates ? 
Exalt your spirits ? trust in flowery youth ? 
Give reinss to pleasure ? all your humours sooth ? 
Licence in rapine ? Powers exempt from laws ? 
Contempt of all things , but your own applause ? 
And think your swinge to any tyranny given , 
Will stretch as broad , & last as long as heaven ; 
when he that curbed with virtue's hand his power 
his youth with continence ; his sweet with sour 
Boldness with pious fear ; his palate's height 
Applied to health , and not to appetite ; 
Felt timeless sickness charge ; state , power to fly , 
And glutted Death with all his cruelty . 
Partial devourer ever of the best , 
With headlong rapture , sparing long the rest 
could not the precious tears his Father shed , 
( That are with Kingdoms to be ransomed ? ) 
His Bleeding prayer , upon his knees t'implore , 
That if for any sin of his , Heaven tore 
From his most Royal body that chief Limb , 
It might be ransomed , for the rest of Him ? 
could not the sacred eyes thou didst profane 
In his great Mother's tears ? The spiteful bane 
thou pouredst upon the cheeks of all the Graces 
In his more gracious Sisters ? The defaces 
( with all the Furies overflowing Galls ) 
Cursedly fronting her near Nuptials ? 
could not , OH could not , the Almighty ruth 
Of all these force thee to forbear the youth 
Of our Incomparable Prince of Men ? 
whose Age had made thy Iron Fork his Pen , 
T'eternise what it now doth murder merely ; 
And shall have from my soul , my curses yearly . 
Tyrant , what knewest thou , but the barbarous wound 
thou gav'st the son , the Father might confounded ? 
Both lived so mixtly , and were jointly One , 
Spirit to spirit cleft . The Humour bred 
In one heart , strait was with the other fed ; 
The blood of one , the others heart did fire ; 
The heart and humour , were the Son & Sire ; 
The heart yet , void of humours slender'st part , 
May easier live , than humour without heart ; 
The River needs the helpful fountain ever , 
more than the Fountain , the supplied River . 
As th'iron then , when it hath once put on 
The Magnets quality , to the virtuous Stone 
Is ever drawn , and not the stone to it : 
So may the heavens , the son's Fate , not admit 
To draw the Fathers , till a hundred years 
Have drowned that Issue to him in our tears . 
Blessed yet , and sacred shall thy memory be , 
O-nothing-lesse-then-mortall Deity . 
Thy Graces , like the Sun , to all men giving ; 
Fatal to thee in death , but kill me living . 
Now , as inverted , like th' Antipodes , 
The world ( in all things of desert to please ) 
Is fallen on us , with thee : thy ruins lie 
On our burst bosoms , as if from the sky 
The Daystar , greater than the world were driven 
Sunk to the Earth , and left a hole in Heaven ; 
through which , a second deluge now pours down 
On our poor Earth ; in which are overflown 
The seeds of all the sacred Virtues , set 
In his Spring-court ; where all the prime spirits met 
Of all our Kingdoms ; as if from the death , 
That in men living ; baseness and rapine sheath , 
Where they before lived , they unwares were come 
Into a free , and fresh Elysium ; 
Casting regenerate , and refined eyes 
On him that raised them from their graves of vice , 
Digged in their old grounds , to spring fresh on those 
That his divine Ideas did propose , 
First to himself ; & then would form in them . 
Who did not thirst to plant his son near him 
as near the Thames their houses ? what one worth 
Was there in all our world , that set not forth 
All his deserts , to Pilgrim to his favours , 
With all devotion , offering all his labours ? 
And how the wild Boar , Barbarism , now 
will root these Quicksets up ? what herb shall grow , 
that is not sown in his inhuman tracts ? 
no thought of good shall spring , but many acts 
Will crop , or blast , or blow it up : and see 
How left to this , the mournful Family , 
Muffled in black clouds , full of tears are driven 
With storms about the relics of this Heaven ; 
Retiring from the world , like Corpse's , herst 
Home to their graves , a hundred ways dispersed . 
OH that this court-schoole ; this Olympus merely , 
Where twofold Man was practised ; should so early 
Dissolve the celebration purposed there , 
Of all Heroic parts , when far and near , 
All were resolved t' admire , None to contend , 
When , in the place of all , one wretched end 
Will take up all endeavours ; Harpy Gaine , 
Pandar to Goat , Ambition ; golden Chain 
To true man's freedom ; not from heaven let fall 
To draw men up ; But shot from Hell to hale 
All men , as bondslaves , to his Turckish den , 
For Toads , and Adders , far more fit than men . 
His house had well his surname from a Saint , 
All things so sacred , did so lively paint 
Their pious figures in it : And as well 
His other house , did in his Name foretell 
what it should harbour ; a rich world of parts 
Bonfire-like kindling , the still-feasted Arts , 
which now on bridles bite , and puffed Contempt 
Spurs to Despair , from all fit food exempt . 
OH what a frame of Good , in all hopes raised 
Came tumbling down with him ! as when was seized 
By Graecian fury , famous Ilium , 
Whose fall , still ring's out his Confusion . 
What Triumphs , scattered at his feet , lie smoking ! 
Banquets that will not down ; their cherers choking , 
Fields fought , and hidden now , with future slaughter , 
Furies sit frowning , where late sat sweet laughter , 
The active lying maimed , the healthful crazed ? 
All round about his Hearse ? And how amazed 
The change of things stands ! how astonished joy 
Wonders he ever was ? yet every Toy 
Quits this grave loss : Rainbows no sooner taint 
Thin dewye vapours , which opposed beams paint 
Round in an instant , ( at which children stare 
And slight the Sun , that makes them circular 
And so disparent ) then mere gauds pierce men , 
Slighting the grave , like fools , and children . 
So courtly ne'er plagues , sooth and stupefie 
And with such pain , men leave self flattery . 
Of which , to see him free ( who stood no less 
Than a full siege of such ) who can express 
His most direct infusion from above , 
far from the humorous seed of mortal love ? 
He knew , that justice simply used , was best , 
Made princes most secure , most loved , most blessed 
no Artezan ; no Scholar ; could pretend , 
no Statesman ; no Divine ; for his own end 
Any thing to him , but he would descend 
The depth of any right belonged to it , 
Where they could merit , or himself should quit . 
He would not trust , with what himself concerned , 
Any in any kind ; but ever learned 
The grounds of what he built on : Nothing lies 
In man's fit course , that his own knowledge fly's 
Either direct , or circumstantial . 
OH what are Princes then , that never call 
Their actions to accounted , but flatterers trust 
To make their trial , if unjust or just ? 
Flatterers are household thieves , traitors by law , 
that rob kings honours , & their soules-bloud draw ; 
Diseases , that keep nourishment from their food . 
And as to know himself , is man's chief good , 
So that which intercepts that supreme skill , 
( which Flattery is ) is the supremest ill : 
Whose looks will breed the Basilisk in kings eyes , 
That by reflection of his sight , dies . 
And as a Nurse labouring a wayward Child , 
Day , and night watching it , like an offspring wild ; 
Talks infinitely idly to it still ; 
Sings with a standing throat , to worse from ill ; 
Lord-blesses it ; bears with his pewks and cries ; 
And to give it a long life's miseries , 
Sweetens his food , rocks , kisses , sings again ; 
Plies it with rattles , and all objects vain : 
So Flatterers , with as servile childish things , 
Observe , & soothe the wayward moods of kings ; 
So kings , that flatterer's love , had need to have 
as nurse-like councillors , & contemn the grave ; 
Themselves as wayward , and as noisome too ; 
Full as untuneable in all they do , 
As poor sick Infants ; ever breeding Teeth 
In all their humours , that be worse than Death . 
How wise then was our Prince that hated these , 
and would with naught but truth his humour please 
Nor would he give a place , but where he saw 
One that could use it ; and become a Law 
Both to his fortunes , and his Princes Honor. 
Who would give fortune naught she took upon her , 
Not give but to desert ; nor take a chance , 
That might not justly , his wished ends advance . 
His Good he joined with Equity and Truth ; 
Wisdom in years , crowned his ripe head in youth ; 
His heart wore all the folds of Policy , 
Yet went as naked as Simplicity . 
knew good and ill ; but only good did love ; 
In him the Serpent did embrace the Dove . 
He was not curious to sound all the stream 
Of others acts , yet kept his own from them : 
" He whose most dark deeds dare not stand the light , 
" begot was of imposture and the night . 
" Who surer than a Man , doth ends secure ; 
" Either a God is , or a Devil sure . 
The Precedent of men ; whom ( as men can ) 
All men should imitate , was God and Man 
In these clear deeps our Prince fished troubled streams 
of blood & vantage challenge diadems . 
In sum , ( knot-like ) he was together put , 
That no man could dissolve , and so was cut . 
But we shall see our foul-mouthed factions spite 
( Marked , witchlike , with one black eye , th' other white ) 
Open , & oppose against this spotless sun ; 
Such heaven strike blinder them th' eclipsed moon 
'twixt whom and noblesse , or humanity's truth , 
As much dull earth lies , and as little ruth , 
( Should all things sacred perish ) as there lies 
'twixt Phoebe , and the Light-fount of the skies , 
In her most dark delinquence : vermin right , 
That prey in darkness , and abhor the light ; 
Live by the spoil of virtue ; are not well 
But when they hear news , from their father hell 
Of some black mischief ; never do good deed , 
But where it does much harm , or hath no need . 
What shall become of virtues far-short train , 
when thou their head art reached , high Prince of men ? 
OH that thy life could have dispersed deaths storms , 
To give fair act to those Heroic forms , 
with which all good rules had enriched thy mind , 
Preparing for affairs of every kind ; 
Peace being but a pause to breathe fierce war ; 
no warrant dormant , to neglect his Star ; 
The licence sense hath , is t' inform the soul ; 
Not to suppress her , and our lusts extol ; 
This life in all things , to enjoy the next ; 
Of which laws , thy youth , both contained the text 
And the contents ; ah , that thy grey-ripe years 
Had made of all , Caesarean Commentares , 
( more than can now be thought ) in fact t'enroule ; 
And make black Faction blush away her soul . 
That , as a Temple , built when Piety 
Did to divine ends offer specially , 
What men enjoyed ; that wondrous state expressed , 
Strange Art , strange cost ; yet who had interest 
In all the frame of it ; and saw those days , 
Admired but little ; and as little praise 
Gave to the goodly Fabric : but when men , 
That live whole Ages after , view it , then , 
They gaze , and wonder ; and the longer time 
It stands , the more it glorifies his prime ; 
Grows fresh in honour , and the age doth shame 
That in such Monuments neglect such fame ; 
So had thy sacred Frame been raised to height , 
Form , fullness , ornament : the more the light 
Had given it view , the more had Men admired ; 
And though men now are scarce to warmness fired 
With love of thee ; but rather cold and dead 
To all sense of the grace they forfeited 
In thy neglect , and loss ; yet after-ages 
Would be inflamed , and put on holy rages 
with thy inspiring virtues ; cursing those 
Whose breaths dare blast thus , in the bud , the Rose . 
But thou ( woe's me ) art blown up before blown , 
And as the ruins of some famous Town , 
Show here a Temple stood ; a Palace , here ; 
A Citadel , an Amphitheatre ; 
Of which ( alas ) some broken Arches , still 
( Pillars , or Columns raced ; which Art did fill 
With all her riches and Divinity ) 
Retain their great , and worthy memory : 
So of our Prince's state , I naught rehearse 
But show his ruins , bleeding in my verse . 
What poisoned Ast'risme , may his death accuse ? 
Tell thy astonished Prophet ( deathles Muse ) 
And make my stars therein , the more adverse , 
The more advance , with sacred rage my Verse , 
And so adorn my dearest Fautors Hearse . 
That all the wits profane , of these bold times 
May fear to spend the spawn of their rank rhymes 
On any touch of him , that should be sung 
To ears divine , and ask an Angel's tongue . 
With this it thundered ; and a lightning showed 
Where she sat writing in a sable cloud ; 
A Pen so hard and sharp expressed her plight , 
It bit through Flint ; and did in Diamant write ; 
Her words , she sung , and laid out such a breast , 
As melted Heaven , and vexed the very blessed . 
In which she called all worlds to her complaints , 
And how our loss grew , thus with tears she paints : 
Hear earth & heaven ( & you that have no ears ) 
Hell , and the hearts of tyrants , hear my tears : 
Thus Britain Henry took his timeless end ; 
When his great Father did so far transcend 
All other Kings ; and that he had a Son 
In all his Father's gifts , so far begun , 
As added to Fame's Pinions , double wings ; 
And ( as brave rivers , broken from their springs , 
The further off , grow greater , and disdame 
To spread a narrower current than the Main ) 
Had drawn in all deserts such ample Spheres , 
As Hope yet never turned about his years . 
All other Princes with his parts comparing ; 
Like all Heaven's petty Luminaries faring , 
To radiant Lucifer , the days first born ) 
It hurled a fire red as a threatening Morn 
On fiery Rhamnusia's sere , and sulphurous spite , 
who turned the stern orbs of her ghastly sight , 
About each corner of her vast Command , 
And ( in the turning of her bloody hand ) 
Sought how to ruin endlessly our Hope , 
And set to all mishap all entries open . 
And see how ready means to mischief are ; 
She saw , fast by , the bloud-affecting Fever , 
( Even when th'autumnal-starre began t' expire ) 
Gathering in vapours thin , Ethereal fire : 
Of which , her venomed finger did jmpart 
To our brave Prince's fount of heat , the heart ; 
A praeternatural heat ; which through the veins 
And Arteries , by th' blood and spirits means 
Diffused about the body , and jnflamed , 
Begat a Fevor to be never named . 
And now this loather of the lovely Light , 
( begot of Erebus , and ugly Night ) 
Mounted in haste , her new , and noiseful Car , 
Whose wheels had beam-spokes from th'hungarian star ; 
And all the other frame , and freight ; from thence 
Derived their rude and ruthless influence . 
Up to her left side , leapt infernal Death 
His head hid in a cloud of sensual breath ; 
By her sat furious Anguish , Pale Despite ; 
Murmur , and Sorrow , and possessed Affright ; 
Yellow Corruption , Marow-eating Care ; 
Languor , i'll Trembling , fits Irregulare ; 
Inconstant Collor , feeble voiced Complaint ; 
Relentless Rigour , and Confusion faint ; 
Frantic Distemper ; & Hare-eyd unrest ; 
And short-breathed Thirst , with th'euer-burning breast 
A wreath of Adders bound her trenched Brows ; 
Where Torment Ambushed lay with all her throws 
Marmarian Lions , fringed with slaming Manes , 
drew this grim fury , and her brood of Banes , 
Their hearts of glowing Coals , murmured , & roared , 
To bear her crooked yokes , and her Banes abhorred , 
To their dear Prince , that bore them in his Arms , 
And should not suffer , for his Good , their Harms ; 
then from Hell's burning whirlpit up she hallde , 
The horrid Monster fierce Echidna called ; 
That from her Stygian jaws , doth vomit ever , 
Quitture , and Venom , yet is empty never : 
then burned her bloudshot eyes , her Temples yet 
Were cold as Ice , her Neck all drowned in sweat : 
Paleness spread all her breast , her life's heat stung : 
The Minds Interpreter , her scorched tongue , 
Flowed with blue poison : from her yawning Mouth 
Rheums fell like spouts filled from the stormy South : 
Which being corrupt , the hue of Saffron took , 
A fervent Vapour , all her body shook : 
From whence , her Vexed Spirits , a noisome smell , 
Expyred in fumes that looked as black as Hell. 
A ceaseless Torrent did her Nostrils steep , 
Her withered Entrails took no rest , no sleep : 
Her swollen throat rattled , warmed with life's last spark 
And in her salt jaws , painful Coughs did bark : 
Her teeth were stained with Rust , her sluttish hand 
She held out reeking like a New-quencht Brand : 
Armed with crooked Talons like the horned Moon , 
All Cheer , all Ease , all Hope with her was gone : 
In her left hand a quenchless fire did glow , 
And in her Right Palm freezed Sithonian Snow : 
The ancient Romans did a Temple build 
To her , as whom a Deity they held : 
So hid , and far from cure of Man she flies , 
In whose life 's Power she mates the Deities . 
When fell Rhamnusia saw this Monster ne'er , 
( Here steel Heart sharpening ) thus she spoke to her : 
Seest thou this Prince ( great Maid & seed of Night ) 
Whose brows cast beams about them , like the Light : 
Who joys securely in all present State , 
Nor dreams what Fortune is , or future Fate : 
At whom , with fingers , and with fixed eyes 
All Kingdom's Point , and Look , and Sacrifice : 
could be content to give him : Temples raise 
To his Expectance , and Unbounded Praise : 
His Now-ripe Spirits , and Valour doth despise , 
Sickness , and Sword , that give our Godheads Prize : 
His worth contracts the worlds , in his sole Hope , 
Religion , Virtue , Conquest have no scope : 
But his Endowments ; At him , at him , fly ; 
more swift , and timeless , more the Deity ; 
His Summer , Winter with the jellid flakes ; 
His pure Life , poison , sting out with thy Snakes ; 
This is a work will Fame thy Maidenhead : 
With this , her speech and she together fled ; 
Nor durst she more endure her dreadful eyes ; 
Who stung with goads her roaring Lions thighs ; 
And brandished , round about , her Snak-curld head 
With her left hand , the Torch it managed . 
And now Heaven's Smith , kindled his Forge & blue ; 
And through the round Pole , thick the sparkls flew 
When great Prince Henry , the delight of fame ; 
Darkened the Palace , of his Father's Name ; 
And hid his white limbs , in his downy Bed ; 
then Heaven wept falling Stars that summoned 
( With soft , and silent Motion ) sleep to breath 
On his bright Temples , th' ominous form of death ; 
Which now the cruel Gods did permit , 
That she might enter so , her Maiden fit ; 
When the good Angel , his kind Guardian , 
Her witheted foot , saw near this spring of Man ; 
He shrieked and said : what , what are thy rude ends ; 
Cannot , in him alone , all virtue's friends , 
( Melted into his all-upholding Nerves ; 
For whose Assistance , every Deity serves ) 
Move thee to prove thy Godhead , blessing him 
With long long life , whose light extinckt , will dim , 
All heavenly graces ? all this , moved her naught ; 
But on , & in his , all our rujnes wrought : 
She touched the Thresholds , and the thresholds shook ; 
The dore-posts , Paleness pierced with her faint look : 
The doors broke open , and the fatal Bed 
Rudely sh'aproacht , & thus her fell mouth said ; 
Henry , why tak'st thou thus thy rest secure ? 
Naught doubting what Fortune & fates assure ; 
thou never yet feltst my red right hands maims , 
That I co thee , and fate to me proclaims ; 
Thy fate stands jdle ; spinns no more thy thread ; 
Die thou must ( great Prince ) sigh not ; bear thy head 
In all things free , even with necessity 
If sweet it be to live ; 't is sweet to die : 
This said she shook at him her Torch , and cast 
A fire in him , that all his breast embraced , 
then darting through his heart a deadly cold , 
And as much venom as his veins could holdj 
Death , Death , OH Death , jnserting , thrusting in , 
Shut his fair eyes , and opened our ugly sin : 
This seen resolved on , by herself and fate ; 
Was there a sight so pale , and desperate , 
Ever before seen , in a thrust-through State ? 
The poor Verginian , miserable sail , 
A long-long-night-turnd-day , that lived in Hell 
Never so portrayed , where the Billows strove 
( Blacked like so many Devils ) which should prove 
The damned Victor ; all their furies heighting ; 
Their Drum , the thunder ; & their Colours lightning , 
Both soldiers in the battle ; one contending 
To drown the waves in Noise ; the other spending 
His Hel-hot sulphurous flames to drink them dry : 
When heaven was lost , when not a teare-wrackt eye , 
could tell in all that dead time , if they were , 
Sinking or sailing ; till a quickening clear 
Gave light to save them by the ruth of Rocks 
At the Bermudas ; where the tearing shocks 
And all the Miseries before , more felt 
then here half told ; All , All this did not melt 
Those desperate few , still dying more in tears , 
then this Death , all men , to the Marrow wears : 
All that are Men ; the rest , those drudging Beasts , 
That only bear of Men , the Coats , and Crests ; 
And for their Slave , sick , that can earn them pence , 
more mourn ( OH Monsters ) them for such a Prince ; 
Whose souls do ebb & flow still with their gain , 
Whom nothing moves but pelf , & their own pain ; 
Let such ( great Heaven ) be only born to bear , 
All that can follow this mere Massacre . 
Lost is our poor Prince ; all his sad jndurers ; 
The busy Art of those that should be Curers ; 
The sacred vows made by the zealous King , 
His Godlike Sire ; his often visiting ; 
Nor thy grave prayers and presence ( holy Man ) 
This Realm thrice Reverend Metropolitan , 
That was the worthy Father to his soul ▪ 
Th'jnsulting Fever could one fit control . 
Nor let me here forget on far , and near ; 
And in his life's love , Passing deep and dear ; 
That doth his sacred Memory adore , 
Virtues true fautor his grave Chancellor , 
Whose worth in all works should a Place enjoy , 
Where his fit Fame her Trumpet shall jmploie , 
Whose Cares , and Prayers , were ever used to ease 
His feu'rous War , & send him healthful peace , 
Yet sick our Prince is still ; who though the steps 
Of bitter Death , he saw bring in by heaps 
Clouds to his Luster , and poor rest of light ; 
And felt his last Day suffering lasting Night ; 
His true-bred-brave soul , shrunk yet at no part , 
Down kept he all sighs , with his powers al-hart ; 
Cleared even his dying brows : and ( in an Eye 
Manly dissembling ) hid his Misery . 
And all to spare the Royal heat so spent 
In his sad Father , fearful of th' event . 
And now did Phoebus with his Twelfth Lamp show 
The world his hapless light : and in his Brow 
A Torch of Pitch stuck , lighting half t'half skies , 
When life 's last error pressed the broken eyes 
Of this heart-breaking Prince ; his forced look fled ; 
Fled was all Colour from his cheeks ; yet fed 
His spirit , his sight : with dying now , he cast 
On his kind King , and Father : on whom , fast 
He fixed his fading beams : and with his view 
A little did their empty Orbs renew : 
His Mind saw him , come from the deeps of Death , 
To whom he said , OH Author of my Breath : 
Soul to my life , and essence to my Soul , 
Why grieve you so , that should all grief control ? 
Death's sweet to me , that you are still life's creature , 
I now have finished the great work of Nature . 
I see you pay a perfect Father's debt 
And in a feastful Peace your Empire kept ; 
If your true Sons last words have any right 
In your most righteous Bosom , do not fright 
your harkening kingdoms to your carriage now ; 
All yours , in me , I here resign to you , 
My youth ( I pray to God with my last powers ) 
Subtract from me may add to you and yours . 
Thus vanished he , thus swift , thus instantly ; 
Ah now I see , even heavenly powers must die . 
Now shift the King and Queen from court to court 
but no way can shifted off their cares resort , 
That which we hate the more we fly , pursues , 
that which we love , the more we seek , eschews : 
Now weeps his Princely Brother ; Now alas 
His Cynthian Sister , ( our sole earthly Grace ) 
Like Hebe's fount still overflows her bounds , 
And in her cold lips , stick astonished sounds , 
Sh'oppresseth her sweet kind ; In her soft breast 
Care can no vent find , it is so compressed : 
And see how the Promethean Liver grows 
As vulture Grief devours it : see fresh shows 
Revive woes sense , and multiply her soul ; 
And worthily ; for who would tears control 
On such a springing ground ? 't is dear fit , 
To pay all tribute , Thought can pour on it : 
For why were Funerals first used but for these , 
Presaged and cast in their Nativities ? 
The streams were checked a while : so Torrents stayed 
Enrage the more ; but are ( left free ) allayed . 
Now our grim waves march altogether ; Now 
Our black seas run so high , they overflow 
the clouds they nourish ; now the gloomy hearse 
Puts out the Sun : Revive , revive ( dead vierse ) 
death hath slain death ; there there the person lies 
Whose death should buy out all mortalities . 
But let the world be now a heap of death , 
Life's joy lies dead in him , and challengeth 
no less a reason : If all motion stood 
Benumbed and stupefied , with his frozen blood ; 
And like a Tombstone , fixed , lay all the seas 
There were fit pillars for our Hercules 
To bond the world with : Men had better die 
then outlive free times ; slaves to Policy . 
On on sad Train , as from a crannid rock 
Bee-swarmes robbed of their honey , ceaseless flock . 
Mourn , mourn , dissected now his cold limbs lie 
Ah , knit so late with flame , and Majesty . 
where 's now his gracious smile , his sparkling eye 
His judgement , Valour , Magnanimity ? 
OH God , what doth not one short hour snatch up 
Of all man's gloss ? still overflows the cup 
Of his burst cares ; put with no nerves together , 
And lighter , than the shadow of a feather . 
On : make earth pomp as frequent as ye can , 
'T will still leave black , the fairest flower of man ; 
Ye well may lay all cost on misery , 
't is all can boast , the proudest humanity . 
If young Marcellus had to grace his fall , 
Six hundred Hearses at his Funeral ; 
Sylla six thousand ; let Prince Henry have 
Six Million bring him to his greedy grave . 
And now the States of earth , thus mourn below 
Behold in Heaven , Love with his broken Bow ; 
his quiver downward turned , his brands put out 
Hanging his wings ; with sighs all black about . 
Nor less , our loss , his Mother's heart infests , 
Her melting palms , beating her snowy breasts ; 
As much confused , as when the Calydon bore 
The thigh of her divine Adonis tore : 
Her vows all vain , resolved to bless his years 
With Issue Royal , and exempt from freres ; 
Who now died fruitless ; and prevented then 
The blessed of women , of the best of men . 
Mourn all ye Arts , ye are not of the earth ; 
Fall , fall with him ; rise with his second birth . 
Lastly , with gifts enrich the sable Fane , 
And odorous lights eternally maintain ; 
Sing Priests , OH sing now , his eternal rest , 
His light eternal ; and his souls free breast 
As joys eternal ; so of those the best ; 
And this short verse be on his Tomb impressed . 
EPITAPHIUM . 

SO flits , alas , an everlasting River , 
As our loss in him , past , will last for ever . 
The golden Age , Starlike , shot through our Sky ; 
Aimed at his pomp renewed , and stuck in 's eye . 
And ( like the sacred knot , together put ) 
Since no man could dissolve him , he was cut . ) 
Aliud EPITAPH . 

Whom all the vast frame of the fixed Earth 
Shrunk under ; now , a weak Hearse stands beneath ; 
His Fate , he passed in fact ; in hope , his Birth ; 
His youth , in good life ; and in spirit , his death . 
Aliud EPITAPH . 

Blessed be his great Begetter ; blessed the Womb 
That gave him birth , though much too near his Tomb 
In them was he , and they in him were blessed ; 
What their most great powers gave him , was his least , 
His Person graced the Earth ; and of the Skies , 
His blessed Spirit , the praise is , and the prize . 
FINIS . 

THE FUNERALS OF THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE HENRY , Prince of Wales , Duke of Cornwall and Rothsay , Count Palatine of Chester , Earl of Carick , and late KNIGHT of the most Noble Order of the GARTER . Which Noble Prince deceased at St. james , the sixth day of November , 1612. and was most Princely interred the seventh day of December following , within the Abbey of Westminster , in the Eighteenth year of his AGE . 

LONDON : Printed by T. S. for john Budgie , and are to be sold at his shop at the great south door of P●ules' , and at Brittanes Burse . 1613.  

THE FUNERALS OF THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE HENRY , Prince of Wales , Duke of Cornwall and Rothsay , Count Palatine of Chester , Earl of Carick , and late Knight of the most Noble Order of the GARTER . 

Which Noble Prince deceased at Saint JAMES , the 6. day of November , 1612. and was most Princely interred the 7. of December following , within the Abbey of Westminster , in the Eighteenth year of his AGE . 

The body of the said PRINCE being bowelled , enbalmed and closed up in Lead , there were four Chambers hung with blacks , viz. the Guard chamber and the Presence with black Cloth , the Privy Chamber with finer Cloth , and that which was his Highness' Bedchamber , with black Velvet : in the midst whereof was set up a Canopy of black Velvet , valanced , and fringed ; under which upon Trestles the Coffin with the body of the PRINCE was placed , covered with a large pall of black Velvet and adorned with Scuchions of his Arms . Upon the head of which Coffin was laid a Cushion of black Velvet , and his Highness' Cap and Coronet set thereon , as also his Robes of estate , Sword and Rod of Gould ; and so it remained ( being daily and nightly watched ) until two or three days before his Highness' Funerals . In which time every day , both Morning and Evening Prayers were said in his Presence or Privy Chamber , by his Chaplains , and his Gentlemen and chief Officers attendant thereat . 

Thursday before the Funerals his Princely body was brought forth of his Bedchamber into his privy chamber . 

Friday , it was brought into his Presence-chamber and set under his cloth of estate . 

Saturday , the fifth of December , about three of the clock in the afternoon it was removed into the Guard-chamber , where all his chief servants and Officers being assembled , and the Officers of Arms in their Coats , the corpse was solemnly carried into the Chapel of that house , and placed under a canopy in the midst of the Choir , the Bishop of Lich-field red the Service , and the Gentlemen of the King's Chapel , with the children thereof , sung diverse excellent Anthems , together with the Organs , and other wind instruments , which likewise was performed the day following , being Sunday . 

Monday , the 7. of December , ( the Funeral day ) the representation was laid upon the Corpse , and both together put into an open Charior , and so proceeded as followeth : 

Poor-men , in gowns , to the number of 140.  

About 300.  Gentleman's servants . 
About 300.  Esquires servants . 
About 300.  Knight's servants . 
About 300.  Baronet's servants . 
About 300.  Baron's sons servants . 
About 300.  Viscount son's servants . 
About 300.  Earl's sons servants . 
Two Drums and a Fife , their Drums covered with black cloth , and Scuchions of the Prince his Arms thereupon . 

Portesmouth , Pursuivant of Arms . 

The great Standard of Prince HENRY , being a Lion crowned , standing on a Chappean , born by Sir john Winifrid , KNIGHT and Baronet , the Motto therein , Fax mentis honestae gloria . 

About 306.  Prince HENRY his Household Servants , according to their several Offices and Degrees : with Tradesmen and Artificers that belonged unto his Highness . 

Trumpets . 

The Coronet of the Prince , being the three Feathers in a Crownet , with his Motto : Iwat ire per altum ; born by Sir Roger Dallison , Knight and Baronet . 

About 360.  Baron's servants . 
About 360.  Viscounts' servants . 
About 360.  Earl's servants : as well English as Strangers . 
About 360.  The Duke of Lenox his servants . 
About 360.  The Lord Chauncellors' servants . 
About 360.  Count Henry de Nassau his servants . 
Trumpets . 

A Banner of th'earledome of Carick , born by Sir David Fowls . 

A Horse led by a Equerry of the Stable ; the Horse was covered with black cloth , and armed with Scuchions of that Earldom , having his Cheiffron and Plumes . 

About 80.  Archbishop's servants . 
About 80.  Prince Palatine his servants . 
About 80.  Prince Charles his servants . 
Blew-mantle Pursuyvant of Arms . 

A Banner of the Earldom of Chester , born by the Lord Howard of Effingham . 

A Horse led by a Equerry of the Stable , covered with black cloth , and armed with Scuchions of that Earldom , his Cheiffron and Plumes . 

About 40.  Falconers and Huntsmen . 
About 40.  Clerks of the works . 
About 40.  Clerks of the Poultry . 
About 40.  Clerks of the Acatry . 
About 40.  Clerks of the Larder . 
About 40.  Clerks of the Spicery . 
About 40.  Clerks of the Kitchin.  
About 40.  Clerks of the Coffery . 
About 40.  Clerks of the Stable . 
About 40.  Clerks of the Auery . 
About 40.  Clerks of the Wardrobe . 
About 40.  Mr. of the Works . 
About 40.  Pay-Mr. 
About 40.  And Clerk Comptroller . 
About 60.  Sergeants of the Vestry . 
About 60.  Children of the Chapel . 
About 60.  Gentlemen of the Chapel in rich Copes . 
About 60.  Musicians . 
About 60.  Apothecaries and Surgeons . 
6.  Doctors of Physic . 
24.  The Princes Chapleyns' . 
Portcullis Pursuyvant of Arms . 

A Banner of the Dukedom of Rothsay , born by the Lord Bruse , Baron of Kinlosse . 

A Horse led by a Equerry of the Stable , covered with black cloth , armed with Scuchions of that Dukedom , his Cheiffron and Plumes . 

About 80.  Pages of the Chamber . 
About 80.  Gentlemen , the Prince's servants extraordinary . 
About 80.  The Prince's Solicitor , and Counsel at Law.  
About 80.  Groom Porter . 
About 80.  Gentlemen Ushers , quarter Waiters . 
About 80.  Grooms of the Privy-chamber extraordinary . 
About 80.  Grooms of the Privy-chamber in ordinary . 
About 80.  Grooms of the Bedchamber . 
About 80.  Pages of the Bedchamber , and the Princes own Page . 
Rouge-dragon Pursuyvant . 

A Banner of the Dukedom of Cornwall , born by the Lord Clifford . 

A Horse led by Mr. Henry Alexander , covered with black cloth , armed with Scuchions of that Dukedom , his Cheiffron and Plumes . 

About 146.  Count Henrickes Gentlemen . 
About 146.  Count Palatines Gentlemen , viz.  viz. Mounsieur Eltz.  
viz. Mouns . Helmstadt . 
viz. Mouns . Colbe . 
viz. Mouns . Benefer . 
viz. Mouns . Adolshein . 
viz. Mouns . Nenzkin . 
viz. Mouns . Walbron . 
viz. Mouns . Waldgrave . 
viz. Mouns . Facts . 
viz. Mouns . Carden . 
viz. Mouns . Berlinger . 
viz. Mouns . Grorode . 
viz. Mouns . Cawlt . 
viz. Mouns . Stensels . 
viz. Mouns . Ridzell . 
viz. Mouns . Helinger . 
viz. Mouns . Henbell . 
viz. Mouns . Auckensten . 
viz. Mouns . Gellu . 
viz. Mouns . Wallyne . 
viz. Mouns . Pellinger . 
viz. Mouns . Berlipps . 
viz. Mouns . Shott . 
viz. Mouns . Weldensten . 
viz. Mouns . Croilesemere . 
viz. Mouns . Levinsten . 
viz. Mouns . Pathenes . 
viz. Mouns . Colbe . 
Scultetez . 

viz. Mouns . Rampf . 
viz. Mouns . Dawnsier . 
viz. Mouns . Maier . 
viz. Mouns . Wanebach . 

About 146.  Prince Charles his Gentlemen . 
About 146.  Gentlemen of Prince Henry's Privy-chamber extraordinary . 
About 146.  Knights and Gentlemen of his Highness' Privy-chamber in ordinary , and of his Bedchamber , with Sewers , Carvers , and Cupbearers . 
About 146.  The Prince his Secretary . 
About 146.  The Prince his Thresorer of his Household . The Thresorer of his Revenues , and the Comptroller of his Household together , bearing their white staffs . 
Roug-croix Pursuyvant of Arms . 

A Banner of the Prince's Principality of Scotland , with a Label , born by the Viscount Fenton . 

A Horse led by Sir Sigismond Alexander , covered with black cloth , armed with Scuchions of that Kingdom , his Cheiffron and Plumes . 

Baronet's . 

Baron's younger sons . 

Sir Edward Phillips , Mr. of the Rolls , being the Prince his Chaunceller , going alone . 

Knights Privy Councillors to the KING : viz.  

Sir john Herbart , Secretary . 
Sir julius Cesar Chaunceller of the Exchequer . 
Sir Thomas Parry , Chaunceller of the Duchy of Lancaster . 
Baron's elder sons . 

Three Trumpets . Lancaster Herald . 

A Banner of England , France , and Ireland , quartered with Wales , born by the Viscount Lisle . 

A Horse led by Sir William Webb , Knight , covered with black cloth , his Cheiffron and Plumes . 

Earl's younger sons . 

Viscounts' elder sons . 

Barons of Scotland . 

Barons of England : viz.  

Lord Knevit . 
Lord Arundel of Wardor . 
Lord Stanhop . 
Lord Spencer . 
Lord Danvers . 
Lord Peter . 
Lord Wotton . 
Lord Norris . 
Lord Hunsden . 
Lord Northe . 
Lord Sheffeild . 
Lord Wharton . 
Lord Wentworth . 
Lord Mounteagle . 
Lord Stafford . 
Lord Morley . 
Lord Candish . 
Lord Carewe . 
Lord Denny . 
Lord Garrard . 
Lord Harington . 
Lord Russell . 
Lord Knowles . 
Lord Compton . 
Lord Chandos . 
Lord Darcy of Chich.  
Lord Rich.  
Lord Evers . 
Lord Windesor . 
Lord Dudley . 
Lord Dacres . 
Lord Laware . 
Bishops 5.  

The Bishop of Rochester . 
The Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield . 
The Bishop of Ely.  
The Bishop of Oxford . 
The Bishop of London . 
The Earl of Excester . 

The Prince his Chamberlain , Sir Thomas Chaloner , alone , bearing his white staff . 

The Lord Chancellor , and Count Henrick . 

The Archbishop of Canterbury : Preacher . 

The great Embroidered Banner of the Union , born by the Earls of Montgomery and Argyle . 

A Horse led , called Le Cheval de deul , covered with black Velvet , and led by a chief Equerry . Monsieur Sant Antoin . 

The Prince his Hachments of HONOUR , carried by Officers of Arms , viz.  

The Spurs , by Windsor . 

The Gauntlets , by Somerset . 

The Helm and Crest , by Richmond . 

The Targe , by York . 

The Sword , by Norroy , King of Arms . 

The Coat , by Clarencieux , King of Arms . 

Three Gentlemen Ushers to the Prince , bearing their wands . 

The Corpse of the Prince , lying in an open Chariot , with the Prince's representation thereon , invested with his Robes of estate of Purple Velvet , furred with Ermines , his Highness' Cap and Coronet on his head , and his Rod of Gould in his hand , and at his feet , within the said Chariot , sat Sir David Murrey , the Master of his Wardrobe . 

The Chariot was covered with black Velvet , set with Plumes of black feathers , and drawn by six Horses covered , and Armed with Scuchions , having their Cheiffrons and Plumes . 

A Canopy of black Velvet born over the representation by six Baronet's . 

Ten Bannerols , born about the body by ten Baronet's . 

Sir Moyle Finch . 
Sir Thomas Mounson . 
Sir john Wentworth . 
Sir Henry Savile . 
Sir Thomas Brewdnell . 
Sir Anthony Cope . 
Sir George Gresley . 
Sir Robert Cotten . 
Sir Lewis Tresham . 
Sir Philip Tiruit . 
Four Assistants to the Corpse , that bore up the corners of the Pall. viz.  

1 The Lord Zouch . 
2 The Lord Abergaveny . 
3 The Lord Burghley . 
4 The Lord Walden . 
William Seger , Garter , Principal King of Arms , between the Gentleman-usher of Prince Charles , and the Gentleman-usher of the Prince Palatine . 

Prince CHARLES' chief Mourner , supported by the Lord Privy-seal , and the Duke of Lenox . 

His Highness' Train was born by the Lord Dawbney , Brother to the Duke of Lenox . 

then followed the Prince Elector , FREDERICK , Count Palatine of the Rhein . 

His Highness' Train was born by Mounsieur Shamburgh . 

Twelve Earls Assistants to the chief Mourner , viz.  

Earl of Nottingham . 
Earl of Shrewsbury . 
Earl of Rutland . 
Earl of Southampton . 
Earl of Hartford . 
Earl of Dorset . 
Earl of Suffolk . 
Earl of Worcester . 
Earl of Sussex . 
Earl of Pembroke . 
Earl of Essex . 
Earl of Salisbury . 
Earl's strangers , attendants on Count Palatine , Count Wigensten . 
Count Lewis de Nassau . 
Count Levingsten . 
Count Hodenlo . 
Count Ringrave . 
Count Erback ▪ 
Count Nassaw . Scarburg . 
Count Le Hanow , junior . 
Count Isinbersh ▪ Page . 
Count holmes . Page . 
Count Zerottin . Page . 


The Horse of Estate , led by Sir Robert Dowglas , Master of the Prince's Horse . 

The Palzgreaves Privy-counsellors , viz.  

The Count of Solmes . 
Mounsieur Shouburgh . 
Mounsieur de Pleshau . 
Mounsieur Helmestedt . 
Mouns . Shouburgh , junior . 
Mouns . Landshat . 
Officers and Grooms of Prince Henry's stable . 

The Guard.  
The Knight Martial , and twenty servants that kept order in the proceeding . 

Diverse Knights and Gentlemen , the King's servants that came in voluntary in blacks . So that the whole number amounted to 2000 or thereabouts . 

FINIS . 





Expostulatio à perturbatione . Potentia expers sapientiae quo maior est , eo perniciosior : sapientia procul à potentia manca videtur . Plat.  Chimaera , a monster , having his head and breast like a Lion ; his belly like a Goat ; and tail like a Dragon . To Death . The Prayer of the King in the Prince's sickness . Simil. Apodeses . Reditio ad Principem . Those that came to the Prince's service seemed ( compared with the places they lived in before ) to rise from death to the fields of life , intending the best part of young and noble Gentlemen . The parting of the Prince's Servants . The Prince's house an Olympus , where all contention of virtues were practised . Non Homeri Aurea Restis Saint james his house . Richmond . The Prince not to be wrought on by flattery . His knowledge and wisdom . Any man is capable of his own fit course and office in any thing . Apostrophe . Men grow so ugly by trusting flattery with their informations , that when they see themselves truly , by casting their eyes inward , they cast themselves away with their own loathing .  Simil. Simil. Musae lachrimae . The cause and manner of the Prince's death . Rhamnusia ( Goddess of revenge , and taken for Fortune ) in envy of our Prince , excited Fever against him . The Fever the Prince died on ( by Prosopopeia ) described by her effects & circumstances . The Fever the Prince died off , is observed by our Modern Physicians to be begun in Hungary . Out of the property of the Hare that never shuts her eyes sleeping . Marmaricae Leunes , of Marmarica a Region in Africa where the fiercest Lions are bred ; with which Fever is supposed to be drawn , for their excess of heat & violence , part of the effects of this Fever . The properties of the Fever in these effects . Rhamnusi● excitation of fever  Rham : durst no longer endure her , being stirred into fury . The starry Evening described by Vulcan's setting to work at that time . The Night being ever chiefesly consecrate to the Works of the Gods , and out of this Deities fires , the Stars are supposed to fly ; as sparkles of them . The good Angel of the Prince to the Fever , as she approache . Fever to the prince ; who is thougght by a friend of mine to speak too mildly ; not being satis compos mentis Portice , in this . Her counsel or persuasion , showing only how the Prince was persuaded & resolved in his deadlyest sufferance of her which she is made to speak in spite of herself , since he at her worst was so sacredly resolute . Description of the tempest that cast Sir Th. Ga●es on the Bermudas , & the state of his Ship and Men , to this Kingdoms Plight applied in the Prince's death . The Archbishop of Cantebury passing pious in care of the Prince . S. Edelbert : Phillip's Master of the Rolls and the Prince's Chancellor , a chief sorrower for hlm . The prince heroical his bearing his sickness at the Kings coming to see him , careful not to discomfort him . The Twelfth day after his beginning to be sick , his sickness was hold incurable . The prince dying to the King.  The sorrows and bemoans of the King Queen , Prince and his most Princely Sister , for the Prince's death . The funeral described . 