CHESTER'S TRIUMPH IN HONOUR OF HER PRINCE . 

As it was performed upon S. GEORGE'S Day 1610. in the for said CITY . 

SURSUM 

LONDON Printed for I B. and are to be Sold in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleet street . 1610.  

ICH DIEN 

HP 



To the High and Mighty Prince , HENRY Prince of Wales , Duke of Cornwall and Rothsay , Earl of Chester , Knight of the most noble Order of the GARTER , etc.  

CHESTER to her Prince . 

Unto the boundless Ocean , most dread Prince , 
Of thy surmounting Great magnificence , 
Do we ( poor Palatines ) from our best hearts , 
( Enlarged with Love of thine admired Parts ) 
Blushing , object to thy deep judgements eye , 
The fruit ( though poor ) of rich Love's industry . 
Not that we are Ambitious , or that we 
Can think it worthy ; of ( most worthy ) THEE . 
But , with our best integrity , to show 
The Awful Duty which our Loves do own , 
To thy great Greatness ; who ( beyond compare ) 
Doth shine so bright in our Love's Hemisphere 
That , in thy right , our Hearts , Lives , Limbs and Swords , 
Shall stretch our Actions far beyond our Words . 
Her ill Townsman , Ri. Davies . 

TO THE READER . 

Reader , to make a large Narration of nothing , were scarce worth any thing ; Yet , since it hath pleased the great giver of all things , to infuse life into poor Animals ( as well as Spirit into more worthy Creatures ) I have by the importunity of some friends ( upon honest conditions ) let slip this prisoner , who like a poor Peregrinator ( to purchase enlargement ) is contented to pass through the Purgatory of the Printing-house : Where ( if by his good behaviour , he do not merit Redemption ) let him be pressed without pity a God's name , and like a vituperious offender , be Stamped and Stared at , by the severest Corrector , and truest Compositor . To be brief , what was done , was so done , as being by the Approbation of many , said to be well done , than I doubt not , but it may merit the merciful Construction of some few , who may chance to Swear 't was most excellently ill done . Zeal procured it ; Love devised it ; Boys performed it ; Men beheld it , and none but fools dispraised it . As for the further Description of the business , I refer to further relation ; only thus : The chiefest part of this people-pleasing spectacle , consisted in three Bees , viz. Boys , Beasts , and Bells , Bells of a strange amplitude and extraordinary proportion ; Beasts of an excellent shape , and most admirable swiftness , and Boys of rare Spirit , and exquisite performance . Which glorious Triumph , with much more , was merely intended ( as it was then thought ) for the joyful celebration of Camber's boundless glory . 

R. D.  

¶ A brief Relation of the most delightful , pleasant and rare Shows , the which have been Enacted , set forth , and performed , within the most Ancient renowned City Caer-leon , now named CHESTER , upon the Festival of our most worthy approved English Champion S. George his Day , being the 23. of April 1610. and shall remain and continue perpetually to future ages , as a memorable and worthy project , founded , devised , and erected only by the most famous , generous , and well deserving Citizen , Mr. ROBERT AMERIE , late Sheriff of the said City , redounding to the glory and praise of Almighty God for his benefits , immediately and bounteously poured upon us Christians , and also in lieu of the Homage , Fealty , Allegiance , and Duty , which we do own and attribute unto the KING'S most Excellent and magnificent Majesty , his Crown and dignity , and to the most virtuous and hopeful Heir Apparent , the PRINCE of Wales , with that Noble victor Saint George , our aforesaid English Champion . 

1 A Man by strange devices climbing to the top of a very high spire Steeple ( standing at the Market ( rose , called S. Peter's Steeple ) carrying an Ancient of our Colours of S. George , displaying the same upon the said Steeple , and fixing the same to the bar of Iron , that the Vane hangs upon : Likewise , sounding a Drum , shooting off a Piece , and flourishing a Sword , and standing upon the Cross of the said bar of Iron , stood upon his hands with his feet into the Air , very dangerously and wonderfully to the view of the beholders , with casting Fireworks very delightful . 

2.  Two disguised , called Greene-men , their habit Embroidered and Stitched on with juie-leaves with black-side , having hanging to their shoulders , a huge black shaggy Hair , Savage-like , with ivy Garlands upon their heads , bearing Herculean Clubs in their hands , an artificial Dragon , very lively to behold , pursuing the Savages entering their Den , casting Fire from his mouth , which afterwards was slain , to the great pleasure of the spectators , bleeding , fainting , and staggering , as though he endured a feeling pain , even at the last gasp , and farewell . 

3.  One mounted on Horseback , bearing the Helmet and Shield of S. George , attended by three : One leading his Horse , a Drum sounding before him , with S. George his Scutcheon in the forehead of his Horse . 

4.  Fame mounted on Horseback , with a Trumpet in her hand , pronouncing an Oration . 

5.  Mercury , descending from heaven in a cloud , artificially Winged , a Wheel of fire burning very cunningly , with other Fireworks , mounting to the height of the foresaid Steeple upon Cords : with most pleasant and melodious harmony at his approach . 

6.  Another representing the forenamed and most worthy City Chester , mounted on Horseback : two Drums sounding before him , with the Arms of S. George upon a Scutcheon in the forehead of his Horse . 

7.  Another with the King's Arms , very richly Haroldized upon a Shield : Also mounted on Horseback , with the King's Arms upon a Scutcheon in the Horse's forehead . 

8.  Another , making an Oration , in Honour of the King his Crown and Imperial Monarchy , likewise mounted on Horseback , with the Arms correspondent in the forehead of his Horse . 

9  Another , mounted on Horseback with a great Bell double gilt , supported by four Lions Rampant , standing upon a lesser Bell with a Clapper in it , the King's Arms engraven thereon , carried upon a Sceptre , Dedicated to the Kings most Excellent Majesty , with many Trumpets sounding cheerfully before him , with the King's Arms upon a Scutcheon in the Horse's forehead . 

10 Another with the Prince's Arms upon a Shield , very richly Haroldized , mounted on Horseback , with the Prince's Arms upon a Scutcheon in the Horse's foretop . 

11.  Another mounted on Horseback , delivering an Oration in Honour of the Prince his Birthright , and magnificent Creation , viz. To the High and Mighty Prince HENRY , Prince of Wales , Duke of Cornwall and Rothsay , Earl of Chester , etc. with the Prince's Arms upon a Scutcheon in the Horse's forehead . 

12.  Another mounted on Horseback , with a massy Bell of Silver , parcel gilt , with the Prince's Arms engraven upon it : Likewise supported by three Lions Rampant , standing upon a lesser Bell , with a Clapper in it , carried upon a Sceptre , a noise of Cornets before the Bell , Dedicated to the Prince , with the Prince's Arms upon a Scutcheon in the Horse's forehead . 

13 Another mounted on Horseback with the Arms of S. George upon a Shield , with the Arms of Saint George upon a Scutcheon in the forehead of the Horse . 

14 Rumot mounted on Horseback , pronouncing an Oration , in Honour of the most worthy Christian English Champion S. George , mounted on Horseback with the Arms of S. George , upon a Scutcheon in the forehead of the Horse . 

15.  Another mounted on Horseback , with the most ancient and famous Standard of S. George , with the Arms of Saint George upon a Scutcheon in the Horse's forehead . 

16.  Another mounted on Horseback , bearing upon a Sceptre a great piece of Plate , parcel gilt , Bell fashion , Dedicated to the Honour of Saint George , with the Arms of S. George in the Horse's forehead . 

17.  Another , representing S. George , Accoutred and Armed at all points , attended by two Squires : Also in complete Armour , a noise of Drums before them , likewise mounted on Horseback , with the Arms of S. George upon a Scutcheon in the Horse's forehead . 

18.  Another on Horseback , representing Peace , who made a Speech agreeable to her nature . 

19  Another on Horseback , representing Plenty , made likewise a Speech , etc.  A Wreath of Wheat-cares upon her head , with a Garland of the same athwart her body , casting and strewing Whcate abroad amongst the multitude , as she road along . Garb or Wheat-sheaf Ore , in a Scutcheon upon her Horse's forehead . 

20.  Another on Horseback , representing Envy , with a Wreath of Snakes about her head ; another in her hand , her face and arms besmeared with blood . 

21.  After her ( on Horseback ) came one , representing Love , who finding Envy dismounted from Horseback , and mounted on a Stage to show her nature , was conjured by Love to depart , and not to interrupt ( with her detractions ) that day's Triumph , undertaken and performed through Love , which done , Love and joy marshal the succeeding sport . 

22.  Lastly , joy mounted on Horseback , rejoicing at so great a concourse of people , never there before seen , and praising the good meaning of what there was undertaken and performed . Whereupon all departed for a while , to a place upon the River called the Rood , Guarded with one hundred and twenty Halberdiers , and a hundred and twenty Shot , bravely furnished . The Mayor , Sheriffs and Aldermen of Chester , arrayed in their Scarlet , having seen the said shows , to grace the same , accompanied , and followed the Actors unto the said Rood , where the Ships , Barks , and Pinnaces , with other vessels Harbouring within the River , displaying the Arms of S. George , upon their main Tops , with several pendants answerable thereunto ; discharged many volleys of Shot in Honour of the day . The Bells Dedicated ( as before is remembered ) being presented to the Mayor , Proclamation being generally made , to bring in Horses to run for the said Bells , there was run a double Race , to the great pleasure and delight of the spectators : Men of great worth , running also at the Ring for the said Cup , Dedicated to Saint George , and those that won the Prizes , according to the Articles agreed upon in that behalf , had the same with the Honour thereunto belonging : The said several Prizes , being with Speeches , and several Wreaths set on their heads , delivered in ceremonious and Triumphant manner , after the order of the Olympian Sports , whereof these were an imitation . 

CHESTER'S TRIUMPH IN HONOUR OF HER PRINCE . 

FAME .  From blissful Bowers of fair Elysian fields , 
( The happy harbour of jove's dearest Deer ) 
From thence these Worthies ( noted by their shields 
Are ( by my conduct ) thus arrived here . 
I Fame that with a trice , do overfill 
The World's wide ears with what I please to say , 
Have brought them thus , as 't were against the hill 
Of highest Lets , to celebrate this Day ! 
This Day , that I so far have famoused 
That not a nook of Earth's huge Globe but knows , 
How in great Britain 't is solemnised 
With divine Offices , and glorious Shows . 
then for th' increase of this triumphant Mirth , 
I 'll invocate the God's Ambassador , 
To be the Precedent of Heaven to Earth ; 
And , from the Gods , salute your Governor . 
then come great Nuntius of th' immortal Gods , 
From that all-swaying Senate of their State ; 
Come , I invoke thee , with thy charming-rod 
In glory come , this Day to celebrate . 
The ninefold Orbs of Heaven , my words do pierce ; 
Descend then , Tongues-man of the Universe . 


A Song of eight voices for the show in CHESTER on S. GEORGE'S day . Come down thou mighty messenger of bliss , 
Come : we implore thee , 
Let not thy glory be obscured from us 
Who most adore thee : 
then come , OH come great spirit 
That we may joyful sing , 
Welcome , OH welcome to earth 
jove's dearest darling . 
Lighten the eyes thou great Mercurian Prince , 
Of all that view thee , 
That by the lustre of their optic sense 
They may pursue thee : 
Whilst with their voices 
Thy praise they shall sing , 
Come away 
jove's dearest darling . 


MERCURY comes down in a Cloud and speaks thus . Down from the Throne of the immortal Gods , 
From out the glorious ever-during Heavens , 
And from the sacred Powers celestial 
From thence I come , commanded by them all 
To visit Him whose rare report hath rung 
His earned fame on earth hath pierced the sky , 
Ascending up unto the highest Heavens ; 
And therewithal procured the sacred Senate 
In great regard to hold his worthiness : 
For which intent , They all ( with one accord ) 
To manifest the Love to Him they owe , 
Have sent me Mercury , their Messenger , 
To bring him joyful tidings of the same . 
And to this place , directed by their Powers , 
I am arrived ( in happy time I hope ) 
To find this happy God-beloved Man 
And lo behold on sudden where I spy 
This Favourite so favoured of the Gods : 
I will salute him with such courtesy 
As best beseems a wight of such account . 
All hail to thee high justice Officer ; 
Mercury , Nuntius to the Powers divine , 
Hath brought thee greetings from their Deities . 
And know ( dear Sir ) thy deeds and good deserts , 
Thy well disposed Nature , Mind , and thought , 
Thy zealous care to keep their Laws divine , 
Thy great compassion on poor wights distressed , 
Thy prudence , justice , temperance , and thy truth , 
And , to be brief , thy virtue's general , 
Have moved them all from Heaven , with one assent , 
To send Me down , to let thee understand 
That thou art highly in their Favours placed : 
And , for the more assurance of the same , 
Lo here a Favour favourably sent 
From them , by me , to thee , that thou mayst know 
Thy virtues here shall there rewarded be 
With endless joy , and perfect happiness . 
Receive the same , returning naught but thanks , 
Which is as much as they require of thee , 
My message done , my task thus brought to end , 
I must return and to the Heavens ascend . 


CHESTER .  Hail sage Spectators , hail ye reverend Sires , 
Hail younger Brutes , whose worth self Worth admires . 
Whose ardent Loves both to the place , and us , 
Constrains our Loves to entertain ye thus . 
Welcome ten thousand times ye blissful crew , 
Whose light lends lustre to the vulgar view . 
Whose several virtues , linked with several Graces , 
Deserves the Best , of our best Loves embraces . 
The Roman Curtius Rome's great Favourite , 
( Whose daring Death did her from scathe acquit ) 
Was never more Welcome to the Romans sights , 
then are yourselves , to these our choice delights . 
To which kind purpose our desire intends 
To entertain you as our fastest friends , 
With such Olympian sports as shall approve 
Our Best devotion , and sincerest Love. 
Such entertain as best beseems your Ranks , 
we 'll strive to give you with our heartiest thanks . 
And so , to please your nicer appetietes , 
we 'll feast your pains with Pleasure's honeyed Sweets . 
The rarest viands Choice itself affords , 
Shall o'er abound upon our bounteous boards , 
And in the midst of all our jovial solace , 
we 'll suck sweet Nectar from the Paps of Pallas . 
we 'll cozen France of those delicious Vines , 
Wherehence they drain their brain-enchanting Wines 
To cheer our hearts , and make you frolic so 
As you shall swim in joy , though sunk in woe . 
we 'll Banquet you with such variety 
Of dulcet Fruits , whose sweet Satiety 
Shall seem so pleasing ; as it shall entice 
The Gods themselves to surfeit on their juice . 
Our best Pavilions , in their best attire , 
Remonstrate shall how much we do desire , 
To satisfy your Expectations eyes , 
With all that Art can possibly devose . 
we 'll pave our Streets , with that Eye-pleasing sand , 
Which is of power whole Kingdoms to command : 
And for your more delight perfume we will 
The Air : nay , it sweet Airs shall overfill . 
Our verdant Pastures three piled green in grain 
Shall wear , to honour so your entertain . 
And round about the Meadows as ye go , 
For peeping flowers the Grass shall scarcely show 
What may be done , and willing hearts can do 
Shall be effected with advantage too . 
we 'll furrow up those petty hills or heights , 
That lie but in the way of our delights : 
And with the Surplus of this surquedry , 
Fill up the places that too lowly lie 
Within the list or prospect of that place , 
Assigned this Triumph and triumphant Race . 
What ever our more than strained utmost-all , 
Can possibly perform ; perform we shall . 


BRITAIN .  Illustrious Britain , stately Seat of Kings , 
Whose boundless glories inequivalent , 
Do so reflect on Fame's oriental wings . 
That o'er the world they spread their blandishment . 
Whose influence ( past compass of conceit ) 
Endarts such Sunbeams to obscurer places , 
That all the world by that resplendent light , 
Derives from her their most peculiar graces . 
Whose royal , clement , chaste , and bounteous King , 
( King ; OH too base a stile for his great worth ) 
Such radiant lustre to the Earth doth bring , 
That like the Sun it cheers the total North. 
then yield him honour Kings that glorious be ; 
Veil to this ( next the highest ) great King of Kings : 
Who by his virtues graceth your degree , 
And to the same immortal glory brings . 
Great Britain's Greatness ( wonder of the North : 
Admired of All whom virtue's height admires ) 
We do ascribe unto thy Matchless worth , 
Surmounting praise , to mount thy virtues higher . 
And while me ( Britain ) Neptune shall embrace , 
I 'll ruin those , that spite thee , or thy Race . 


CAMBRIA .  Renowned Camber , Britain's true repose , 
Whose ardent zeal to her admired Prince , 
Hath ever been approved to friends and foes 
To sacrifice her blood in his defence . 
With high-swollen words of vaunt to thunder forth 
How much we dare to do in this respect , 
Were more than merely idle ; since our worth 
Shall show itself in such words true effect . 
Our hopeful Prince whilst Camber's Race doth Breath , 
Shall they with fast united might , 
In his just cause will their best Swords unsheathe 
Against the stoutest Opposer of his Right . 
We scorn that Wales such weaklings should afford , 
That dare not bravely front the eager'st foe 
At any Weapon ( Pistol , Pike , or Sword ) 
And ( like stout Warriors ) give him blow for blow . 
But to our Prince ( Great Britain's matchless Heir ) 
As humbly low , as is his Greatness high , 
Our lives we 'll prostrate with our best Devoir , 
To do what may undo the Enemy . 
Whose Grace is thought upon this present day , 
Which day Saint George hath blissfully created , 
To take his Birthright ; with such great joy , 
As such a day was never consecrated . 
To memorise which more then blissful Feast , 
We are incited by the love we owe him , 
The same to celebrate , or at the least 
Our great , great joy most thankfully to show him . 
then naught remains but that we all do pray , 
God bless Prince HENRY Prop of England's joy . 


RUMOUR .  Saint George for England , is the Patron Knight , 
Whose ever-conquering , and all-daring hand , 
Did put whole Hosts of Heathens foes to flight , 
That did the vigour of his strength withstand . 
He that did ever live ( a Champion stout ) 
With such undaunted holy-high resolve , 
That through the earth his fame did fly about , 
Which shall not die till heaven and earth dissolve . 
Against the Heathen folk his force he proved , 
By which he did decline their highest pride : 
For which of heaven and earth he was beloved , 
And made a glorious Saint when as he died , 
Upon a hideous Dragon ( whose thick scales 
Like shields , that naught could pierce by force nor Art 
Did Bulwark him ) so fast his Falchion falls , 
That he through them made way unto his heart . 
Whose rare atchivements and whose rich renown 
( Flowing from matchless Magnanimity ) 
Still makes them owners of great Britain's Crown , 
As in this day to crown his memory . 
Whose Fames bright Splendour , rarely to depaint 
In colours rich according to his worth , 
Would try the tongue of Hermes , sith this Saint 
Thus travels Britain's glory to bring forth , 
Many a Monster he by force subdued , 
And many a fiend incarnate he suppressed , 
Whose Sword did still mow down their multitude , 
So to imbarn them in hell's restless rest . 
When lo at length returning to the soil , 
Wherein he first received his vital breath , 
He spent his time religiously awhile , 
Till Death had slain him , who now conquers Death : 
So , britain 's when they fight with cheer , they say , 
God and Saint George for England to this day . 


PEACE .  TO bring glad news of future happy years , 
Peace is the Nuntius that such tidings bears . 
Who while the Scotch the English fair entreat , 
And me embrace withal , I 'll make them great . 
no foreign Nation shall affronted their force 
As long as I direct them in that course . 
All rash dissensions and litigious brawls , 
I shall expel from their unshaken walls . 
All civil Mutinies shall then surcease , 
And Peace shall bring them everlasting Peace . 
Inveterate hate so will I turn to love , 
As with one motion both shall jointly move . 
Brother with brother , nay , the foe with friend , 
For mine and thine shall never more contend . 
no massacre nor bloody stratagem , 
Shall stir in Peace's new jerusalem . 
no civil Discord , nor Domestic strife 
Shall ever annoy their Peace , much less their life , 
For ( like to Olive branches ) they shall bear 
Fruit that gives love an appetite to bear . 
Which mutual concord dateless shall endure 
As long as love can Peace to love procure . 
I 'll bind their Loves with true Love's Gordian knot , 
That rude Dissensions hands undo it not : 
And with a Wreath of ever-during Bayss , 
Crown all your brows with peace-procured praise , 
I 'll rend the close-mouthed rage of emulous strife , 
And wound Distraction , with Connexion's knife . 
And when damned Malice comes but once in sight 
I , with a vengeance , will suppress her strait . 
I 'll send pale Envy down to hell with speed , 
Where she upon her Snakes shall only feed . 
And with some poisonous and envenomed Toad , 
Her much more poisonous self shall make abode . 
Which being done I 'll send that base infection 
( Whose only virtue is but base ) Detraction 
Her to associate ; where they both shall live 
As long as hell can life with horror give : 
And thus shall Peace their joy perpetuate , 
That love ( in love ) to stay this blessed State.  


PLENTY .  Since Plenty still cooperates with Peace , 
Plenty shall bless your basket of increase . 
From whose abundant never exhausted store , 
You shall receive much more than had before , 
I 'll stuff your Barns up to the throat with grain , 
Which shall all yours , and others still sustain . 
I 'll fructify the earth with rarest fruits 
Of sundry shapes , and several kind of suits , 
So as the Soil ( that bears seed timely sown ) 
Under the burden of their weight , shall groan . 
In all abundance I will rear your Beasts , 
Which shall maintain your o'er abounding Feasts , 
Fish , fowl , herbs , grass , and all things whatsoe'er , 
Shall at your door be cheap , and nothing dear 
I 'll sink into the concaves of earth's mould , 
And there hence pull and cull her purest gold , 
And then will dive into the Ocean Deeps , 
To raise the Treasure which their Neptune keeps . 
I 'll fraught your ships with such o'er-freighting store , 
That greediness herself shall seek no more . 
no scarcity shall in your Land be found , 
As long as I with Nature till your ground . 
What shall I say ? your life-supporting staff , 
The staff of bread ; I 'll throw abroad like chaff . 
then see how graciously the Highest hath sent ye 
Peace , in all fullness , in all fullness Plenty . 


ENVY and LOVE . Envy .  Hisse . 


Love.   Why how now Envy ? dost thou hiss at Phoebus ? 


E.   Yes ; and at Cynthia too , if she anger us.  


L.   Your reason Envy ? 


E.   Why ? My reason 's this , 
To hear a Cat cry mew , who can but hiss . 


L.   Out hissing Scorpion : 


E.   Out ye filthy Fool , 
Envy hath wit , to set such Apes to school . 


L.   Malicious Monster , thou incarnate Diu'll , 
Whose base condition , is the source of evil . 
thou envious Bandog , speak and do thy worst , 
He that regards it ; is the most accursed 


E.   And he that thinks that Love can ever be wise , 
Hath neither judgement , wisdom , wit , nor eyes . 


L.   Say thou abortive , men-detested slave , 
Whose only virtue is , but to deprave 
Man's best proceedings , speak thou squint-eyed Monster , 
What is the cause which makes thee still misconstrue ? 


E.   Because I hate to hear a want-wit preach 
Beyond wits bounds , and wisdoms boundless reach : 
To see a superficial Sot make show 
Of deeper skill than wit itself doth know . 


L.   What is the solace Envy counteth deep ? 


E.   Marry to see a Wolf devour a Sheep . 
To see men-divels breeding still dissension 
Is sport ( me thinks ) beyond all comprehension : 
Or else a rich man hunger-pined with want , 
To see an Army ( when their food is scant ) 
Eat their own excrements ; OH this is sport 
For Envy , that without this is all amort . 
To see a drove of Drunkards like to Swine 
Swilling their souls , in soul-overwhelming wine . 
To see a City burned , or Barns on fire , 
To see a Son the Butcher of his Sire . 
To see two Swaggerers eagerly to strive , 
Which of them both shall make the Hangman thrive . 
To see a good man poor , or wise man bare , 
To see dame Virtue overwhelmed with care . 
To see a ruined Church , a Preacher dumb , 
A King's child perish in the Mother's womb . 
To see a Miser , who to have his pelf , 
Will take a rope and ( desperate ) hang himself : 
To see a virgin by a varlet used , 
Till she by him to death be so abused . 
Or else to see a Father suck the blood 
Of his own Spawn , O! these would do me good . 
But to behold a rank of rustic Boys 
Showing as childish people childish toys 
To grace a day with ; OH it grates my gall 
To hear an apish Kitling caterwaul . 
Is it not harsh to hear a Marmoset squeak 
Upon a stage a most unjointed speak ? 
And then to hear some ignorant Baboon , 
Swear that this Monkey did surmount the Moon . 
When as the Infants best is too too bad , 
And which to hear would make a wiseman mad . 


L.   thou damned Infection ; damned from thy birth . 
Abhorred of heaven , and odious to the earth , 
How canst thou ever hope to merit grace , 
When thy delight is but detraction base ? 
But since there is no sign of grace in that 
Damned face of thine , which hell doth wonder at , 
Love shall conjure thee ; that from this time forth , 
thou never frequent this Island of the North. 
Dive to the depth of deepest Stygian flood ; 
There suck thou Snakes , and Snakes there suck thy blood . 
Or sink thou quite to the infernal deep , 
Where crawling Scorpions may about thee creep . 
And there among those vermin vile beneath , 
Belch up that poison which thou here dost breath . 
Go , I conjure thee , lest I make thee feel 
The keenest edge of Wraths revenging steel . 
Burden the earth no more , thou hateful Toad 
With such a ponderous earth-annoying load , 
Go with a vengeance go , and never retire , 
But we are out Time in everlasting fire . 


Envy .  OH I could grinned and grate thee with my teeth , 


L.   no more thou Monster ; hence be gone forthwith ; 


E.   Confusion , death , plague , pestilence , and piles , 
confound their souls who at mine anguish smiles , 
Yet , ere I go , I 'll bid the best farewell , 
Hoping ere long to meet their Ghosts in hell . 


L.   Go ugly Monster , loves Misanthropos , 
Sink down to torture and continual woes . 
Heaven excludes thee ; Earth abhors thy sight , 
And grieves to bear the burden of thy weight . 
Sink to her centre , there 's thy Native rest , 
And never more be seen to spot her breast : 
So , hast thee hence ; and henceforth I 'll direct 
My speech to those , whom I do best affect : 
Love bids you welcome that are come in love , 
To see our sports that Envy doth reprove . 


JOY .  Envy avaunt , thou art no fit Compeer 
T' associate these our sweet Consociates here . 
joy doth exclude thee , who ( to thy disgrace ) 
Here spits Defiance in thy ugly face . 
And that is more ; thy everlasting shame 
Shall be still blasted by the Trump of Fame : 
The powerful tongue of facund Mercury , 
Shall to the world display thy Infamy . 
Chester abhors thy presence ; Britain hate's thee ; 
And for a damned fury , Camber takes thee . 
Peace , as a Herald , shall proclaim to All , 
That thou art damned by justice-generall . 
Plenty detests thy base Society , 
Who scorns thy hellbred gross impiety . 
And last of all ; My Love , in Love's defence 
In spite of Envy , shall send Envy hence . 
wherefore avaunt ; that all the I 'll may sing , 
Now Envies gone , in peace w'enioy our King.  


After the running of the Horse's FAME speaks . With rich Characters of resplendent gold , 
Fame hath your names within her book enrolled : 
Which till Time stays his course shall glitter bright , 
Maugre Detraction and fell Envy's spite . 


BRITAIN to him that won the best Bell.  IN sign of victory which thou hast gained , 
This Wreath by thy fair front shall be sustained . 
Whose green leaved branches unto Fame shall tell 
That thou didst best deserve the better Bell.  


CAMBER to the second . TO crown thy Temples with a second wreath , 
Lo here doth Camber unto thee bequeath 
This fragrant Garland : sith thou didst excel 
The best that ran but at the second Bell.  


RUMOUR to him that won the Ring . Thou that by either cunning , or by chance , 
Didst take the Ring with thy thrice happy Lance : 
Here take of me ( to raise thy virtues up ) 
This wreath of Balm , and polished silver cup.  


All together . And so we all in all your several Graces , 
Will with fames o'erfill all times and places . 


CHESTER'S last Speech . no Action , though admired for Excellence , 
no Practice , though of highest pre-eminence 
That can escape the Polyphemian eye 
Of Envy , that for ever looks awry : 
Yet notwithstanding on your Love's depending , 
Whose patient ears excludes all reprehending . 
We here submit ourselves in humblest wise , 
Before the bar of your judicious eyes , 
What we present unto your dainty ears 
Is freed from scandals : so is free from fears . 
Only your Loves which are our fairest marks , 
Must muzzle Envy , when the Fury barks 
Unto the best , we doubt not but our best 
May purchase favour ; and for all the rest 
We do expect but this poor kindness from them , 
That they would speak but what shall well become them . 
This being granted : Chester doth invite 
Each noble worthy , and each worthy Knight , 
To close their stomach with a small repast , 
Which may content a temperate curious taste . 
Measure our ardent Loves , with such kind measure , 
As we afford you sport , and give you pleasure : 
And so we 'll leave you with this solemn vow , 
That whilst we breathe , our hearts shall honour you . 
IF any Reader shall desire to know 
Who was the Author of this pleasing show : 
Let him receive advertizement hereby 
A Sheriff ( late of Chester ) AMERIE . 
Did thus perform it ; who for his reward , 
Desire's but Love , and competent regard . 


ROBERT AMERIE . 

FINIS . 

A 



