THE CRUEL BROTHER ▪ A Tragedy . 

As it was presented , at the private House , in the Blackfriars : By His Majesty's Servants . 

LONDON , Imprinted by A. M. for john Waterson , and are to be sold at the sign of the Crown in Paul's Churchyard , 1630 , 

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD WESTON , LORD HIGH TREASURER OF ENGLAND . 

MY LORD , 

I Should do my inclination wrong , to call this , the first Testimony of my Zeal to your Lordship : For I did never think the wonder , or the praise that I have written , just ; until I found your Lordship's Character in both : and yet the age is grown unworthy to receive such truths ; therefore , some were purposely concealed ; and this fit esteem of your Lordship , is chiefly left to delight Posterity . I could urge the dignity of Dramatic-poems , but that were vainly to direct , rather than woo , an acceptation . Those errors , your Lordship's leisure shall vouchsafe to read in this Tragedy , are its original Crimes , having received no examination since the Birth , and being advised to correct it , by a survey , I said ; I had studied your Lordship , and would not lessen , the noble office of your Mercy . This confidence ( I hope ) shall nothing prejudice 

Your Lordship's humble Servant . WILLIAM D'AVENANT . 

The Scene , Italy . 

The persons of this Tragedy . 

The DUKE . Of Sienna . 
LUCIO . A Count  
FORESTE . Creature to Lucio . 
CASTRUCHIO . A satirical-courtier . 
COSIMO . A Courtier , and Cousin to Castruchio . 
DORIDO . A Gentleman , Companion with both . 
LOTHARIO . A frantic young-gallant . 
BORACHIO . A Rustic , Tenant , and Servant to Lothario . 
A MONK . A Suitor . 
A GENTLEMAN . A Suitor . 
CORSA . Sister to Foreste , Wife to Lucio . 
LUINNA . Wife to Foreste . 
DVARTE . Woman to Corsa . 
A BOY . Who Sings . 
SERVANTS . etc.  
THE CRUEL BROTHER . 

Actus Primus . Scena Prima . 

Enter FORESTEE and LUCIO . FORESTE .  I must not be so rude as to believe 
That you ( my Lord ) can your affections set ; 
Upon a Maid , so humble in her birth 
As she you name , for regard of honour 
Do not mock the sister of your servant . 


Lucio .  This way to madness leads , teach not my heart 
Such modern Heraldry . Let it dispose 
Of charitable thoughts , with natural eyes , 
Unlimited by customary form , 
Which gain , and nicety have made an Art , 
Virtue , not blood ennobles us , and ernes 
Her attribute , without hereditary help 
From ancestors . OH my dear Foreste ? 
Thy sister with such noble wealth is fraught , 
That to be covetous for her , appears , 
A holy sin . But thou art cruel grown 
Thy memory is sick . The old effects 
That witness how I love thy learned soul , 
Are quite forgot . 


Foreste .  Young Lord , disclaim that thought ! 
Hear I Promulgate , you my Patron are ; 
You found me in estate so poor , so low , 
That you were fain to stoop to lift me up , 
You are the Duke's Creature ! who dotes by Art , 
Who in his love , and kindness , Method keeps : 
He holdeth thus his Arms , in fearful care 
Not to bruise you with his dear embracements , 
And what is she whose Virgin blood disdains 
To quench your lawful fire ? or whom the Duke 
Would not procure to climb your Marriage be 
Upon her Knees ? And shall I then 
( Like to the treacherous Moon ) strive to eclip 
The Sun that gives me light ? Shall I consent 
That she , that tumbled in a Womb with me , 
Shall give your Issue birth ? The royal Duke 
Would thank me for such charity . My Lord 
Though you are wise , you are but young . 


Lucio .  Heart of Viper ! 
Sure Time hath lost his feathers from his Heels , 
Mark how slow he goes ? Shall I near be old 
That my designs may repute have , 
And credit in the World. I do not ask 
Thy Sister for my Whore ; but for my Wife . 


Foreste .  Sir 't is already joined unto my Creed ▪ 
For I would eat your Heart , should it contrive 
A way in thought , how to cheat my Sister 
Of her pure Chastity . I love you so 
That I with care suppose ; She not deserves 
To be your Wife , and so esteem of her 
That she is much too good , to be your Whore. 
In this new Argument , I am too bold , 
You know my duty well . The Dukes abroad 
Though but the birth of day . Go Sir ! 


Enter Duke , Castruchio , Dorido , Cosimo , Page : and Followers . Duke .  My glorious Boy , you are too vigilant : 
The Sun , and you , do visit me at once . 
This courtship is not safe . You must not meet 
Your Lover , with a Rival , glorious 
As yourself . Foreste ! welcome from Genoa , 
How fares our Brother Cardinal ? 


Foreste .  In health , and ease . He bad me tell your Grace 
It was a deed of charity to think 
Him worthy of this same great employment . 
And this letter he humbly recommends 
To your perusal . 


Duke reads the Letter to himself . Cast .  How can it choose 
But choke the very Soul , and bruise the Heart 
To think that such a giddy Snipe : a Fool 
( That merely lives to disparage Nature ) 
Should creep to this ambitious government . 
Still he rules the Ruler . The Duke is Ward 
Unto a Page ; whose Kickshaws wear more Beard , 
then doth his Chin : And there 's his Instrument , 
A dark fellow ; that with disguised Looks 
Cou●d cheat an Hypocrite , older than Time.  


Dorid.   i  heard a better Character of both , 
Such , as to the young Count , Witt , and valour gives : 
Unto Foreste , honest Spirits . 


Cast .  R●port is then become a Bawd to Luck ; 
Whom Fortune do enrich , Fame doth flatter . 


Duke .  Sure this tame Priest will make us all Cowards . 
We must a truce confirm with Genoa . 
Well , be it so . Where now ( my noble Boy ) 
Shall I occasion find , to testify 
That you deserve my love , by virtue of your own ? 
In sickly times , when War and civil Spleen 
Besiege the Heart , with treacherous designs , 
A friend shall find a cause to make him known , 
But now in fair weather : I need not ask 
What hovel 's ne'er ? 


Lucio .  In this , I dare discredit Fate . 
They are not so wealth in affliction : 
With sorrow so well stored ; as could suffice 
To try my sufferance : in the behalf 
Of you my Prince , and still royal Master . 


Duke .  dar'st thou then die for me ? 
here — make thyself a sacrifice to Fame , 
Proffers him a naked Poniard . Take it : and I will be thy Chronicler . 


Lucio .  It were ( Sir ) but ingratitude in me 
To l●ssen thus , the number sanctified 
Of your true friends . Be you pleased to sheathe it , 
In that same part , which you do most abhor . 


Duke .  OH Lucio ! thou art my Earwig now , 
Creepest in my ear , to feast upon my Brains . 
When in my private grave I lie enclosed , 
more silent than my ruined Fame : no tongue 
Shall pay his tribute to my memory 
But thine : for thou art likely to survive . 
Thy years are few , but full of gratitude . — 
Come : hie we to the Park : The sprightful morn 
Gives motion wings , and liberty to those 
Whom lameness stakes unto the ground . 


Cast .  Royal dotard , like tinder , thou dost waste 
Thy forced fire : to give another light 
Whose saucy flame will darken thine . Monstrous ! 


Dorid.   Why dost thou spend thy gall in secret thus ? 
A pox upon 't : turn thoughts to action : 
Heaven knows , I had rather enrich myself , 
then envy others wealth . Employ thy brain . 
Get the Duke's fist to this ; and thou shalt share 
Five hundred Crowns . 


Cast .  What is 't ? 


Dorid.   The old business . 


Cast .  And not yet signed : This 't is to be modest . 
Had I had reputation in thy Creed 
Enter Foreste . It had been done long since . there 's my agent . 
Hence and provide me thanks . Save you Signior . 


Foreste .  You may with charity . 


Cast .  am I in your remembrance sir ? 


Foreste .  Signior Castruchio , as I take you . 


Cast .  The same . Because I never did desire 
To gain by being troublesome , I lost 
The dear benefit of the practic part . 
custom 's a suitor's safe encourager . 
I the Duke have served , since I was able 
To serve myself . Yet never had the luck 
To get by it : and as the times promise , 
Never shall : Unless I imitate the Crab , 
And find my way ( as he doth his ) backward . 
That is . to make petition to the foot 
That he will please t' instruct , and teach the head 
When to commiserate my affair . 


Foreste .  Signior . I need a comment to your words . 


Cast .  If you will move my Lord ( the Count ) 
To get the Duke's fair hand , subscribed here ; 
then shall I feel myself well understood . 


Foreste .  Sir my abilities are most pregnant 
When I find I may be profitable 
To any Courtiers just , and modest suit . 
I pray what sense carries the inscription ? 


Cast .  Only this Sir. There is an Engine made 
Which spends its strength by force of nimble wheels , 
For they once screwed up , in their return 
Will rive on Oak : but with such subtle force 
That motion gives no leisure to impediment . 
The large and ponderous Log is soon consumed , 
To shave more transparent than a Glass . 
Of these the skillull Boxes make , Scabbards , 
Sheaths , Chests , and moulds for children's Cabinets . 


Foreste .  Trust me an Engine of importance great . 
But now , what would the Engineer himself ? 


Cast .  Faith Signior , naught but a Monopoly 
For all those wares , his Engine makes . 


Foreste .  Keep it . Good sir keep it . A monopoly 
Why sir the commonwealth hath been so crushed , 
With th' insulting Charter of such Parents , 
That now the very word defiles the cause . 
I had thought you Signior would have engaged 
My industry in such a suit as might 
Noway disparage though it did enrich ; 
How ever not abuse the public weal . 


Cast .  Very good Sir. My Lord the Count , yourself 
( His servile Instrument ) and some others , 
Of this new faction that now , engross 
All Offices , and send your Scouts abroad 
Intelligencers strict , that bring you home 
The number , and the rate of what yourselves , 
Or others in the dark can put to sale . 
Nature hath not altered yet : the first 
And antic method to preserve our breaths . 
We must eat bread if we intent to live ; 
Which how to get ( unless this humble way 
That you deride ) In troth I cannot tell . 
It makes me mad to think you should expose 
Us Men of Heart , to those fastidious helps 
That scape your own acceptance . Your wide Threats , 
That soon will swallow any thing which fills 
Although it nourish not . A pox upon you all ! 


Foreste .  I did expect you would begin to rail . 
Good troubled Soul ! I knew you well before . 
You are the only Man , whose wealth Muse 
Doth furnish all the Fiddlers in the State 
With desperate Ballads , and invective Songs . 
Libels of such weak fa●cy and composure 
That we do all esteem it greater wrong 
T' have our Names extant in such paltry Rhyme 
then in the slanderous sense . 


Cast .  Very well Sir ! 


Foreste .  You , you must be a Satirist forsooth , 
Calumniate by instinct and inspiration . 
As if just Heaven would borrow Gall of you , 
Wherewith to write our faults . ( OH strict account ! ) 
Your Gall , which in the Pen so overflows , 
That still it blots , where in inscribes . 
You imitate the property of Dogs , 
Who bark and snarl most at him they know not 
For else among all those you scandalise 
Why named you me ? ( almost a stranger to your Eye ) 
My Ancestors that built no Monument 
For their fames to dwell in ; You also bring 
Into the knowledge of the critic World. 
Why I could never see thee yet but drunk : 
Which makes thy Verses reel and stagger so . 


Cast .  Come sir ! We may exchange one thrust unseen . 
They draw fight , close , For stings down Case & disarms him . 


Foreste .  A pretty Cur ! dare it by't as well as bark ! 
How now sir , your Mathematical thrusts ! 
then have at ye — Yield me thy Sword , or else thou diest . 
I have no joy to set a● liberty 
A Soul so unprepared . And as thou art 
My Enemy , I take a full revenge , 
By suffering thy corrupted blood to dwell . 
Enter a Monk . And taint within th● veins . we are discovered — 
Take thy sword Now get thee home and rail upon 't , 
Because 't would fight no better . 


Cast .  Yet we may meet i' th' dark . You have a throat 
And there are Knives in Italy . 


Exit Cast●uchio . Forest .  A good day attend my ghostly Father ! 
Doth this your tarriance here discover aught , 
You would with me ? 


Monk .  Your leisure shall produce my utterance . 
OH Son , your fame is of complexion clear , 
Such as ensnares the virtuous Eye , to love 
And adoration . Such as would procure 
All the skilful Angels suitors to her , 
And such as serves for my encouragement 
For I no letters have from Noble friends , 
Which a requital from themselves invite , 
By Courtship bold , and troublesome to others , 
Noram I with that wicked mettle stored , 
That rules the mighty , and betrays the mind 
To toil in a design , which angers Heaven , 
And makes the Devil blush . But yet ( dear Son ) 
I have a suit to thee . 


Foreste .  Which I desire to know . 


Monk ,  In the ancient Covent of S. Austin 
There is a holy brother lately dead , 
Whose place if you will but confirm on me 
By the Duke's letter to the brotherhood , 
then shall I better leisure have to pray 
For you my Patron . 


Foreste .  Alas my Father ! 
The times are more observant to your Tribe . 
It is the method now that your deserts 
Need not to usher but succeed reward . 
The Treatise ( written lately ) to confute , 
The desperate sect in Mantua , calls it you 
The Author ? 


Monks .  It knows no other . 


Foreste .  There your preferment safely taketh root . 
Believe me ( ghostly Father ) I will choose 
The fittest time to work in your behalf . 


Monk .  Heaven prospero your designs . 


Exit Monk . Forest .  What throngs of great impediments besiege 
The virtuous mind ? so thick in multitude , 
They jostle one another as they come . 
Hath Vice a charter got , that none must rise 
But such , who of the Devil's faction are ? 
The way to honour is not evermore 
The way to Hell : a virtuous Man may climb . 
Let the flatterer sell his Lies , else where 
It is unthrifty merchandise to change 
My gold for breath . Of all Antagonists 
Most charity I find in envious men . 
For they do sooner hurt themselves , then hurt 
Or me , or him , that raised me up . 
An envious man is made of thoughts . 
To ruminate much doth melt the brain , 
And make the heart grow lean . Such men as these : 
That in opposing waste their proper strengths : 
That sacrifice themselves in silly hope , 
To butcher us ; save Revenge a labour , 
And die to make experiment of Wrath. 
Let Fame discourse aloud until she want 
An Antidote : I am not scared with noise . 
here I dismiss my fears . If I can swell 
( Unpoisoned by those helps , which Heaven forbids ) 
Fond love of ease , shall near my soul dehort : 
Maugre all flattery , envy , or report . 


Exit Foreste . Suitors within . OH good your Grace hear us , hear the complaints 
Of us poor Men : OH hear us ! we are all 
Undone ! Good your Honour hear us.  
Enter Duke and Lucio . Duke .  Death encounter ' 'em ! Lucio shut the door ! 
't is the plague of greatness , the curse 
Of pomp , that in our darkest privacy , we must 
Even public be to every Man's affairs . 
How now ! All these saucy Troops of brawling 
Suitors , attend on you my glorious Boy . 


Lucio   It is their humble skill not to arrive 
Before your Grace , but by an Advocate 
A Mediator blessed in your Eyes . 


Duke   How apt am I to love ! yet now observe 
Unkindness in my care , and bitterness 
In Physic . I study how to make thee less 
That I may make thee more and more my own . 
Office and Dignity are Enemies 
To health , and ease . Respect grows tedious 
Observance troublesome , where t i's most due . 
He that gives his Soul no more employment 
Than what 's her own : may sleep within a Drum . 
While busy Hearts , that love to undertake 
Beyond their reach of years : are fain to use 
Drowsy potions : yet watch the Winter night 
With more distinction than the Parish Clock . 
Couldst thou resign thy titles and thy cares 
To make me yet more capable of still 
Enjoying thee ? 


Lucio .  My zeal unto myself forbids my speech . 
Since if I make reply to this , I but 
Disparage duty , and consume my breath . 
Where ●ight is young , and clear , there Spectacles 
Are troublesome ; and rather hide , then show 
The object . The most devout obedience 
Which I shall ever own unto your Grace 
Becomes my heart , much better than my tongue . 


Duke .  But yet observe ( my Lucio ) 
th' unkind tricks of Nature : how we are fooled 
By a religious constancy in Love. 
A Prince's hate doth ruin where it falls : 
But his affection warmeth where it shines 
Until it kindle fire to scorch himself . 
If we are subject to the sin of Heaven , 
( Too much charity ) extremity of love : 
Let there be mercy shown in punishment . 
Why is the corrupted use of Royal love 
Imputed to our charge , to our Audit laid ? 
We that with all those Organs furnished are 
All those faculties natural in Men : 
Yet limited in use of each : prescribed 
Our conversation , by a saucy form 
Of State. How can we choose ( by this restraint ) 
But struggle more for liberty ? make choice 
Of some one Ear ; wherein to empty out our Souls , 
When they are full of busy thoughts ; of plots 
Abortive , crude , and thin . 't is cheap , and base 
For Majesty not to be singular 
In all effects . OH then , if I must give my heart 
To the command of one : send him ( sweet Heaven ! ) 
A modest appetite : teach him to know 
The stomach sooner surfeits with too much , 
then starves for lack of that supply 
Which covetous Ambition calleth want . 
For when my Friend begs , my bounty then 
Concludes to make me poor before that he 
Shall so unthrifty be of breath to ask in vain . 
Distraction ! tameness ! OH my Lucio . 
How canst thou construe this . After I have chid 
I seem to flatter thee . 


Lucio .  My gracious Lord ! — 


Duke .  Peace — 
I will no more employ my memory 
Thus to discourage thine . where 's Foreste ! 
't is fit he know you are not vigilant 
In his behalf . Farelo de Sforza 
( My old Secretary ) is newly dead : 
The place is his . I shall expect no thanks 
From you , nor yet from him : 
My bounty is requited in her choice . 


Lucio .  Your Grace will bring us both within the reach 
Of public envy . 


Duke .  thou now wouldst certify , 
His birth obscure and base discourageth 
Such earnest help to his so great promotion . 
Not a jot : Know my Boy ! 't is the vulgar , 
Not the Royal trade to patch up things : 
Or seek to mend what was before of quality 
Perfect enough itself . To make a Man 
Of nothing : why this same creation 
Inclines a little near Divinity . 
Near the old performance ; which from Chaos 
drew this multitude of subtle forms . 


Lucio .  Since you ( the royal maker ) do commend 
The mettle , and your workmanship ; it shows 
there 's little skill in those which envy him . 
Foreste is your Creature . Many times 
I do acquaint him what the general voice 
Doth urge in his disgrace . He laughs it out 
And swears he would not lose that privilege 
Which Nature gave him by her kind mistake 
In his nativity , for the Seas worth . 
As if from 's Issue , he could never deserve . 
A monument , u●lesse himself do hew 
The stones whereof 't is built : unless he raise 
His Monument on a Wart ; his dignity 
On poverty obscure and base . 


Duke .  We do affect his thoughts Such industry 
Proclaims him fit for high designs : Some Men 
Attend the talking Drum , and riddle out 
Their lives on Earth ; with Madness Sophistry : 
Calling their loss , their gain , danger , delight . 
Some men converse with Books , and melt the brain 
In sullen study how to vindicate 
The liberal Arts. Those loose formality , 
then grow Methodical ; and die i' th' dark . 
Some practice rules of State , and suffer much 
For Honour's sake : nay tread upon themselves 
At first ; to reach the higher . Some pursue 
The Plough ; and in their wholesome sweat do swim . 
And some that furnished are with nimbler souls , 
Employ their times in wanton exercise ; 
Masques and Revels : the compliments of Love , 
And Love I find the easiest vanity . 


Lucio .  OH gentle Corsa ! make it so with me , 
Feign would I ( if I durst ) reveal to him 
a noise within The heat of my affection , and where 't is fixed . 


Duke .  Hark : sure the gallery door is left unlocked . 
Are we debarred all place of privacy ? 
Nature in us hath lost her vulgar right . 
A loud , bawling suitor ; doth not waken 
Charity , but deafen her . 
A shame upon 'em all ? In Lucio . 


Exeunt Duke & Lucio . Enter Suitors at the other door . 1.  Heaven bless his Grace ! 
2.  Amen : and my Lord the count 's good Honor. 
3.  Friend ▪ went the Duke this way ? 
2.  here . This way . 
3.  Pray show me him : they call Signior Lucio 
2.  The Count Come , I 'll show you him . 
1.  follow , follow , follow . 
Exeunt . Enter Dorido and Cosimo . Dor   Dost here ? Cosimo . 


Cosi.   What sayst thou ? 


Dor.   I prithee stay , why slip but here aside 
And thou shalt see the most resplendent Fop , 
That ever did discredit Nature . Sigmor . 
Lothario ; a Country Gentleman 
But now the Court Baboon : who persuades himself , 
( Out of a new kind of madness ) to be 
enter Lothario , Borachio . The Duke's favourite . He comes . th' other is 
A bundle of Proverbs : whom he seduced 
From the Plough ; to serve him for Preferment . 


Lotha.   Borachio . 


Bor.   My Lord ? 


Loth.   Survey my garments round , and then declare If I have hit it ? 


Bor.   You have sir : but not the mark . 


Loth.   What mark ? thou bold Parishioner of Hell.  


Bor.   Why Sir , the mark I aim at : Preferment . 
After a storm , comes a calm : the harder 
You blow , the sooner your Cheeks will ache : and he 
That cares for your anger , may have more of 't 
When he list , for my part , I know my Mother . 


Loth.   The froward Sisters have conspired Slave ! Dog 
wilt thou never leave this immense folly ? 
Can nothing serve these dull Lips but Proverbs ? 


Bor.   Sir , I know none of your Proverbs . First come , 
First served . These words that are nearest the tongue , 
Have opportunity soon to leave 
The mouth . 


Loth.   Is it then decreed , I must grow mad ? 


Bor.   I 'll be no more flow●ed , nor bruised , not I 
What need my Lord , be beholding to me 
For 's mirth ; when he may laugh at 's own folly ? 
Besides though motion and exercise 
Be good for gross bodies ; therefore , must they 
Of the Guard , pitch me up and down like a bar ? 


Loth.   Sa , sa , sa , A mutiny in Heaven ! 


Bor.   If there be ; You are not likely to come 
Thither to appease it , first end this quarrel 
Upon earth , I have served you this six Months , 
In hope of an Office ; and am no more 
An Officer than she that bore me . 


Loth.   Alas poor fool ! 
I pity thee . thou wilt believe nothing 
But that which may be seen or understood . 
I say thou art an Officer . Or if thou art not 
thou shalt be ; which is better : for that same 
Which we now enjoy is in some danger 
To be lost : but that which we never had 
Cannot be lost before we have it . 


Bora.   OH rare conclusion : 


Loth.   Besides . Look here and then rejoice , Is the Count 
( Whom they call my Rival i' th' Duke's favour ) 
Is he ( I say ) accoutred like to me ? 
Why his sleeves sit like stockings on his Arms . 
His Breeches are like two Cloak-bags , half sowed 
Together in the Twist : and his other 
Garments show like Plasters on him . Follow. 
And make thy fortune fat . 


Bora.   Well . He that still expects , but tires his hope , 
What One cannot , another can : 't is so 
With days and hours too . And for my part 
Exeunt Loth. Bor.  Let the Glass run out . 


Dorid.   His man 's as full of Proverbs 
As a Constable : he coins 'em himself . 


Cos .  And such another Headpiece filled with Whey 
As is the Master here , the Sun ne'er saw . 


Dorid.   He walks like a Zealand-stork . 


Cast .  But sure the Duke 
Enables error in their fancy , by some 
Behaviour equivalent to what 
The Master , and the Man expect : for else 
Folly cannot be so sick-eyed ; but time 
Will give it strength to know itself . 


Dorid.   Why sir ; this dignifies the jest . They scarce 
E'er saw the Duke : and are less known 
Unto the world . His Grace well apprehends , 
These voluntary mistakes of Nature , 
In preservation of their intellects , 
Are fitter subjects for accidental mirth , 
then a Comical continuance . It is 
A levity too humble in a Prince 
To heed such trifles . 


Cos.   Nay — Prithee lead the way ▪ 


Exeunt omnes . Actus Secundus . Scena Prima . 

Enter FORESTS and LUINNA . FORES.   I cannot tell , why thou ( my Girl ) shouldst joy 
In my advancement thus . Honour , and place 
Bring sullen thoughts with them : business of such 
A ragged quality , as takes away 
The amorous garb : those soft wanton touches , 
Wherewith the youthful flatterer betrays 
The weaker side to action : whose effects 
more weakness brings . I shall no leisure have 
To comfort thee with smiles : when 't is assigned 
That I must venture for a Boy : 't will be 
In haste . My business will not suffer me 
To stay , and make a prologue to the act , 
To kiss , or simper invitation . 


Luin.   It is not fit I apprehend you now , 
But I wish that you would know ; My duty 
Is so well preserved from all corruption : 
Which either youth : or fowl example might 
Produce : that it in plores for sufferance , 
To certify the world how strong it is . 


Forest .  I was assured before . This is the time , 
In which I shall oblige posterity 
Or fall ( my wench ) by flattering error . 
Hast thou to my sister counsel given ? 
Instructions safe ! whereby her actions 
May warrant her promotion well deserved . 


Luin ,  It was my tongues last employment . 


Foreste   I would have her wear her growing fortunes , 
In a handsome fashion : Do but observe 
The unpolished garb of City dames : of those 
Whom ●athers' purse-strings hoyfe up to honour . 
How they do suck their Chins into their Necks . 
Simper with unskilful levetie : and trip 
On their wanton Toes ; like Kibe-heel'd-fayries . 
The Devil's damn shows like a vestal Nun 
To them : more powerful in humility . 
Instruct my Sister , gentle wife . — 


Enter Lucio . Lucio   I shall be earnest to my utmost skill . 


Foreste .  My Lord is come , where 's my Sister . 


Lucin.   With the Horentine : who instructeth her ▪ in music . 


Exit . Lucio .  Signior Foreste , 
You see my love is rude , and bold . ●am 
The usher to my own entrance . 


Foreste .  My good Lord , The proverb will persuade you : 
To be bold , with whaws your own . 
Your title 's strong , bo●● to the house , and me . 


Lucio .  I am in debt for both . wilt thou not child . 
To see my heart assume this liberty . 
Music . Upon my Tongue : before it rightly knows ! 
Thy sister's heart : 
The Duke consent , as yet unasked too : hark ? 


Foreste .  Cease that noise , 't is troublesome : 


cease Muss . Lucio .  How Forest ? Hast thou ears ? and wilt thou● 
〈◊〉 such hopeful harmony , 〈…〉 
Thy thirst unnatural , wilt thou forbid 
Thy friend to share in what is good , sweet tongue 
And hand , persist in what your kindness proffered . 


Foreste .  Obey him , if the music not deserve 
Your strict attention : You must blame yourself . 


Song . Lucio .  Show me the way Foreste . 


Foreste .  whither sir ? 


Lucio .  My heart is stolen out of my ear ; let me 
But know the thief , and I 'll forgive the robbery . 
Speak ; who is (null) that , with a voice so amorous 
And shrill , confounds the others hollow organ ? 
Still so reserved , and unto me . 


Enter Corsa . Foreste .  Why then look there , the voice was hers , go sir 
And take what else you would enforce from my possession . 


Lucio .  Is this that child of Orpheus ? how ? kneel to me ? 


Foreste .  Stay Sir — If she consent but to abuse 
The property of motion in such kind 
As may exalt her person but on such 
Above this height : I am her enemy 
For evermore . Consider what you do . 
She brings no portion but humility , 
If her first payment fail : who dares assure 
The future debt ? Pray look into her lap : 
you 'll find she comes not from the East enriched 
With Diamonds , bright wealth : whose wanton worth 
Unskilful fancy prizes not from use 
But from the idolatrous doting of the eye . 
Her chaste obedience is all her dowry . 
OH bitter speech ! it cuts my very soul 
To think that fortune should create us two 
Mere patterns of your charity . 


Lucio .  Dare you authorise this Idolatry ? 
then I 'll kneel too . 


Forest .  And I , 
Will join to make th' offence seem virtuous . 
Now interchange your souls . Where passion is 
So fond , it cannot well be sergeant . 
Each unbusied Angel , hear me speak ! 
OH send , send down unto this youthful pair 
Celestial heat . Such serious love as makes 
A business of delight ; Instruct her soul 
To practise duty in the humble strain . 
And furnish him with an acceptance prompt . 
Make her fruitful as the Vine ; which grows 
Crooked with the weight of its own increase . 
So blessed in their Issue , that when time 
Shall think them fit to taste the privilege 
Of Death : they shall not need a Monument 
Yet dwell as chief i' th' memory of Fame . 


Corsa .  Amen , Amen . 


Lucio .  Such is my prayer too . OH Foreste ! 
Excessive joy disturbs my utterance . 
My words are parted on any tongue . OH speak ! 
thou knowest my heart ! Tell her , there may lie hope , 
I shall deserve those Tears that show like dew 
Upon the Morning cheek . Entreat her , that 
My years may not disgrace my love . Though I 
am young , I cannot sergeant , 
I ever speak my thoughts . I am o'ercome . 


Corsa .  Alas sir , so am I , There needs no Art , 
To help belief , where no suspicion is . 


Foreste .  Now ; I 'll leave you to yourselves . 


Exit Foreste . Corsa .  i  much to promise in my own behalf : 
Of my future love , and humble duty 
To you my dearest Lord Time lays his hand 
On Pyramids of Brass , and ruins quite 
What all the fond Artificers did think 
Immortal workmanship . He sends his worms 
To Books , to old Records : and they devour 
Th' inscription . He loves Ingratitude , 
For he destro●d the memory of Man : 
But I shall near forget on what strange terms 
You ta●● me to your bed . 


Lucio .  Excellent wretch ! I am undone with joy 
I will not blame the Coward to fear death , 
Since the world contains such joy as this . 
Why do you weep Lady ? can you suppose 
Foreste would consent to what is done , 
Unless he knew there were no danger in 't ? 
Sure his Mother was a Sibyl ; he sees 
With a prophetic aim ; the end of his 
Designs ; before they come to action . 
He is too wise to err . Why weep you then ? 


Corsa .  It is a folly in my Eyes . 
I know not why they weep : unless they weep 
Because they now have lost their liberty ; 
Heretofore each man , which chance presented , 
Was to them a lawful object : but now , 
They are to look on none but you . 


Lucio .  Mark then the bondage I impose on mine , 
My poor eyes have no object , but your face : 
Of which I will deprive them thus — 
Covers her face with her white Veil . Shroud thee in thy vestal ornaments . 
Creep , creep , my glorious Sun , behind a cloud . 
For else my eyes , will surfeit with delight . 
I never felt true joy till now . Me thinks 
A brisk alacrity , a nimble fire , 
Con●ayes me strangely from my flesh . 
Not the Cannons , Iron-entrail , when wrapped 
Within a swarthy case of troubled Air , 
could squall me in emphasis of Motion . 


Corsa .  Though Mo●est would suffer me to boast , 
Yet 't were not in the power of breath , to make 
My joy so known , as i● is felt . 


Lucio .  Come then ( my dear Corsa ) the Priest attends 
Within ; the world wants Men ; and Hymen is 
A nimble God. When all is past prevention 
The Duke shall know my choice . 


Exit . Enter Dorido : and Cosimo : Dorid.   This disgrace , makes thy Cousin boil his heart 
In his own blood . 


Cos .  He hath written a most pestilent Libel 
Which must be sung all about the city , 
By one he calls his Daw ; A tall , big , fellow . 


Dor.   I know him . He sings like Phalaris Bull.  


Cos .  I supposed at first , he would have sent him 
A Challenge . 


Dor.   But that 's contingent now : Foreste 
Being made Secretary of State.  


Cos .  I've heard o' th' new edict , which institutes 
A mysterious toy , i'th' ' Hatband , for those 
Of the faction . 


Dor.   Why about two days since : one of the sect 
Scent me a Challenge . Because my sister 
Drunk his Lord's health , with her Coif on . Each hour 
These giddy Participles do embark 
Themselves for Duels . The one is a kin 
To my honourable Lady . Ih'other 
To my very good Lord  


Enter Castruchio . Cos .  There comes my Cousin , chawing his lean heart . 


Dor.   Good morrow to the Court Satirist . 


Cast .  The world is altered Dorido , Foreste 
Is stepped beyond my reach : we cannot meet 
In Duel : The Heralds stand between . 
But my sine Thrush , can sing you a new Libel . 


Dor.   We shall have your Thrush , in a Cage shortly . 
Remember , who you deal withal . 


Cast ,  hang him , d●ll , open slave , His thoughts may be 
Discerned , through the shaving of a deal bo●d . 
I 'll sift and winnow him , in an old hat . 


Dor.   Prithee ( sweet Castruchio ) leave thy barking . 
'T will bet treason shortly for any man , 
To carry ears , within three , miles of thy Tongue . 


Cast .  Why Signior , what Faction are you of : 


Dor.   Not of your faction ( Sir ) if none return 
Unto the prison for your libelling . 
You remember your Vices-striped , and whipped . 
Your trim Eclogues , the fulsome Satyr too , 
Written to his Grace . Wherein you flatter , 
Whine , and damn yourself to get a pardon 
For what seems there a resolute offence . 
Satyrs , are more useful , now then ever . 
Nor grieves it me to see the humour used , 
But thus abused . To see a Bard still reach 
At ho● Bays , Passion o' me ! I 'll tell thee . 
Thy R●meses include not so much Brains , as would 
Suffice to fill a Cherry-stone . 


Cast .  you 'd fain make me angry . 


Dor.   ay , with thyself . 


Cos .  And then thou spendest thy Gall , with more justice , 
then when , thou rail'st against Foreste . 


Cast .  Cry you mercy ( precious Cox ) Hath Foreste , 
So great a share in your tongue too ? Sympathy 
Is corrupted . Behold society 
amongst the wicked : whilst a virtuous man , 
Is left alone to resist his bad fate . 
Let him chide the fulsome Age , rail against 
The Times , aloud ; though in a Vault : or'tweene 
Two Hills . He shall find no zealous echo , 
To second his bold Language . When I die , 
I die a Martyr to the Commonweal . 


Enter Lothario and Borachio . Loth.   Dull Caitiff , leave these abortive Provects , 
And talk in the newest fashion . I 'll have 
My very Dug bark i' th' Courtly garb . 


Dor.   Step aside . They are as mad as thy Cousin . 


Loth.   The excrements and mere defects of nature , 
shall be reduced to Ornaments in me . 
I 'll feed upon the tongues of Nightingales , 
For so each fart I let , will be a Song — 


Cast .  For the Peripatetics being Butchers 
here in Sienna : — 


Loth.   A Pallas hewed in an entire Carbuncle . 
Encircled with a more that flows with Lhasis — 


Cast .  Derined their Angury from the warm Entrails 
Of a Calf . 


Bor.   Sir. These are some of those , that laughed at ye 
In the presence . 


Loth.   At me ? thou liest . They laughed at thee . 


Bora.   Why then the Devil , will never give a Ma● 
Leasure , to believe a truth . 


Cast .  Signior Lothario , the great Minion 
To our Duke : I greet your health , with all joy . 


Cos .  And I with all humility . 


Dorid.   And I with all celerity . 


Loth.   Hark ! thou dull Sinner . Is this real ? hah ? 


Bora.   Sir , let him , that hath a heart of his own 
Think what he list . 


Loth.   Do they adore , or flout me now ? 


Bora.   All is witchcraft . know when the Moon winks 
there 's something in'● , besides an eclipse . 


Loth.   Miscreant : What suspicious follies 
Dost thou create within that Wooden-skull ? 
And with what Heathen-phrase uttered ? Know Dog , 
If I employ my wrath — 


Bora.   Alas sir   more faults than misbelief . 
Therefore give me your blessing , and let me 
Go home in peace . 't is true , wh●n the sky falls 
We shall have Larks . But let weaker stomaches , 
Ex●ect such curious meat . I can eat 
Oats , and Garlic , under my own Roof . 


Dorid.   How ? will Borachio leave the Court ? 


Cast .  What accident of dire portent is fallen ? 


Loth.   Gentlemen applaud my patience : Because , 
He cannot furnish me with wholesome Suits , 
He doubts my power to get 'em granted . 


Cast .  Why we , will furnish him with Suits . 


Bora.   But wont ye flout , and play the knave with one ? 


Cast   How ( Knave ! ) was that the word ? 


Bora.   Interpret the word , as yourself shall please . 
I scorn to be your Dictionary . 
Mary come up : Are your ears so tender ? 
I hope I 'm a Man , although a sinner . 


Cast .  Use no choler Amorous child . But if 
thou wantest suits , thy Lord being near the Duke , 
May furnish thee with — 


Cos .  Or me thinks thou wouldst become a knighthood 
Get him to beg it for thee . 


Bora.   no , no , Hot words make but warm air , A fig 
For a Knight-errant ; that hath a stile , and ne'er a hedge . 


Dorid.   then get a Patent to survey Brine-pits . 
Or else for casting Ordinance in Lome . 


Cast .  Or else search Saint Peter's patrimony , 
Lay Prebendries are good , and Simony 
Is an old Paradox . 


Bora.   Hold , hold 
Enough sufficeth all women but whores . 
He that expects the Morning lengthens the Night 
Therefore straightway let my Lord get the Duke 
To sign these Patents : which done 
I 'll return to the wife of my bowels , 
And die for joy . 


Cast .  Why this , is fit , and requisite . 


Cos .  If Signior Lothario do consent . 


Loth.   It is decreed . 


Bora.   Who would hasten Time , when we may be old 
Too soon . Let me take down a Cushion , and pray . 
For I shall have more dignity than will suffice 
To damn a Monk . 


Cast .  Who could perish in a better cause ? 


Bora.   Why , can I help it ? If a man be born 
To Offices . Or as my Master said , 
Predestinate in the womb of greatness . 
't is not our faults . Each man obeys his Star , 
In spite of his Teeth , 


Dor.   All this is Koran . 


Bora.   One thing grieves me . i  a bad memory 
Already , and now 't will be made worse . 


Cast .  How can preferment hurt thy memory ? 


Bora.   OH Sir ! preferment makes a man forget 
His dearest friends ; nay his kindred too . 


Cos .  Look , Thy Master's building more Castles , in the Air . 


Cast .  He has intelligence from Spain , and fortifies , 
To no purpose 'gainst the next Spring . 


Loth.   All offices shall be sold i' th' dark — 


Bora.   How ! Grow not old in another's garment , 
sell what 's your own , Some of those offices 
Are mine by promise . 


Loth.   Still , cross to my designs . I 'll stretch your Sinws● 


Dor.   Hold ! Signior Lothario , hold ! Mercy 
Becomes the powerful , 


Bora.   Let the Devil take the Knighthood , and make 
His Dam a Lady . I 'll not be his Ass , 
Exit Bor. Loth. running after him . That served for blows , and Provander . 


Dor.   le 's relieve Borachio , or all our Comic Scenes 
Are at an end . 


Exeunt Omnes . Chair out . Enter Duke and Foreste . Duke .  Foreste 


Foreste .  My gracious Lord  


Duke .  Are yet our Letters to his Holiness 
Dispatched ? 


Foreste .  They are so please your Grace . 


Duke .  Did the French-ambassador make some show 
Of discontent at his departure hence ? 


Foreste .  Both in his words and looks : for when he heard 
th' English-leiger had opposed his Treaty 
Concerning trassique with the Florentine , 
His anger strait dismissed the Argument , 
And seized upon the Nation , nay railed 
Against the Leaguer too , whose opposition , 
Might be chidden as too nice a Virtue , 
But could not be accused as a vice , 
't is known indeed the French do take a prides , 
In the emphasis of sudden anger , 
As if alacrity in ill did make , 
The fault look handsomely , and dulness add 
Deformity to sin . 


Duke .  't is faithfully observed . 


Foreste .  Swelled with uncharitable pride : such as 
Admits no stile of Neighbour ; as if grown 
Above the use of friendship . They seem to call 
Those mighty Islanders nearest their soil , 
Poor borderers to their Continent . Such , 
Whose thin numbers , have in bloody battle , 
Made their multitudes their impediments , 
Worn their Ensigns , instead of gaudy Scarves . 


Duke .  The chance of war , 
Admitteth many times of Miracles , 
Even such , as do discredit History , 
High-providence confers the conquest there , 
Where probability conferred the loss . 
And this is done , that we may attribute 
The praise to him that gave the victory , 
Not to them that got it . Observe besides , 
That when the weak do overcome : the strong , 
Do leave that stain , for their Posterity 
To wipe away : which is already done ; 
The French , have fiery ni●ble spirits . 


Foreste .  Your Grace deals justly in your praise . They ( have 
Spirits : but they all are useless made , 
By forward and affectate violence . 
He that spends his fury , and his strength 
i' th' first charge , must not hope to mak es retreat , 
So nobly , as the modest Combarant , 
Whose onset slowly moves : as careful not 
T' outride his skill . Their valour is t' attempt . 
Not to perform . 't is a giddy Nation ; 
And never serious but in trifles . 


Duke .  thou dost mistake in natural effects , 
Where Fancy is so rich , the incident 
To s●me u●-expence . These 〈◊〉 
Divulge the wealth o●●h ' Brain . ●●uite that is ripe 
Is prone to fall , or to 〈◊〉 self . 
〈◊〉 to the ●●e of ●●archiess : 
Th●y now are fully ripe : they reach 
The height , and 〈◊〉 of mortal ●aeuleiess . 
Nature 〈◊〉 them doth stand upon the verge 
Of her 〈◊〉 youth The English want 
Three ●u●dred y●ereses of that perfection . 
And as the Moo●e never changes but i'th'full 
Even so the mighty Nations of the Earth , 
Change in their greatest glory . First their strict 
And rugged discipline , to vain delights . 
Their solemn Marches next to wanton ●igss . 
Their Battles fierce to Duels splenative , 
enter Lucis . kneel . Or witty quarrels of the Penne.  


Luc.   here may my knees take root : whilst I do grow 
A living Statue of true obedience , 
Or let my royal Master grant his pardon . 


Duke .  Sure we may trust , the judgement of our eyes , 
thou dost not look as if thou couldst commit 
A sin so horrid , so ugly as can fright 
Our mercy from us. Rise , we pardon thee . 
Now let us know thy crime . 


Lucio .  It is no crime 
Unless against that great prerogative 
Your ear hath overrune . Perhaps my Heart , 
Hath made escape through these fond Eyes . And I 
( i' th' rash discretion of my youthful blood ) 
Confined myself in Matrimonial bonds . 


Duke .  Ha ! married ? speak suddenly , to whom ? 


Foreste .  Io my Sister . Sir pardon the permission , 
Foreste kneels . Or frown , and leave your creature more obscure 
then when you owned him first . Now is the time 
To show your charity Divine . Preserve 
What you have made . 


Duke .  Foreste this is ill . 
What confederate with ungoverned youth ? 
But 〈◊〉 , we pardon you . where 's the Lady ? 
Enter Cor● Rare beauty ! — 
You have our pardon , and our favour too . 
I thus invite more knowledge of your worth . 
Believe me Lady : you have a feature 
That ●ould betray a more experienced Eye 
then Lucio's is . Excellent wretch ! with a 
Timorous modesty , she stifleth up 
Her utterance . OH such a pregnant Eye ! 
And yet ● slow of speech ; is a wonder 
more delightful , than any Nature makes . 
Hast thou Lucio , so much unhappy wit , 
As to be ●ealous yet ? with thou suppose 
Thyself s●c●re in our discourse ? 


Lucio .  Heaven ●orb●d , your Grace should ere employ 
Your 〈…〉 as to discourse with her 
Till grew 〈◊〉 . 


Duke .  Come hither Lady , come , confess , how chance 
Y●u have bewitched my Boy with subtle smiles , 
With wan●on behaviour of those pretty Eyes ? 
Doth Heaven bestow such Noble ornaments , 
To be abused in the use : and now 
He is your Prisoner too , in cheerful bonds , 
How can you have the heart to make s●ch spoil , 
And havoc of his beauty ? hah ! speak Lady ! 


Corsa .  I hope your Grace hath thoughts more merciful . 
I know this match was made in Heaven ; and not 
Provoked by any sinful art in me . 
How I have vied him in this little time 
That he hath been my Lord : let him declare . 
My duty is so strict , I need not blush 
To hear the story told . 


Duke .  No! look , look there . His Eyes for very shame 
Their lustre 's lost are crept into his head : 
Encircled with the weakly colour blue . 
The Roses in his Cheeks are withered quite 
His clear and brisk aspect is muddy now 
And dull : His voice ( that was so shrill ; and could 
Even Trumpetlike , outscold the Echo ) 
Is hollow grown , and horse . Have you then used him well ? 


Corsa .  Alas ( most gracious sir ) go not about 
To make my Lord suspect my Loyalty . 
If Nature sicken in his faculties ; 
Which ( heaven be thanked ) I perceived not yet , 
It cannot prove a guiltiness in me . 


Duke .  Believe 't ( young wife ) I am no Proselyte , 
I still aver , you are that greedy Nymph , 
That hath devoured the rich complexion of my Boy . 
See how his feature 's shrunk ? his beauty stained ? 
The Scythian Dame ( whose cruelty is such , 
Whose lust so prodigal , that she doth strive 
To kill the able Lecher in the act ; 
Making her womb his Sepulchre ) would yet 
Have spared that wanton handsomeness ; to show 
As pattern of her Lenity . 


Corsa .  I hope , your Grace will pardon Ignorance , 
That so ill mannered is , as not to know 
Your meaning . 


Duke .  no matter Lady . 
My accusation shall withdraw itself . 
Pretty innocence ! Lucio , prepare . 
't is our will to make thy Wife a Courtier ; 
She shall be high in favour ; if she 'll leave 
Her modesty ; that 's out of fashion now : 
In Neighbour Courts , the Ladies so prevail 
With masculine behaviour : they grow 
In factions able to depose their Husbands 
From the charter of their Sex.  


Foreste .  't is strange that his dislike is fled so soon . 


Duke .  Your Marriage we will solemnize with masks , 
And Revels . If Invention ●uer mean , 
To get reward for subtlety ; 't is now . 
We take notice ( Lucio ) She is thy wife , 
And thy sister our Foreste . 


Foreste . Lucio .  We your Grace's humblest Creatures . 


Foreste .  Affection is become a Parasite ; 
Strives to please , whom it cannot benefit . 


Exeunt omnes . Actus Tertius . Scena Prima . 

Enter , DORIDO , COSIMO , CASTRY CHIO . DORIDO ,  Known , by whom by City wits ! 


Cos .  Or my Lady's workmen . 


Dor.   Who never saw verse , but what their Suitors written , 
Which they read like Prose too . 


Cast .  I 'll not discredit my patience , talk on . 


Dor.   They say you are particular with a 
Great Lady . 


Cos .  Yes , and her Pensioner . 


Dor.   Some loose thing ( belike ) yet will be at charge , 
To secure her fame from noise . For thou pray'st 
Against all lechery but thine own . 


Cos .  And she hath wished in witty-penitence , 
thou hadst been single in the world , 


Dor.   ay , for than she had lived chaste . He grows angry , 
His eyes look red . 


Cast .  no Sir. They blush to see a Foole.  


Dor.   'T were fit they would employ their modesty 
At home . For thou art a fool in print . 


Cos .  Yet had he lived , when the old Sibyl , 
Presented her divine Manuscripts , to 
The dull Roman ; he would have scolded with her , 
Unless his Pamphlets had attained the first 
Acceptance . 


Dor.   True , for every Poet thinks himself 
The best Poet in the world . 


Cos .  And that Satyr not the worst ; wherein 
He chides Women , for wearing their Half-ruffes , 
Which pinned behind trans situates the face , 
Or makes 'em look , like janus with two faces . 


Dorid.   A just exception : for going hastily 
To kiss his whore ; he could not find her Mouth . 


Cos .  Why sure her breath was strong enough 
To direct him to it . 


Cast .  Yet I have heard nothing , but what deserves 
more pity , than anger . 


Dorid.   Now when he hath provided some high toy 
For the Press ; he thinks on dedication , 
Straight chooseth one of the faction ; who must 
Not Patronise , but buy what he makes vendable , 
With praise in the Epistle . 


Cos .  Can you deny this Cousin Satirist ? 


Dorid   And nothing makes Learning so cheap ; but that 
Every writer sells his works . 


Exit Castruchio . they after him . Cos .  Nay let 's follow ; and worry him to pieces . 


Enter Lucio , and Foreste . Lucio . Foreste .  Our ruin is contrived above . 
If our Master p●ocue unkind , the Planets 
Govern ill : For our gratitude , and care , 
Deserves more constancy . 


Foreste   Looks he so strangely on ye ? 


Lucio   As if the object were but new to him . 
And his own heart unsettled in his b●●ast . 


Foreste .  Is his violence so soon tired ? survey 
The Register of your own deeds . Speak Sir , 
Have you so engrossed his ears , as if their 
Organ , were yours , not his . Confined 'em to 
Your own tongue : and so deprived the sorrowful , 
The grieved in heart , of an easy audience ? 


Lucio .  ●ever . 


Forest .  Since you have shared the Duke's prerogative , 
And by his love , held opposition . 
At such great advantage . did you ever slight 
With cheap regard , those of high , and Noble birth ? 


Lucio .  My soul abhors such tyranny . 


Foreste .  Have those who wear th'eternals Livery 
Bought their wages of ye ? Or have they found 
Bold , and skilful flattery , more helps 
Advancement ; then deep and modest Learning ? 


Lucio .  Never , since my distinction was of power , 
To help its choice . 


Forest .  In nice trial , or evidence of Law , 
Hath Custom ( which only gives us hope 
Of certainty in justice ) been traduced 
By your obscure help ? 


Lucio .  Never . 


Foreste .  Hath the desolate Widow scared mercy 
From your eyes , with her old ruined beauty , 
( For grief was never amorous ) or hath 
The torn Beggar too soon dismissed your charity 
Because not giddy enough to delight 
Wantonness . 


Lucio .  Never . 


Foreste .  then if our great Master withdraw his love ; 
The weight of sufferance cannot bruise ye ; 
For the whole world will share i' th' burden . 


Enter a young Gentleman with a Letter . Lucio .  From whom is this sir ? 


Gent.   From my Lord Marquis de Loretta . 


Lucio .  I humbly kiss his hand . 


Gent.   Now luck flatter me but once , and I am made — 
't is short , pray heaven it be sweet , or I 'll ne'er love 
The Proverb . 


Lucio .  Sir , have you ever been in service , 
Under any eminent Commander ? 


Gent.   Never yet . 


Lucio .  Read these Foreste . 
How Reputation lessens in esteem . 
Courtesy grows so cheap , that denial , 
Seems less troublesome than consent . 
And performance is only Lazy . 
The labour of subscription hinders more , 
then thought of that , to which it doth subscribe . 
This Letter would fain make you a Captain 
In the new Troops , sent to the Valtaline . 
But sure your modesty will teach you balk 
The grant , though I should beg ye to receive 't . 


Foreste .  Sir. Shall the grey head , the old Soldier . 
That tries misfortune by his constancy 
In sufferance ; affronts the winter's rage ; 
Whilst his blood is frozen into Coral , 
His sins into Wyer : whole Valour thinks 
To wear Chained shot , as bracelets on his Loins . 
Shall his preferment be intercepted ? 
Shall he now trail a Pike under a Boy , 
Whose experience is younger than his face ? 


Lucio .  no , the friendship of the noble Marquis 
Shall never countenance unjust deeds . 
Find a Suit more capable of my grant , 
And your acceptance , it is your own . 


Chair at the Arras . Gent.   Noble Signior , I 'll put ye to the test . 


Foreste .  Prince's letters are c●e●per far than those 
Which Scrivener's put to sale . If such Pigmies , 
Apes in doublets , procure command o' th' Camp , 
Let the Cranes wage war again . no opposition 
Is too weak to ruinate . — Go young Lord , 
The Duke is ill accompanied , if on●y 
With his own thoughts . Discover more . Perhaps 
His discontent concerns not you . 


Lucio   I fear , yet my hopes would fain comfort me , 
Farewell . 


Exeunt omnes . Enter Luinna , and Duarte.  Luin.   I would not be unmannerly , but if 
She be at leisure , tell her , I am here . 


Dua.   Please your Ladyship to sit , I 'll tell her so . 
enter Corsa . she 's come already . 


Corsa .  I saw your entrance . How do you Sister ? 


Luin.   I humbly thank your honour , I am well , 
Pray dismiss your woman : I would impart 
A privacy . 


Corsa .  Watch my Lords coming from the Duke , and bring 
Me word , before he is uncoached 


Dua.   I shall . 


Exit Duarte.  Luin.   OH Madam Time is now grown old , and runs 
But slowly , I thought each Hour , a year , 
Until I saw your Ladyship . 


Cor.   Why what 's the matter ? I hope my brother 's well 


Luin.   Yes , I thank heaven . But pray come hither . 
Who do you suppose was with me last night , 
When my husband was at Court ? 


Corsa   How should I tell , without you instruct me . 


Luin.   Why give a guess . 


Corsa .  The Lady Benuolia , or the Lady 
Vtruvia , who was it ? 


Luin.   Nay 't was a Man too . 


Corsa .  that 's fine i'faith , pray name him to me . 


Luin.   What think you of the best man in Sienna ? 


Corsa .  How ! was the Duke with ye ? 


Luin.   Yes , disguised too : he either came , ( or else 
Pretended so ) to meet your husband there . 
After some talk , ( in which he did express 
His love to all our family ) he gave 
An ample praise of you : and said he saw 
Already so much worth in your fair breast 
As will add a knot to your Lord's Heart , 
And his own : nay and make his constant love 
A pattern for every royal Master . 


Corsa .  Indeed , I daily pray to have it so . 


Luin.   then he gave me this same jewel ; to you 
He recommended the receipt of this . 


Corsa   Trust me wench , they are both full of glory 
Rarely cut , and set . 


Luin.   Yours is the better of the twain , 


Corsa .  It is . 
But truly I mislike the manner of 
The gift . Dost thou think his thoughts are honourable ? 
I prithee tell me ? 


Luin.   they are such as I suspected at the first , 
Such as made me to refuse these jewels . 
He swore I was a Traitor , if I thought . 
He meant amiss Or if I did deny 
To bear this same to you , I did but ill 
Require his kind request unto my husband . 
then in the close he used such Art , such subtle phrase , 
To free his thoughts from the strict jealousy 
Of mine ; as reconciled me to obey his william 
You know besides how harsh it is to chide 
With Majesty , or slight Princes favours . 


Corsa .  I 'll show to my Lord  


Luin.   I had thought t' have shown my husband mine too 
But since 't is capable of curious 
Questioning , I mean to stay awhile . 


Corsa .  thou counsel'st well . we 'll wear 'em both at once . 
Mine is the best , I ever was Mistress of . 


Enter Duarts . Luin.   And mine is not eclipsed much by yours . 


Dua.   Madam , my Lord is near at hand . 


Corsa .  Come Sister , we shall here the news at Court.  


Luin.   I 'll wait upon your Ladyship . 


Exeunt omnes . Enter Castruchio , Lothario , Borachio . Cast .  Sir Knight , believe 't Foreste is the Man ▪ 
That dulls your reputation with the Duke . 
And suborns the Count against ye . 


Loth.   Dares he control my purposes ? 


Cast .  Ask honest Borachio else . 


Bora.   Nay he 'll not believe me : though I should sw●●● 
You slout him behind his back : and when a man 
sees things plainly ; he need not buy spectacles , 
Till he grow old . 


Loth.   I 'll mince the Villain into sand , to fill 
My Hourglass — 


Cast .  In this Garden he walks continually 
After dinner . here stay , and expect him . 
And Signior in this skin of parchment ; mark 
What pains I take , to perfect your revenge . 
i' th' shape of tree ( which takes root in Hell ) 
You shall discover all his base descent . 
On that branch appears a Hangman . then , 
A jakes-man , then , a Tinker . On 's Mother's side 
A Bawd professed . then , a Tyb . than a Tripe-wife . 
A Synagogue of Welsh Rabbis ; could not 
Express more skill in Genealogies , 
then this includes . Sir , show it him , and he 
Insaniates straight . 


Loth.   I 'll make him wear it on his forehead . 


Cast .  Excellent rage ! but not a word of me . 
I humbly take my leave . 


exit Castruchio . Loth.   Not the four winds ( met in March ) shall cool my spleen 


Bora.   Sir , now we are private , 't is a fit time 
To be troublesome — 


Loth.   I 'll cram Cerberus , with sops made of the slave's blood — 


Bora.   Concerning those Offices . i  thought on 'em . 
And will have 'em all in spite of Bolten's teeth . 


enter . For , Foreste .  Signior Lothario ! Borachio too . 
thou art an honest fellow . 


Bora.   ay , your worship is wise , to speak no more , 
Than what you may well stand too . 


Loth.   Base stem , derived from I soap root , 
Our Ancestors were not so familiar . 
Behold , & grow more mannerly . 


shows him a Parchment . Foreste .  what 's here ? My Pedigree ? Some saucy knave 
Hath counselled him , to this affront . What he , 
Enter servants . I must know th' original projector . 
Lay hold upon those fools . 


Loth.   Lay hold on me ? 
Take off your hands ; or I will toss ye all 
Into the clouds , and kick the Mountains after ye . 


Bora.   I pray bid the Gentleman take good heed ; 
For my Master , can do all this , and more too 
I have seen him . 


Ser.   Be you quiet . You that desire Offices . 


Bora.   If I do , what then ? there be ●hose desire 
Worse things . 


Loth.   Know ye not Rogues , that I can muzzle up 
The testify Unicorn , in a Spinner's thread ? 


Foreste .  Lay all hold on him . 


Bora.   He that cannot run for his Liberty 
Hath no courage in his Heels . Let the Gout 
Take him , that hath Legs , and won't vse 'em 


he runs away , Foreste .  no matter , let him go . Convey that fool , 
Unto the Porter's Lodge . 


Loth.   A Chaos shall succeed this same . 


Exeunt servants with Lothario . Enter Lucio . Foreste .  whither so fast ( sweet Lord ! ) 


Lucio .  Foreste , I have ta'en my leave o' th' Duke . 


Foreste .  Must ye away to night . 


Lucio .  Now , presently . My followers attend 
At door . I only came to kiss thy hands . 


Foreste .  The Sun will fail ye , ere ye reach Lucca . 


Lucio .  I must through . His grace will have it so . 
Why dost thou make thy head , to shake and reel , 
Upon thy shoulders thus . Is it o'ercome 
With thoughts , and such as must be hid from me ? 


Foreste .  Take heed , suspicion is the Favourite 
Of Time , and Nature , it takes a sudden growth : 
And gathers in the breast , like Balls of suow , 
In snow ; until the weight make it deny 
To be removed : then melts at leisure too . 


Lucio .  he 's too moderate , that will at my years , 
Be satisfied thus . 


Foreste .  Why then consider thus . You go to Lucca , 
There to congratulate the sat approach 
Of the Pope's Legate ; He hath been there a week ; 
And why he was not visited ere this 
Or why upon such strict , and short summons . 
Yourself must now be sent ; quite puzzles me . 
Actions rare , and sudden , do commonly 
Proceed from fierce necessity : or else 
From some oblique design : which is ashamed , 
To show itself i' th' public Rode.  


Lucio .  Foreste is this all ? 


Forest .  Why me sweet Patron : this is enough 
Of danger , since none is merited . 


Lucio .  Young thoughts encourage me to sufferance . 
Each storm is usher to a gentle calm : 
Why toils with speed , gets soon home to rest . 
The plodding Mule shall sleep eternally . 
Why should the strike dear bemoan his death : 
His obsequys , were full of noble rites : 
Actaeon's Choir , a jolly Requiem gave : 
And th' Arrow from the bow did sing his dirge . 


Foreste .  Thus thy years do riddle grief away ; 
Making sorrow swift , because 't is mortal . 
Let me wait , on your Lordship to your horse , 
And at your better leisure read this same . 
I 'll tell ye as we go , who brought it me . 


Exeunt Omnes . Enter Duke . Duke .  To wrong my boy , unkind , incestuous heat ! 
Why is Copulation legal ; it gives 
Authority to lust , for chastity 
Would soon conclude the World. OH virtuous 
Pre●dice , when error , prevents folly ! 
Fiends , Devils , that do live in liquid fire , 
Have constitutions not half so hot , 
So riotous as mine . But why this ? 
The beauteous Corsa is not yet defiled . 
He that reputes ever he commits a fault , 
Doth like a thirsty , sinner store his Soul 
With mercy , to absolve that sin himself ; 
Which he may afterwards , more securely 
Fall into . Enough this soon Initiates . 
Enter Castruchio . The credulous Count her husband , I have sent 
To Lucca . And tomorrow he returns . 
My plots are limited too short a time 
To become Actions . Nor was it skill 
To send the jewel by her sister . Mark ! 
My Soul and brain , are perfect Courtiers grown ; 
In my declension , and my greatest want 
They leave me to instruct , and help myself . 


Cast .  These fancies are not old : the whole Court 
Observes him strangely altered . But why 
am I sent for ? that I must know , by safe , 
And cautelous insinuation . 


Duke .  How soon , i  profited in discipline 
Of Hell I must through What I did mean 
Adultery at first ; will now I fear 
Become a Rape . 


Cast .  Ha ! still upon that string ? I like it well , 
't is musical . 


Duke .  Castrucho ! art thou come ? 
thou hast been a Courtier long ; but whether 
'T was want of skill in me to choose a Man , 
Or want of luck in thee to be my choice ; 
Suspense makes neutral . But know ; my love 
Was tardy , because still void of leisure ; 
To warrant passion well bestowed ; by safe 
( Though tedious ) trials . Affection 
That is slow , is sure : And now , I wear my heart 
Not in m●ne own breast , but thine . 


Cast .  I have but one life , it is some error 
In your Grace , thus t' oblige me to the loss 
Of more , in your dear service . 


Duke .  I am not skilled in words . But I affect 
Thy fury . For thou art the bold Satyr , 
That whips Foreste , and the wanton Count , 
In thy tart Verse . 


Cast .  My gracious Lord ! I shall conceive much grief , 
If my zeal mistake in accusation 
Of those Men , which th' uncertain Tongue of Fame 
Delivers to my charge . 


Duke .  Nay , make not thy confession an excuse 
Rather than a story : For there needs none . 
I hate Foreste , and the Count , and would 
device succinct ways to my revenge . 


Cast .  Heaven forbid : I 'd rather far disgrace 
The skill of my subject ; call accusation 
Slander : then that the busy multitude 
Should note inconstancy in you , 


Duke .  This is a damned Hypocrite . Chamellons 
Changes , are not so intricate to sense . 
Castruchio ! ease me with nimble apprehension . 
I have not leisure , to be modest now . 
Speak ; hast no acquaintance with any near 
Corsa's person ; the Counts fair wife ? 


Cast .  I humbly beg , your Grace would not mistake 
The conditions of my duty . 


Duke .  I beg of thee not to mistake the sense 
Of my designs . My words import my heart , 
And both , no danger unto thee . 


Cast .  I hope my skill in servitude , will not 
Provoke my Prince to tempt my honour . 


Duke .  What prolix love is this ; Dost thou indent 
With my acceptance , make choice of services ! 


Cast .  Your Grace will give me leave ; since that I know 
I not deserve to share in your high secrets , 
To doubt my safety in knowing this . 


Duke .  Death ! and horror ! thy suspicions are too thin . 
Consider why I sent the Count to Lucca ? 
Upon my life thou art secure : therefore 
Reply unto my former question . 


Cast .  My gracious Lord , I have some interest 
In her woman . 


Duke .  In Corsa's woman known to thee ? 


Cast .  She is . Perhaps — 


Duke .  Discharge thy tongue . May my ears blister 
If they digest words to thy prejudice . 


Cast .  Perhaps I knew her , beyond the modest strain . 


Duke .  there 's Gold. Castruchio , show some pity 
flings him a Bag.  On rebellious blood . Be my Harbinger , 
Billet me this night where she doth lie 
And thou art made for ever . 


Cast .  Must it be this night ? 


Duke .  Strict opportunity will have it so . 
Her Lord returns with the next Sun . 


Cast .  I cannot say herself shall porter be 
Unto your entrance ; but her woman shall . 


Duke .  Enough ! here 's more Gold. Smmon up thy brain 
Thy heart , thy soul , to meet in consolation , 
And so contrive my peace , Farewell . 


Cast .  I will instruct your Grace ever long : both when , 
And how to make this armorous assault . 


Duke .  Myself and my Exchequer are thine own . 
There needs no Art to work him into evil ; 
He is bad enough t' infect the Devil . 


Exeunt several ways . Actus Quartus . Scena Prima . 

Enter DORIDO . DORIDO ,  Good ! they have left the Garden door unlocked 
I 'll venture in to help discovery . 
Castruchio is graced with rare employment : 
The Duke and he do here consume the Night . 
These are hours for Ghosts , Adulterers 
And thieves . The slave is Haggard . At Supper 
Being full of gold : his vain Appetite 
Fed at Nero's rate ; I was discarded 
With a frown : shaken like a Burr from 's sleeve . 
As if my closure heretofore had been 
Impertinent . Ambition lessens all 
Beneath itself to nothing : the higher 
Enter Castru . We do stand : so much less those men appear 
Duarte.  Whom we behold below — Hark ! Kind Fortune 
Lend me thy Ears — 


Cast .  The night grows aged now . 'T were fit the Duke 
Would hasten his departure . In troth Wench , 
Thy service to him exceeds requital . 
But what ; she took it willingly ! 


Dua.   no , but she did not . 


Cast .  Pox ' oh these modest Lies ! I say she did , 


Duar.   In troth you do abuse her then ; I 'm sure 
Her shrieks did scare my heart up to my lips . 


Cast .  then thou couldst have Kissed heartily . 


Duar.   I wonder , it wakened not the whole house . 


Cast .  Is (null) possible ! what means did the Duke use 
To stifle up this noise ? 


Dua.   Nay , I know not . But since she was no more 
Pliant ; it doth repent me much , I'ere 
Was instrument to his other actions . 


Cast .  What , repent ! I prithee sweet Duarte 
Wrong not Divinity so much : waste not 
A virtue , that would more profit others : 
And to suppose that the Lady was ravished , 
Is an heresy , which my Soul must ne'er 
Be guilty of . Do not I know Women 
Are a kind of soft wax , that will receive 
Any impression ? 


Dua.   And do not I know : there is difference 
In workmen as in wax . Hard wax ( when cold ) 
Accepts of no impression . By coldness 
I in far chastity : for chastity 
Is cold , 


Cast .  But those workmen are harder far 
Than that hard wax . And 't is hardest of all 
To find those workmen : unless by Russia 
Where the people frieze , till they spit snow . Come , 
Kiss me Chuck . Again , once more — 


Dor.   A precious Satirist ! This surly Dog , 
Inveighs ' 'gainst lechery in others , ' cause 
He would engross all Women to himself . 


Cast .  Your greatest Thiefs , are commonly begot 
When Parents do their lechery by stealth . 
Men get Cowards , when frighted in the Act. 
And by such vulgar consequence : 't is now 
A proper time to beget a Pander . 
One , that may hereafter do other men 
The same office : which we do the Duke now . 
Come . Shall we , in and try ? 


Dua.   You presume much , on an easy nature ; 
And how extravagant you are abroad ; 
I am not so unkind to question . 


Cast .  Faith Wench : i  some interest in every Child 
That playsi'th ' street , The Dukes come down . Go , go , 
enter . Duke . Give your Lady a Caudle : and let me hear 
How she likes her new Bedfellow . I 'll meet 
Exit Duar.  His Grace two hours hence : when he hath dismissed 
Those thoughts , which still succeed unlawful lust . 


Exit Dor.   OH damned villainy : Is this th' imployment 
Castr ▪ That doth make ye proud ? I will haunt ye still , 
To strengthen my intelligence . 


Exit Dor. after . Cast . Duke .  OH silly , weak evasion ! being dark , 
I creep within my Cloak . IT is modesty 
In sin to practise every disguise 
To hide it from the World. But Creatures free from guilt 
Affect the Sun , and hate the dark ; because 
It hides their innocence . OH traitor Lust . 
That leads us with encouragement to fight , 
And when we have discharged our Veins for thee , 
we are besieged with thoughts , that more perplex us 
then the former . For than we did complain 
Of strength ; but now of weakness more . 
Away , ●way . 't is time that I were gone : 
The modest Morn doth blush i' th' East , as if 
Ashamed to see so fowl a Ravisher . 


exit Duke . Enter Castruchio , and Dorido . Dorido .  So swift of foot ! I must overtake ye . 


Cast .  How now ! the World is wide enough : wherefore 
Dost thou jostle me ? 


Dor.   Cry mercy Signior : the day 's blear Eyed yet , 
And my own haste made me unmannerly . 


Cast .  Signior Dorido is it you ? 't is much 
To see you appear before the Sun . 


Dor.   Faith Signior ; the Count being out o Town 
I thought Foreste would have more leisure 
To peruse my new Suit . he 's early up ; 
Which caused my vigilance . 


Cast .  Why Signior use a means more absolute ; 
It is true , Foreste does all : but how ? 
As th' instrument governed i' th' workman's hand . 
Instruct me with conveniency of time , 
And I will work the Duke in thy behalf . 


Dor.   then Signior , you will oblige my prayers . 


Cast .  At supper , when you departed from me , 
You gave demonstrations of discontent : 
Who knows , but whilst the soul 's employed within ; 
The body might neglect some outward form , 
Which curiosity prefers to custom . 
Custom to abuse . It was my business 
Not disrespect of you , that did deprive 
My compliment of vanity . I shall 
Rejoice when I can show you kindness . 


Dorid.   I will be bold to think so . 


Cast .  I 'd have thee build thy Mansion on a Rock . 
Favourites are served in with those Dishes 
The Prince best loves . And meat we most affect 
We soon surfeit on . Instruct thy soul . 
The Count is but a glorious trifle . 
And to be factious without benefit — 
Well , think upon 't . I know a way to get 
The Duke's best Ear , without Foreste's help . 
Farewell . 


Exit Castruchio . Dor.   The Profit of the day be yours . These tricks 
Shall make me wear him in my Eyes . The slave 
Doth usher out his breath in state ; as if 
His honours had out grown his own knowledge . 
Yet but a tame Pande● . The beauteous Corsa 
Is ravished by the Duke . OH black horror . 
Arise my soul , inspire my industry 
With noble purpose . Something I 'll do 
That shall proclaim my Spirit . 


Exit . Enter Corsa , and Duarte.  Corsa .  Hence , hence , like Time ; who swiftly flies away , 
But evermore returns . Go cruel wench ! 
thou hast betrayed thy Mistress , even to 
Eternal loss . th' angels that live above 
Have seen it all . They know thee well enough . 
In the general Session of the world ; 
It will not my adultery be called ; 
But a prodigious Rape derived from thee . 


Duarte.   Good Madam , your Conscience is too bold : 
It trouble's you too much . Dismiss 't : think , 
That other Ladies have offended more . 


Corsa .  Out Devil . wilt thou betray my soul too ? 
Duarte hence ! I am inspired with strength 
To make revenge prove masculine . 
Fly quickly hence . Why dost thou stay ? there 's Gold. 
I prithee wench in all thy Pilgrimage 
Disperse my fault in charitable sense . 
Use me nobly with thy Tongue . So farewell . 


Duarte.   Or let my sin no mercy find in Heaven , 
no pity here on Earth . 


Exit Duarte.  Corsa .  Now all the motives of my Lords delight 
Exterminate for evermore with me . 
My silent lute 's interred in the Case . 
My voice now rather frights , then captivates 
The sense . 
Enter Luinna . OH Sister , dare you visit me ? 
I am a strumpet grown . Hence , and secure 
Your fame . 


Luin.   Alack , what prodigy is this ! 


Corsa .  I will tell thee all . For I should disgrace 
Iniquity to be modest now . The Duke — 


Luin.   Aye me ! What in that name can privilege 
Offence ? 


Corsa .  Hear my Luinna , hear . In midst of night , 
By my pernicious woman's help ; He opens 
My chamber door : whose faithful Hinges shrieked , 
To warn me of his dire approach . His Hand 
Employed a Torch , a Torch ; whose fancy weak 
Aged , and black , had overgrowen the flame . 
And showed ( me thought ) like unto Tarquin's Ghost ; 
Preaching in fire : as if it counselled him , 
To prevent such penance by forsaking 
His attempt . This , I told him too . But he 
( That came not to consider , but to act ) 
O're●u●ed my Hands with his : then made shipwreck 
Of my Honor.  


Luin.   OH royal Villain ! 
My joints and sinews dissipated are , 
And scattered in a trembling fear . But mark 
more sorrows yet . My Husband looking in 
My Cabinet , did spy that jewel there , 
Which the Duke last gave me . It was to him 
A new , and unknown star : and Comet like , 
Employed his thoughts with such Astrology 
As made an Optic of his jealousy ; 
Through which , he would discern the cause , th' effect 
Of its being there . I told him all the truth : 
And truth 's oftener praised , then rewarded 
here on Earth : for he dismissed me straight 
With fatal looks . 


Corsa .  My Brother is a noble Gentleman . 
Go , go , and kneel to him . All jealousy 
Must still be strangled in its birth : or Time 
Will soon conspire to make it strong enough 
To overcome the truth . Shield us sweet Heaven ! 
The Sibyls dance about my Heart . They lay 
Their verges here : infusing a prophetic fear : 
Which whispers we shall never meet again , 
le 's take a solemn leave — farewell for ever 


they kiss . Luin.   Farewell ! the noblest Lady o' th' World.  


Excunt several Ways . Enter Cosimo , and Borach'o . Cos .  I am glad to see thee well Borachio ! 
But where 's thy Master ? what , in durance still ? 


Bora   Alas Sir , I ( Good Gentleman , ) the Room 
Wherein they have put him , is so little 
He fills it up to the Roof : and is fain 
To leave his Legs Sentinels without door , 
To watch the rest of his body . 't is no 
Chamber , but a Court. Cupboard . 


Cos .  But they make him amends in his diet . 


Bora.   They cannot Sir , For he 's a faint eater , 
If he would pray so often as he fasts ; 
He had been at liberty long ago . 
he 'll dine upon a single Pea ; and leave Orts.  


Cos .  Do they no more regard his potent hopes ? 


Bora.   Alas Sir , when Fortune's Tippet stands up , 
Few men will lend a pin to tack it down , 
I , and my lineage have sweet loss of him : 
I 'm sure of 'at , 


Cos .  Nay , that 's too evident . 


Bora.   OH sir ! I would not a'giuen this Rush ; 
T' have been assured all th' offices in 's gift 
But hang such Dukes ( I say ) that suffer thus 
Their Favourites to be imprisoned . 


Cos .  How now Borachio ! Dost thou speak treason ? 


Bora.   Sir , I have said no more , than what I mean 
To unsay again : which is but a kind 
Of losing one's labour . An● ' ●is better , 
To be ill employed then to be idle . 


enter Castruchio . Cos .  How the slave sows his Proverbs together . 
Are you come ? I have stayed until the Clock 
Gave your promise the lie . 


Cast .  My time was spent to more advantage . 
I have declared my interest in your blood . 
If you assist my plots ; you needs must share 
Success , that hath already warranted 
A large requital . 


Cos .  I am resolved : and wish myself more able . 


Cast .  't is well . But now you undertake business : 
You must be as serious as a Mussel . 
That is : wear your Beard , upon your tongue : talk , 
Bravely . But of all avoid Dorido 
As you would to drink 
A violent poison . 


Cos .  Enough , he is a stranger to my thoughts . 


Cast .  there 's fresh encouragement — 


gives him Gold.  Cos .  A little more of this mettle would puzzle 
My Geography ; Is this Italy 
Or the indies , There Borachio ! Weep no more 
For thy Master . 


Bora.   Alas I 'm apt to weep , though I but see 
An Onion stripped naked . 


Cast .  I thought to meet thy Master here . I 'm sure 
I saw the warrant signed for his release . 


Bora.   The Devil take your worship for me , why , 
d' ye bring such good news , on a worky day ? 


Cast .  But thou prayest ill , in praying the Devil 
To take me . 


Bora.   Why could he ever come to less purpose 
then when he finds you doing well . Though he 
Lose his labour once : I dare warrant ye , 
he 'll come again on the same errand . 


Cast .  A bitter fool . 


Bora.   Sir , let we friends be true to one another . 
There are but few true friends extant . Let them 
Be kindly used and kept , if only for breed . 


Cast .  With all my heart , translate thy meaning . 


Bora.   Is my Master at liberty ? 


Cast .  I 'll defer an answer of this , until 
Thy own Eyes be a little elder . 


Bora.   Well , is he still in favour with the Duke ? 


Cast .  Why he shall shortly govern all at Court , 
And be a very Mote in the duke 's eye . 


Bora.   Enough . 't is not wholesome to burst with ●oy . 


Cast .  But what then ? 


Bora.   i  thought with much care on these Offices : 
And find myself fitting to be in 'em . 
I will haue 'em all ; come Cut , and Longtail . 
For my Wife , will be such a glad woman . 


Enter Lothario . Cos .  Look ! who comes there ? 


Bora.   OH Sir ! give me your blessing — 


He kneels . Loth.   Weep not Borachio ! I have prepared 
Such bloody art in my revenge ; as makes 
men's wits , more famous than their cruelty , 
Let horror propagate . all 's too little 
For my use . But you Sir had the honour , 
To release me . 


Cast .  Or else I had been much dishonoured . 


Cos .  Sir , now he supposeth you in durance : 
And is himself secure ; happily drunk , 
Or riding in the stews ; you may take some 
Advantage on his soul too . Lose no time . 


Loth.   that 's my intent . 
For it were dull humanity to aim 
no farther than his life . I 'll pursue him 
Even to Hell.  


Cast .  And let me alone so to facilitate 
The project , by search of fit time , and means : 
As shall declare the act less troublesome , 
then thus to threaten it with words . 


Bora.   You Signior Castruch●o ! Signior Coxcomb ! 
Are you ti●ed with doing well ? you have scarce 
Brought my poor Lord out of the Prison doors ; 
But you long to have him in again . Nay , 
Ne'er look ! For my Sword dwells within a Yard 
Of my Tongue , and shall defend what I say 


Cast .  What a pernicious Calf is this ? 


Bora.   What harm have my poor Wife , and Children done 
To you , or yours ; that seeing me within 
A hair's breadth , of a hundred offices , 
You confound all , by leading my poor Lord 
Into new broils . 


Loth.   Bold Miscreant ! If I but stir — 


Cos .  Nay Signior ! let him alone . Borachio ! 
Steep thy wrath in cold water : follow , 
And be dumb . All shall be well . 


Bora.   Yes , persuade me to dry Ice in an Oven ! 
But I 'll follow your Heels so close : as I 'll 
Go near to tread upon your Kibes . 


Exeunt omnes . Enter Dorido , and Foreste . Dorido .  Signior , I knew ye a brave Commander 
Under the great Petruchio ; and since 
That time your constant virtues have deserved 
more recompense , than Fate will minister 
By me . My kindness is no miracle : 
Since gratitude is only sick , not dead . 
But pray believe what I have said is truth . 


Foreste .  OH Sir , 't is th' error of unskilful love 
To be too constant in her charity 
To all . But I have grounds more relative 
To make me jealous of the truth : and I 
Believe you with my heart : and yet 't is strange . 
Doth this Castruchio think his haggard fate 
Can triumph over mine ? because in lust 
The Devil did instruct his industry : 
Dares he attempt my life ? 


Dor.   I give you real grounds for my suspense . 
Reward ( sir ) may make a Villain bloody 
Though it cannot make him valiant . The Duke 
Will let him want no Gold.  


Fores.   Nay 't is often seen . 
amongst the several Creatures of a Prince , 
Such instruments as these most profit reap . 
Employments noble do requite themselves , 
And honour pays , the great of heart : who loose 
But Time in service which is the Body's wealth . 
Your friend stays . If you please t' appear with him 
From thence , at my summons : I shall discover more . 


Dor.   Noble Signior , I am yours , 


exit Dorid.  Forest .  What hoa ? Luinna ! Wife ! 


Enter Luinna . Luin.   My Lord ! 


Foreste .  Come hither Love. Signify in secret 
When was the royal Lecher here disguised ? 
What did he send thee last ? when must ye quench 
The Cyprian fire : hah ! you may tell me all , 
For I 'll not blab . Alas , I 'm more silent 
Than my Grandsire in his Tomb . A subtle Pimp , I , 
A Pander learned in the art . Tell me Chuck ? 


Luin.   Alas my noble Lord ! what do ye mean ? 


Foreste .  Why nothing , I : yet 't is enough I feel 
The wrong , If ignorant , I suffer twice . 
And therefore let me know my Enemy . 
The little worm , when trod upon ; will turn 
His Head , to look upon his Murderer . 
And hath my Spleen no Eyes : Is the revenge 
Of Man less curious than a Worms . — She weeps , 
OH Luinna , the sacred knot 's untied . 
thou hast defiled and stained the vestal Sheets , 
Thy Breast shall be no more my Pillow . 


Luin.   OH say not so . Let Thunder strike me dead , 
If I'ere knew the ' Duke ; with knowledge more 
Dishonest , than what harbours in the Eyes ; 
Only by sight . 


Foreste .  OH new horror ! such brazen impudence , 
Would make a Negro blush . Come glorious who●e , 
Acquaint me with your tricks . Who ! when , where , how● 
For besides the jewel which he gave thee : 
I have proofs , that will even damn my sister ; 
And convince thee too . 


Luin.   My dear Lord ? be not cruel in your Faith ; 
What I have said is truth . 


Foreste .  Still constant in thy perjury . Mercy 
Were tamen●sle then . thou shalt die 
Like an heroic Whore : a 〈◊〉 Martyr 
Enter Doride and his Friend in visards . To thy concealed lover . Appear ho ! 
here my she goat ! These men are full and fresh ; 
But if they cannot tyre ye out : I will 
Procure ye some of larger Thighs ; that feed 
On th' unctuous Lhasis , and the Persian-crab . 
Or bring the riotous Horse , and the Town Bull 
To drowned ye in the act . Take her aside , 
And agree who shall begin . 


Luin.   Stay , stay , OH my Husband , my dearest Lord ? 
Will you permit such cruelty against 
Your own Wife . She , that hath so often slept 
Within your Bosom . OH speak ? do you want 
The natural touch● stay , stay , I will confess 't . 


Forest .  Stay , I 'm of too easy , too soft a Soul . 
My Heartstrings ( sure ) are made of silk : and 't is 
A subtle whore , she knows it well enough . 
But come , be brief . Charm me not with stories 
Of my former love between us. 
I see thee as thou art , and thou appear'st 
Like an entire , proportionable Boyle . 
Why speakest thou not ? 


Luin.   Sorrow was ever slow of utterance , 
And I do tremble still . I knew the time , 
My duty hath been held in more regard 
Than now it is . All former interest 
Is quit forgot . 


Foreste .  Mark , did not I suspect , she would begin 
Her Charms again . Away with her . 


Luin.   OH stay , now , now , I will reveal all . 


Foreste .  Be nimble then : and tell me punctual truth , 
For my revenge is honest , and would not 
Willingly mistake , when it shall strike . 


Luin.   't is true , your Sster's ravished by the Duke . 
Which fatal truth , this morning I received 
From her own mouth , But if I ere did break 
My Marriage vows , or think unlawfully ; 
then may I lose my interest in Heaven . 
My duty , and my love remain still yours , 
And this constancy deserves some kindness . 
Therefore , if 't is decreed that I must die : 
Let me die a modest death . Expose not 
Your poor wife , unto the cruelty 
Of Ravishers . 


Foreste .  What think ye sir ? 


Dor.   My thoughts continue in the former sense : 
I have a chaste , and virtuous wife ; however 
You desired assurance from a trial 
So unkind as this . 


Foreste .  Still me thinks that jewel which he gave her , 
Procured the same requital that my Sister made . 
But let it pass . I do conjure ye both , 
( As you've been Soldiers ) to keep your Tongues , 
A safe distance from your Ears , Let not words 
Disperse what you have heard . 't is external 
Reputation that keeps some Men from sin . 
Our faults once known , we do neglect to mend : 
Since Reputation suffers still : for that 
Admits of help , but it is never cured . 
And so the fatal jars 'tween Man , and Wife , 
If secret kept , dissension falls asleep . 
But if once known to Fame ; Fame talks so loud 
She waketh it again . Your silence Signiors , 
Shall challenge much from my requital . 


Dor.   Besides our obligations to your worth , 
Even both our honours would impose it 
As a virtue , not a trouble . We are 
Your humble servants . 


Exit Dorido with his Friend , Foreste .  I will deserve you for my friends . Rise — 
You must be cleared by a stricter trial : 
Till when I do neglect the large Charter 
Of Husbands o'er their Wives : and command ye 
As a judge th' offender . Hence , and become 
My Prisoner in your Closet . Take heed , 
no curiosity in fear make you , 
To pry in my designs . 


Luin.   I do obey ye cheerfully . 


exit Luinna . Forest .  OH my heart ! shall my industry , and hopes 
Find this period ? My sufferance is tired . 
It is an old inconstancy in Fate , 
Soon to erect , and soon to ruinate . 


Exit . A Chair at the Arras . Actus Quintus . Scena Prima . 

Enter FORESTE Solus . FORESTE , no , no , my Stars , it is too much to bear , 
Though I were stomached like an Ostrich , 
Yet could I not digest such hard dealing . 
My Wife defiled , Corsa ravished . The Count 
Abused where satisfaction is exempt 
By Nature . Myself proscribed to suffer 
By the cheap valour of obscure Villains . 
Would I had trodden the humble path , and made 
My industry less ambitious . The Shrub 
Sccurelie grows . The tallest Tree , stands 
Most in the wind . And thus we distinguish 
The Noble from the base : the Noble find 
Their lives , and deaths still trouble some : 
But humility doth sleep , whilst the storm 
Grows horse with scolding My Gall o'erflows my heart : 
And drowns propitious Thoughts . I will be just 
Yet cruel too . The darkness of the Night 
Is thick . I feel as I grope for way — 
Stay — That sickly light from her chamber breaks . 
Minion l●●e begin with you . 
Exit . Enter Corsa and a Boy . Corsa .  Sing gentle youth ; who knows if I shall live 
Timploy thy voice again . 


Song . 

Boy . Weep no more for what is passed 
For Time in motion makes such haste 
He hath no leisure to descry 
Those errors which he passeth by . 
If we consider Accident , 
And how repugnant unto sense , 
It pays desert with bad event : 
We shall disparage Providence . 
Enter Foreste . Forest .  This is your Dirge , 


Corsa .  Ha ! who is there ? 


Foreste   Tis. I Dismiss that trisle hence , and shut 
The door . 


Corsa .  Farewell Youth ! Get he to bed . 


exit Boy . Foreste .  But where 's the wriggled Hag ; th' incestuous lump 
Of heat ? where is she , speak ? 


Corsa .  Alas Sir , who do you mean ? 


Fores.   Why she that Gossips with the Devil's Dam , 
The subtle Bawd , your Woman . OH Sister ! Corsa kneels . 
I have heard all . — Nay do not work distinction thus . 
Kneel not to me ; you are my Patron's wife . 
But yet where obligation is endeared ; 
There Injury condemns itself . Can you 
Survive a wrong so eminent : a wrong 
Committed ' 'gainst your Husband , and my Patron ? 


Corsa .  OH Sir ! I hope if you have heard the truth : 
You will conclude it as a rape i' th' Duke ; 
And no adultery in me . 


Foreste .  How , a rape ! oh weak , and immodest shift , 
Were Aretine alive ; or had I brought 
A Crew of Midwives here : whose obscene art 
Might warrant the distinction good ; 
Although the cause did blush , to own th' effect ; 
Yet thy appeal might stand : but here are none . 
If compulsion doth insist , until 
Enforcement breed delight , we cannot say , 
The female suffers . Acceptance at the last , 
Disparageth the not consenting at the first : 
Calls her denial , her unskilfulnesse ; 
And not a virtuous frost i' th' blood . 
Come , sit thee down . — Or if ye mean to pray , 
Kneel , and be nimble in devotion . 
That art to die . 


Corsa .  My Noble Brother ! 
Do not fright my sufferance : use me kindly 
With your tongue , and looks : I am already 
Reconciled to Heaven ; and would perhaps 
Consent to your design . 


Foreste .  Blessed speech ! thou shalt prescribe my gesture 
And my Phrase . 


Corsa .  'T were not unnatural in me , to wish 
For life● yet minding what constructions 
The world may make of my sinister chance — 


Foreste .  I there 's the point . The giddy multitude 
Have neither skill , nor leisure to convince 
Supposition , with Arguments of strength 
And charity . Their quick censure , brings such 
Effect , as Spectacles , when used in haste ; 
Which then ●oe rather aggravate the shape : 
then giu● distinction of the form . Who , who , 
Would live to be an Argument for them ? 


Corsa .  Do ye conclude then , that I must now die ? 


Foreste .  Why is (null) not apt , and pregnant to your sense , 
It should be so ? 


Corsa .  E'er I take my last leave of my kind Lord  


Fores.   Ceremonious form , doth oft , so long 
Delay our journey ; till it prove too late 
To reach our home . 't is a long way to Heaven . 
We must make haste . Nay , if your courage fail 
Before it comes unto the test : I shall 
Prepare to be unkind . Grim , black fancy 
could you endure to see your Lord ; defiled , 
Polluted as you are ? That kind Patron 
To all our family ; whose constant love 
Is warranted by Time ; that best can judge 
Of constancy . Who took you to his bed ; 
Upon conditions cheap , and dangerous 
To his own estate . 


Corsa .  Sir , speak no more : but use me as you please ; 
I will obey in all . 


Fores.   Come , stretch down your Arm : and permit this Scarf 
To fasten it to th' Chair . then veil your Eyes . 
We must not trust a Woman's valour so — 


Corsa .  O , o , o . 


Foreste ,  The torture 's past . Thy wrist veins are cut , here 
In this Basin bleed : till dryness make them curl 
Like Lute-strings in the fire — 


Corsa .  Commend me to my dearest Lord I am 
His humble sacrifice . he 'll not be more 
Unwilling to grant atonement : then I 
Have been to need it . The Fates give others 
Expiation : which now they want themselves . 
I speak too loud . For who dares chide with them 
That may employ Thunder . 


Foreste .  Her beauty'gins to wither . She distils 
Like to a Rose . OH could I separate 
The blood defiled from what is pure : I would 
Shed that ; then restrain the current , know ! 
( Unskilful Nature ) If operation 
Should long subsist in such gross mixture : Men , 
Would be Devils ' ere they lived in Hell.  


Corsa .  I come Celestial Choir ! — 


She riseth up . Foreste .  Ecstasy ! through weakness in expense of blood ! 
Dear sister ! Disturb not your last Minutes . 


Corsa .  I must ascend — 


Foreste .  How ! would you enter Heaven ; with fetters on 
Your Soul ? clogged with these mortal Limbs . Sat down , 
Expire in peace . 


Corsa .  OH my Brother ! whilst I am yet human , 
Let me feel some interest in your blood . 
What fault of mine deserves impediments 
In my last journey ? If my Lord were here 
He would have seen me used with mercy . 


Foreste .  Sweet Soul ! these , are but mistakes of weakness . 


Corsa .  Will not my Lord be merciful ; to me , 
And to my memory . 


riseth up : Foreste .  Sat still . I bring no negative reply . 
Thy worth shall shine in such a Character : 
That being dead ; he needs must woo thy Ghost . 


Corsa .  And will Posterity consent , that I 
Abide in List ; with those of modest fame ? 


Foreste .  That Astrologer ; who spies thee first 
Within a Star : must not find thee billeted 
Near to Venus . Such error in his Act ; 
Would make me wreathe his Body into Cords . 
And with prolix strength draw the dull Caitiff , 
Through his slender Optic . 


Corsa .  O , o , o — 


Recorders : Sadly . Foreste .  A Convulsion in her Arteries ! 


Corsa .  Mercy Heaven ! 


She dies . still Music above . Foreste .  Hark ! 
As she ascends , the Spheres do welcome her , 
With their own Music . — Her Soul is gone ! 
Ha ? whether is it gone ? OH vast suspense ! 
Madness succeeds inquiry . Fools of Nature ! 
Cease Rec.  What Ancestor ( that died long since ) hath brought 
Us news of his abode ! or told us how 
They use him in the other world ? OH this 
Wild mystery so much concerneth Man : 
That we would willingly dismiss suspense 
With Eyesight not with consequence . 
For he that sees through Faith , but flatters doubt . 
faith 's a Perspective ; through whose narrow lane ; 
Little things ( far of ) seem so much too great , 
Too near : that what was first unknown is more 
Estranged from knowledge , than it was before . 
Yet by the rules of lawful notion : It 
Goes well with her : for she was ever given 
To prayer : superstitious in humility : 
And even unthrifty in her charity . 
She held her Virtues in such high extremes , 
That her Divinity was troublesome . 
Grew from a Saint , a holy Cynic . Sleep here : 
A sacrifice to thy wronged Lord : Till I 
( Thy Priest ) become an Executioner 
To him ; who was thy cruel Ravisher . 


Exit Foreste . Enter Duke , and Castruchio . Duke .  Doth she insist in censure of the act 
With such a stern impatience , and dislike ? 


Cast .  Even so ( Sir ) my intelligence imports . 
For since her Woman , was dismissed : she sent 
A Messenger unto Lucca ; to urge , 
Her Lords return : whom ( by a laboured consequence ) 
I do expect within this Hour . he 'll choose 
To travail in the Night for privacy . 


Duke .  And I have sent to stay him there : until 
A new Commission order his return . 


Cast .  Most royal Sir , you then may guess what frights 
Such opposition in these messages 
Will nourish in his Heart . And being young , 
He cannot feed on doubts . he 'll rather think 
His interest in you his previledge to err : 
So , slight your Mandate , and come home , 
To settle his suspense . 


Duke   Remorse doth cherish danger ! Let me be safe , 
Sec●re me in thy wholesome Art I would 
Express myself without a Tongue — 


Cast .  My gracious Lord ; my apprehension lies 
Not in my Ears but in my Brain . I can 
Conceive without the noise of words . It shows 
Apparent to my intellect : the Count 
Presuming on that free address , he still 
Hath had unto your person : will hither bring Corsa , and Foreste to show the shape , 
And quality , of his new sufferance . 
Be you within your bed , to free you from 
The world's suspicion : whilst I do place 
Behind the Gallery door ( which leads unto 
Your Closet Chapel ) such trusty spirits , 
As shall dare to thrust their weapons home . 


Duke .  OH quintessence of Soul . I will devote 
My actions wholly to thy use . Good night . 


Exit Cast .  May slumber cease upon your royal Eyes 
With gentle closure . Know , poor Foreste ! 
The bag that holds my Gall is so immense , 
Enter Duke . That when I steep thee in it thou art drowned . 


Duke .  Castruchio ; I have better thought upon 't . 


Cast   My gracious Lord  


Duke .  I would not have thee hurt my Boy : use him 
Kindly for my sake . 


Cast .  Shall I not strike him here ; between the Ribs ? 


Duke .  Not for the world . thou dost not know his Soul . 
he 's of so soft , so sweet a property , 
That he enchants where he is known . Besides , 
I find I am so powerful o'er his youth : 
That I shall soon extirpate from his memory 
The wrong I did his Wife , and him . As for 
Foreste : his experience is of growth 
Too stubborn , of practice stiff ; and will not 
Be removed from his revenge , by strength of words . 
Therefore , let him no mercy feel : but let ; 
My Boy be gently used for my sake . Farewell — 


Exit Duke . Cast .  This is a silly kind of love ! 
But let me think — So to contrive this plot : 
That Lothario may destroy Foreste , 
And him to make his silence safe ! humh — 


Enter Duke . Duke .  no ; it must not be — 


Cast .  My royal Lord ! 


Duke .  Lucio ( my Boy ) is not proscribed . Take heed 
Castruchio ! If thou dost extend thy hand : 
In motion , boisterous , and rough to him ; 
thou dost infect all thy other kindness : 
And I shall see thee as a Cockatrice : 
That will enforce my Optic-nerves to shrink , 
And pull my Eyes into my skull . Look to 't . 


Cast .  Most gracious Sir , were his person bulwarked 
With the Alps : were he hidden in●s own fear ; 
He could not be more safe , than you have made him . 


Duke .  Once more then good Night . 


exit . Cast .  A plague upon this turdy love . Such thoughts 
When first your Blood did make your Veins to swell 
( Like Bridges'ore your flesh ) had prevented 
My employment . Softly , softly . 
Fear , and suspicion ever walk on Eggs . 


Enter Foreste , and Servants with a Light.  Foreste .  Leave here the Light , and go to Bed.  
Exit Servant . within cry Break open the door , break open the door . 


Foreste .  Ha ! who counsels so unlawfully ? 


Enter Lucio and Servants . Lucio .  OH Foreste ! the fatal Hour is come 
Ring out your Bells , until they wake the dead . 
Let the Drum murmur in a ●able Bag . 
Reverse your Muskets , and trail your stubborn Pikes 
In slimy-channels . Let Trumpets groan , 
And the shrill Phip be hoarse . The fatal Hour , 
Is come . 


Forest .  Why , what 's the matter Sir ? 


Lucio .  OH my wife ! by this she did entreat me 
he shows a Letter . Suddenly , ( upon some urgent cause ) 
To haste from Lucca to her : Just now ; 
I lighted from my Horse , entered her Chamber : 
And found her newly murdered in her Chair . 
My Servants say that my arrival there , 
Did just succeed your departure from her . 


Fores.   Dismiss your Servants , and you shall know all . 


Lucio .  Hence , and expect me straight at home . 


Exeunt . sern . Foreste .  I pray come hither Sir. — Do you dislike 


That justice which deprived your Wife of breath ? 
Lucio   Dost thou call it justice ? 


Foreste .  Yes , in the noblest strain : she was defiled . 
The royal Goat ( the Duke ) hath ravished her : 
And I ( that never could admit excuse 
In points of honour ) ( where ever suspicion 
Sufficeth to condemn ) did summon up 
My memory : wherein the kind effects , 
Of your best love to us are registered . 
And finding you betrayed in your own Fort ! 
I slit her Wrist-veins , and gave perpetual 
Liberty , to her polluted Blood.  


Lucio .  OH Villain ! more bloody than the Tiger ; 
Whose empty Entrails noise , doth ( Trumpet like ) 
Encourage cruelty ; Though thou didst flight her 
As my poor Wife : yet she might well expect 
Some mercy , as being thy own sister . 


Foreste .  Had she included all propinquity 
Of blood ; which lawful Marriage keepeth known , 
Or promiscuous Copulation , maketh 
Intricate : this bare word ( Honour ) had been 
Enough , t' have divorced her from my mercy . 
Sweet Lord ; do not mistake your Servant : 
Whose kindness thinks his own Sister ( when defiled ) 
Was to base for your use . 


Lucio .  A bloody kindness to distinguish so 
She was no Adulteress , but enforced . Her thoughts 
Were pure : and such a noble sympathy 
Endeared her Soul to mine ; that her own Tears , 
Might soon have washed away her Bodies' stain , 
And she again seem clean . Corsa ! 
OH my Wife ! my bosom Girl ! where art thou ? 
Speak , no reply ? Art thou so much busied 
With thy new acquaintance now in Heaven : 
That thy poor Lord , may not borrow one word 
At parting ? Draw , draw ingrateful Monster ! 
That hast prevented thus our Dialogue . 


Foreste .  Sir , cool your spleen ! take breath awhile : 
And hear me speak . 


Lucio .  no false Siren ! thou holy Hypocrite ! 
I know thy tricks too well ! ' Cause I am young , 
Too soft of heart , and apt to melt 
In every flame of my own trivial love ; 
Therefore thou thinkst to practise on me now 
With subtle phrase . Draw , or else thou diest . 


Foreste .  Come — Let me die ( as she ) a sacrifice 
To thee my Patron . 


offers his naked breast . Lucio .  A sacrifice to me ! OH Foreste ! 
Why dost thou multiply thy skill 
flings away his Sword.  To thy friend's prejudice ? It is not well , 
In troth it is not . Employ thy own heart : 
Think upon 't thyself . 't is not kindly done : 
I should not have used you thus — 


Foreste .  OH my dear Lord ! where did I lose your heart ? 
I am o'ercome at these expressions . 
I cannot weep much : yet my Eyes are moist . 
OH my unskilful gratitude ! what dire 
Mistake , confounds our properties ! I killed 
A Sister , to secure a Friend . 'T was ill , 
' was not the right way . A true Roman now , 
Would walk aside , and with his own Sword 
Dismiss his own Soul : and not permit 
Moisture in youthful Eyes , thus to disgrace 
The strength of elder love . I cannot weep , 
But our divinity supplies us with 
Discreeter ways , to make affection known ; 
Enough . I will prefix but one short Hour , 
To think upon 't . here sir . Sheath your good sword , 
Till revenge prove ripe . And I conjure 
By all my Sister's love to follow me : 
In whose behalf , your justice may employ 
Itself . Which done , you shall behold my Heart 
Without a Perspective . 
If it concerneth her ; by whom thou dost 
Conjure my service , I 'm bound to follow thee . 


Foreste .  What hoa ! 


Enter Luinna . Luin.   My Lord  


Foreste .  Come Minion , come along with us. You walk 
Unto the Bar . If trial find thee false ; 
thou shalt be scattered into Atoms ▪ 


Luin.   OH my devining Soul ▪ Sure my Sister 
Is not safe . 


Exeunt omnes . Enter Castruchio , Lothario , Cossimo , several ways . Cast .  Signior Lothario ! 


Loth.   here ! Signior Cossimo ! 


Cos .  I am here . Speak low . Cousin Castruchio . 


Cast .  I am here too . Why are we scattered thus ? 


Cos .  't is in search of Borachio ; who fearing 
Danger in this action , commits himself 
Very tamely to his Heels . 


Cast .  Let him be damned unthought of . Have you heard , 
Or seen a Passenger . 


Cos .  no , yet Lothario gives me notice : 
Of a noise far off : but you know the length 
Of an Ass' ear . 


Loth.   Pastes there ( say you ) who is 't ? 


Cos .  He echoes by mistake . no body : but 
My Cousin says he 'll lug the Ass' ear , 
Speaking of your Man  


Loth.   The Butcher's dog shall save him a labour . 


Cast .  Well Gentlemen , I have intelligence 
( By my Boy ) that Foreste , and the Count , 
Are coming hither . Look to 't . But let the Count 
Be safe . You know his voice Lothario ? 


Loth.   Very distinctly . 


Cast .  Well , any Man ( but he ) that stirs his Tongue , 
Invites his own ruin Give me your Hands 
I 'll bring ye to a door : through which , if they 
Do pass , it must be over us.  


Loth.   Leave Foreste to my charge for I am 
His impediment . 


Cos .  Softly , softly . 


Exeunt Omnes . The Duke ( on his Bed ) is drawn forth . Enter Foreste , Lucio , Luinna . Foreste .  Now set the reflex at liberty : 
He opens 〈◊〉 dark Lantern . here let me beg your tarriance : till I 
Resolve a doubt that most concerns my Heart . 


Lucio .  You shall . But do not execute revenge , 
Upon the Duke ; till my assent encourage thee . 


Foreste .  My actions are confined : Upon , not in 
The Bed ? Gild confounds all order , and makes , 
Our rest unnatural . Mistress , stand you there . 


He leads Her to stand at the Bea feet . Duke .  Ha ! from whence that light ! who waits within 


Foreste ,  is it you ? what do you mean 
By this uncivil visitation ! 


Foreste .  I am not so unthrifty of time 
To join replies , unto demands , I must 
Deprive you of your Soul . 


Duke .  How ? Is this Language lawful , unto me 
Thy Sovereign Prince . Did not high-providence , 
treble the assurance of my safety : 
By Guards invisible , when I was first 
Predestinate to this supreme function ? 
And dar'st thou tempt the strength of Heaven ? 


Foreste .  I know it were a profane curiosity 
In me , to question the prerogatives 
Of a free Prince . For Ignorance , and a dull , 
Easy faith ; must flatter bondage still . 
Or Liberty ( th' eldest Child of Nature ) 
Confounds predominance , by suing for 
Equality amongst the Sons of Men : 
And so revokes a Chaos . 


Duke .  Which soon returns : unless distinction 
Persuade thee fix my Royalty , above 
Thy reach : that art my natural Subject . 


Foreste .  Enough false Sir. Warm not the air with words . 
Be still , or I conclude ye in a trice , 
And now requite the Leisure , I permit 
For prayer : by a true reply to what 
I shall demand . 


Duke .  I william  


Foreste .  Look on your opposite . 
Did you ever make her an Adulteress ? 
Speak truth , so come your Soul to Heaven . 


Duke .  Never . So come my Soul to Heaven , as I 
Speak truth . 


Foreste .  OH Sir ? 
Take heed the Perjurer hath little hope 
On the last day , to hide himself i' th' Crowd . 
He is a sinner much too eminent . 
But what meant that jewel which you gave her ; 
And which she concealed ; till it 's own lustre 
Did betray it ? 


Duke .  I gave it to disguise the cause , for which 
I sent the other unto Corsa . 


Lucio .  That name will prick my fury on : although 
I strive to be propitious . 


Foreste .  I know Luinna , thou art merciful : 
Forgive me gentle Girl . It was the first 
Bargain we did make i' th' Church , to Share 
In sufferance . 


Luin.   And 't is my duty Sir , to be most prompt 
In the observance . 


Foreste ,  My Lord ! 


Lucio .  A rude summons , that calls me as a judge , 
To censure on the errors of my Prince . 


Duke .  What , Is he there too ? OH kill object ! 


Foreste .  Behold ( young Lord ) the cruel Ravisher . 
Whom Time himself shall never parallel , 
Though he survey his old Records , and scratch 
His reverend Head to waken memory . 


Lucio   OH horror ! furnish us ( sweet Heaven ) with some 
Instinct . Inspire remorse : or we accuse 
Thy skillfulness to predestine us a Prince : 
Murdering , whom thou didst anoint our Sovereign . 


Foreste .  My heart swells . I 'm full of grief , and danger . 
Some Iron Hoops to help my Ribs , or I shall burst . 


Duke .  The cause deserves great alteration . 
more than mortality can see , and yet 
Be safe . I wonder Heaven takes so little 
Notice of it . I am not singed to death 
With Lightning Like the Door : nor murdered through 
The Ear with thunder ; like a Bat . OH Lucio ! 
Mind not my former love : but strike , until 
I groan my last . 


Lucio .  Foreste sheath thy sword . It must not be . 
He was our Royal Master once , and might 
In modesty compare himself ; with all 
But Princes ; whom Fame reserves as Patterns , 
For my sake sheathe your Sword.  


Duke .  OH I shall survive my Royal Charter ! 
My creature is more beautiful than I : 
more wealth in his love . 


Foreste .  For my own part , I will annihilate 
Myself : for should I live , I should grow mad . 
But I am bound to care for you ( my Lord ) 
Take heed ! I know the tricks of Majesty . 
They think they cannot be secure after 
Doing ill ; but by doing worse : that is , 
By kill quite , whom erst they did but wound . 


Lucio .  And that 's the surgery , which I desire . 
I will endure all . OH my Lord , my Lord ; 
I will not bid Posterity tell tales : nor charge 
Historians to insert in Annals ; 
On such a Night a great Italian . Duke , 
Ravished his Creature Lucio's Wife : Sister 
To Foreste , his active Councillor . 


Foreste .  Lucio , composed of such an humble love : 
That to secure his Master's feet , would spread . 
And scatter all his Limbs , for him to walk upon . 


Lucio .  And Foreste , whose industry , and care 
Outwatched Lean-vigilance , till she grew mad . 
But come , Let 's leave him to contrive our deaths . 
My Heart so fills my mouth , I cannot speak . 


Duke .  Lucio stay , Foreste stay awhile . 
Leave me not thus anatomised with breath . 
He riseth from the Bed.  Dissect me really with your good Swords . 
Behold my Breast , take out my Heart : and if 
You find your figures there , then use my Fame 
With Mercy . 


Lucio .  Foreste come away . 


Foreste .  Make haste Luinna . 


Luin.   I am waked out of a strange amazement . 


Exeunt Foreste , Lucio , Lu●nua . Duke .  hide me swelling Hills ! rough , and scabbed Rocks , 
ye Quarrels cleave , and suck me in , then join 
Again . Would it not make a Patriarch mad ? 
OH who shall bribe the Sun , that in the day 
Of general accounts : he may avouch 
He never saw me here . Ha ! false Memory ! 
I forgot to tell 'em of Castruchio . 
't is best to o'ertake ' 'em . I cannot guess 
Which way they went.  


Exit the other way . Enter Castruchio , Lothario , Cosimo . Cast .  Hell , and the Pillory take such dull Ears . 
It cannot be , but they have passed the Cloisters , 
And ever this , with help of private Keys , 
Entered the Duke's Bedchamber . 


Loth.   Those were Authors of that noise , I spoke of . 


Cast .  The very same . A pox upon demurs . 


Cos .  Will you lead the way , that we may harken 
enter Duke , If they be there , or no.  


Duke .  If I should come too late ? — 


Loth.   that 's none of the Count's voice . Have at ye sir ; 


Duke .  OH , OH , OH , I am surprised in my own snare . 


Cast .  It is Foreste sure . Let 's make safe work 
Kill Lothario , lay him by him , and depart , 


Cos .  A match . 


Loth.   OH Villains , OH , OH , O.  


Luthario dies , Enter Foreste , Lucio , Luinna . Foreste .  What noise is that ? 


Cast .  Another Foreste . 


Lucio .  My Royal Master bleeding on the Ground : 
OH murderous Villains : 


Luin.   Murder , murder . Help ! o help ? 


Exit Lucio fights with Cossimo , Foreste with Castruchio . Foreste .  The Duke my Soveraign● sla●e , and Lucio 
Bleeding at his feet . Villain take this thrust 
At my own prejudice . 


Lucio .  I am foiled by a base hand . 


Cast .  Fly Cosime , fly . 


Exeunt Cast . and Cos . Foreste .  Some comfort yet remains : in that I am , 
Proscribed to share in thy fate , though it be bad . 
I lose much blood . OH trivial fortitude , 
False Sinews , do you begin to shrink ? 


He falls down . Duke .  Lucio , Let my Soul , carry your pardon 
With her unto Heaven ; and yours Foreste . 
This strangeme was mine , but the success , 
Was much against my william  


Lucio .  Sir , I forgive you all . 


Foreste .  Nay let us join Hands . — We do forgive 
Each other , and the World. The like mercy 
May Heaven bestow on us.  


Duke .  Amen , Amen . 


Lucio .  Amen , Amen . 


they die . Foreste .  There his heartstrings broke . Lucio ( my Patron ) 
Already Chap-fallen to : that sight deserves a Tear : 
Though I should stab my Eyes to warrant it . 


Enter Dorido , Luinna , Courtiers with Light : Castruchio : and Cosimo : led in . Dor.   Bring the slaves in , their deeds will soon convince 
Their faint denial , where did you leave 'em Lady ? 


Luin.   Here , here , OH my Lord , my Lord  


Foreste .  I have not breath enough to comfort thee . 
With words , mercy Heaven . 


dies . Luin.   OH my Lord ? my Husband he 's dead , he 's dead . 


Dor.   Hold the Lady there : OH dire spectacle . 
the Duke , Lucio , Foreste , and Lothario 
Lie here breathless . I did suspect some black 
Conspiracy . Which made me haunt them two 
Unto the Palace , but I did lose 'em 
By the Chapel stairs ; bloody dogs , what Devil 
Prompted thee to this action . 


Cast .  I hope , i  not so much Blood left , as will preserve 
Me for an answer . 


Cos .  I feel my end to near . 


Dor.   Take 'em away , and close their wounds , though there 
Be some mercy shown , by thus deferring 
That reward which your black souls shall receive 
In Hell. Yet know the Law will here on Earth 
Provide such tortures as shall make your deaths 
Exemplary to all succeeding times . — 
exeunt some with Cast . and Cos . Gentlemen , your silence may be excused . 
Where , there 's so much cause of admiration . 
Some help transfer the dead from hence , others 
Call up the Councillors of state . 
So intricate is Heaven's revenge 'gainst lust . 
The righteous suffer here , with the unjust . 


Exeunt . omnes . FINIS . 

