Brittannia's Honour : Brightly Shining in several Magnificent Shows or Pageants , to celebrate the Solemnity of the Right Honourable RICHARD DEANE , At his Inauguration into the Majoralty of the Honourable City of London , on Wednesday , October the 29th . 1628.  At the particular Cost , and Charges of the Right Worshipful , Worthy , and Ancient Society of Skinners . 

Mart. lib. 7.  Ep. 5.  

Rursus 10 , Magnos clamat nova-troia Triumphos . 

Invented by THO. DEKKER . TO GOD ONLY BE ALL GLORY 



To the Right Honourable , Richard Deane Lord Mayor of the most Renowned City of London : And to the two worthy Sheriffs , Mr. Rowland Backhouse , and Mr. William Acton . 

Honourable Praetor : Noble Consuls . 

You are ( this Year ) the Subject of my Verse , 
In You lie hid the Fires which heat my Brains , 
To You , my Songs Triumphant I rehearse : 
From you , a thanks brings in a golden Gains , 
Since You are then the Glory of my Muse , 
But You , whom can she for her Patrons choose ? 
Whilst I rest , Devoted To your Lordship , And worships In all service , Tho. Dekker . 

Brittannia's Honour : Brightly shining in several Magnificent Shows or Pageants , to celebrate the Solemnity of the Right Honourable RICHARD DEANE , at his Inauguration into the Majoralty of the Honourable City of London , on Wednesday the 29. of October . 1628.  

What Honour can be greater to a Kingdom , than to have a City for beauty , able to match with the Fairest in the World ? A City , renowned Abroad , admired at Home . London , and her Royal Daughter ( Westminster ) are the Representative body of the general State ; for , here our Kings and Queens keep their Courts ; here are our Princes , the Peers , Nobility , Gentry , Lord's Spiritual and Temporal , with the Numerous Communality . 

London in Foreign Countries is called the Queen of Cities , and the Queen-mother over her own . She is her Kings Chamber-royal , his Golden-key : His Storehouse : The Magazine of Merchandise ; the Mistress of Sciences ; a Nurse to all the Shires in England . 

So famous she is for her Buildings , that Troy has leaped out of her own Cinders , to build Her Wals. So remarkable for Priority and Power , that hers is the Master-wheel of the whole Kingdom : As that moves , so the main Engine works . 

London is Admiral over the Navy royal of Cities : And as she sails , the whole Fleet of them keep their course . 

Fully to write down all the Titles , Styles , and Honours of this our Metropolis , would weary a 1000 pens : Apollo shall have a New Garland of Bays , to undertake it . 

As thus in State , she herself is Glorious ; so have all our Kings held it fit to make her chief Ruler eminent , and answerable to her greatness . The Praetorian Dignity is therefore come from the ancient Romans , to invest with Robes of Honour , our Lord Mayor of London : Their Consuls are our Sheriffs ; their Senators our Aldermen . 

The extension of a Lord Mayor's power , is every year to be seen both by Land and Water : Down as low as Lee in Essex : Up , as high as Stanes in Middlesex : In both which places , he keeps personal Courts . His House is a Chancery : He the Chancellor to mitigate the fury of Law : He the Moderator between the gripping Rich and the wrangling Poor . 

All the City ▪ Orphans call him Father : All the Widows call him their Champion . His Table lies spread to Courtiers , and Free to all Gentlemen of fashion . 

more to Proclaim his Greatness , what Viceroy is installed with louder popular acclamations ? What Deputy to his Soraigne goes along with such Triumphs ? To behold them , Kings , Queens , Princes , and Ambassadors ( from all parts of the World ) have with Admiration , rejoiced . 

These Triumphal passages are full of Magnificence for State , Munificence for Cost , and Beneficence for doing good . For ▪ besides all the twelve Companies , ( every one of which is a gainer by this employment : ) it would puzzle a good memory to reckon up all those Tradesmen ( with other extraordinary Professions which live not in the City ) who get money by this Action . 

then by this means , are every Year added to those that were before , three Fair , Spacious , and Palacious Houses , Beautified , Painted , and Adorned . 

The Lord Mayor of London ( like a Prince ) hath likewise his Variety of Noble Recreations : As Hunting , Shooting , Wrestling , before him , and such like . 

Thus having ( as it were in Landscape ) a far off shown you the Tops only of our City-buildings ; and in a little Picture drawn the Face of her Authority , giving but a glimpse of her Praetor as he passes by ; let me now open a Book to you , of all those Ceremonies , which this great Festival day hath provided to Attend upon him , and do him Honor.  

The first Show , is called a Sea-consort . 

The first Salutation being on the Water , is furnished with persons and Properties fitting the quality of that Element . An Artificial Rock therefore is quaintly contrived : On whose highest Ascent fits Amphitrite Queen of the Seas , habited to her State ; a Mantle fringed with silver crossing her Body : Her hair long , and dishevelled , on her head , a fantastic dressing made out of a fishes writhen shell , interwoven with Pearl , the shell is silver , on the top of it stands an Artificial moving Tortoise : On each side of her , swim two Mermaids . These two enticed by the variety of several instruments ( echoing to one another ) have followed the Sea-soveraigne , and wait upon her , as Maids of Honor.  

Round about the Rock are Sea-nymphs , and in places convenient for them are bestowed our three famous Rivers , Humber , Trent , and Severne , aptly attired according to the quality of such Marine persons , who play upon Cornets . 

Amphitryte is the Speaker . From whom are delivered these lines . 

Hail worthy Praetor , ( Hail Grave Senators ) 
The Queen of Waves ( leaving Grace Neptune's Bowers ) 
waits here ( Fair Lord ) to serve you . Fame's Report , 
( so far as old Oceanus' Crystal Court ) 
what Triumphs Ceremony forthwould Call 
To Swell the joys of This Grand Festival , 
Iutic'de me with my Mermaids and a Train 
Of Sea-nymphs hither . Here ( this day ) shall Reign 
Pleasures in State Majestic : And to lend 
A brighter Splendour to them , do Attend 
Three of my Noblest Children , Humber , Trent , 
And Severne ( Glorious made by Punishment . ) 
The Silver-footed Thames ( my elder son ) 
To Grace your Triumphs , by your Barge shall run . 
Your Fortunes ( led by a white-handed Fate 
Up to this High Fame ) I Congratulate : 
Glad am I to behold you Thus Set Round 
With Glories , Thus with Acclamations Crowned , 
So Circled , and Hemmed in , on Every side 
With Echoing Music , Fish's even take pride 
To Swim along , and listen , Go , and Take 
The Dignity stays for you , whilst I make 
Smooth way Before you , on This Glassy Floor , 
Ushering your glad Arrival to the Shore . 
To Honour's Temple now you have not far , 
Hie , and Come back more Great than yet you Are , On , 


And so the Cornets playing one to Another , they go forward . If her Majesty be pleased on the Water , or Land , to Honour These Triumphs with her Presence ; This following Speech in French is then delivered to her , with a Book of the Presentatiens , All the Cover , being set thick with Flower de Luce's in Gold.  

MADAM , 

Voicy , maintenant les Quatre Elements qui vos Attendent pour vous fair Honneur . L'eau est Couverte de Triomphes flottans , pour Dancer en L'air : E'l'air est Remply de Mille Echos , & Retentit de la doulce Music , que leur voix resonne , pour Attirer vos oreilles favorables à les Escouter . Puis vous avez sur la , Terre dix mille Mains qui vous Applaudissent pour joy & Allegresse quelles ressentent de voir vostre Majesty dans la Ville . L'element du Feu , Bruit & Ton vostre Bien Venue . Vos Subjects accourent à grand Foùlle , ravis de voir les Graces qui ont choisi leur Throsne sur vostre Front. Toutes les Deliees d' Amour se jouënt sur vos paupieres , La Rose d' Angleterre , & les Fleurs de lis de France S'entrebaisent sur le Vermilion de vos jouës . Soyez Saine comme le printemps , Glorieuse comme l'este , Autant Fructeuse que la vigne . Que seurte guard , & Enuironne vostre Chariot le jour : Et le Sommeil door Dress & orne vostre Chambre de Nuict . Vivez longuement : Vivez Heureuze : Vivez aimee , & Cherie . Bonte vous guard ; Virtue vous Couronne ; Et les Anges vous guident . 

Thus Englished . 

ROYAL LADY , 

Behold , the four Elements wait upon you to do you Honour : Water hath provided Floating Triumphs to Dance in the Air : In the Air are a Thousand Echoes with Music in their Mouths , to Entice you to hear them : On the Shore shall ten thousand pair of hands give you Plaudits in the City : The Element of Fire , thunders aloud your welcomes . Throngs of Subjects here , are glad to see the Graces Enthroned on your Forehead : All the Delicacies of Love , playing on your Eyelids , The Roses of England , and the Lilies of France , Kissing one Another on your cheeks . Be you healthful as the Spring ; Glorious as Summer : Fruitful as the Vine : Safety run along your Chariot by Day ; Golden Slumbers dress up your Chamber at Night . 

Live long , 
Live happy , 
Live beloved ; 
Goodness Guard you , 
Virtue's Crown you , 
Angels Guide you . 
The second Presentation , New Troy's Tree of Honor.  

A Person in a rich Roman Antique Habit , with an ornament of Steeples , Towers , and Turrets on her head , Sits in a quaint Arbour , Interwoven with several Branches of Flower● . 

In her Left han● , she holds a golden Truncheon ( leaning on the ground ) to show that she 's a Leader & Conductress of a Mighty People : Her Right Hand ( thrusting through the Arbour ) takes hold of a Tree , out of which spread Twelve Main and Goodly Branches . 

This Lady ( thus si●ting ) Represents London : The Tree ( guarded , and supported by her ) The 12.  Superior Companies . 

Upon every particular Branch , is bestowed the Arms of some One of the Twelve , expressed in the True Colours within a fair shield . The highest Branch of all ( as over-topping the Rest at This Time ) bearing the Arms of the Skinners in a more large and glorious Escutcheon . 

Among the Leaves in the Top , is a Tablet , in which is written , in letters of gold , Vivite Concords , Live in Love : Or agree in one . 

Over the Person , Representing London , is likewise Inscribed in golden Capitals , This , Me ●●nctus Lauro perducit ad astra Triumphus . 
Each Triumph Crowned with Bays , 
Me to the Stars does raze . 




In places convenient , and in a Triangular form , under the twelve branches of the Tree , are seated Minerva , ( Inventress and Patroness of Arts , Handicrafts , and Trades ) in Ornaments proper to her quality : And not far from her , is Bellona goddess of War , in a Martial habit , on her head a Helm and Plume , in her hands a golden Spear and Shield , with Medusaes●●ad ●●ad . Hereby intimating , that both Arts and Arms , are ( in a high degree and fullness of honour , ) nursed up and maintained by and in the City : And , that either of them flourish bravely under the shadow and protection of the twelve Branches , shooting forth from that . New Troy's Tree of Honor.  

Upon a border of Flowers , enclosing this Tree , are fitly bestowed the Arms of as many of the inferior Companies in less Escutcheons , as for the quantity of room , can there be handsomely placed . 

Within the same Border , ( where less Trees also grow ) are presented Peace , Religion , Civil Government , justice , Learning , Industry , and close to Industry , Honor. For as all these are golden Columns , to bear up the Glories of the City , so is the City an indulgent and careful Mother , to bring up them to their Glories . And as these twelve Noble Branches cover these persons , ( as it were with the wings of Angels , ) so the persons watch day and night to defend the twelve Branches . 

These persons are adorned fitting their state and condition , and hold such properties in their hands , as of right belong unto them . 

1.  Peace hath a Dove on her fist , and a Palmtree Branch in her hand . 

2.  Religion is in a white glittering robe , with a Coronet of Stars on her head , holding in one hand , a Book open , in the other , a golden ladder , ( emblem of prayer , by whose steps we climb to Heaven . ) 

3.  Civil Government is in a robe full of eyes , and a Dial in her hand to express her Vigilance : For she must watch every hour , and keep all eyes open , yet all little enough . 

4.  justice holds a Sword.  

5.  Learning a Book , and a Jacob's Staff . 

6.  Industry , a golden Hammer , and a Seaman's Compass , as taking pains to get wealth , both by Sea and land  

7.  Honour sits in Scarlet . 

The Person , in whom is figured London , is the Speaker , who thus salutes his Lordship . 

Ten thousand welcomes Greet you on the shore , 
( My long expected Praetor , ) OH before 
You look on Others , fix your eyes on Me , 
On Me , your second Mother , ( London . ) She 
Whom all Great Britain's Cities , style their Queen , 
For still I am , and have her Darling been . 
The Christian World , in Me , reads Time's best stories , 
And Reading , falls blind at my dazzling Glories , 
But now the Snow of age , covers my head : 
As therefore you , by Me have up binbred ▪ 
You ( Sir ) must Nurse me now : with a quick eye 
View then my Tree of Honour , branching high 
For hundred of past years , with 12. large Stems , 
Twelve Noble Companies , which like 12.  gems 
So shine , they add new Sun beams to the Day : 
Guard all these 12. main-boughs ; but you must lay : 
A soft hand , on the Topping-branch , for there 
( Thrive the Root well ) yourself grows all this year : 
The lesser twigs which lowly run along 
My tall Tree , Border , you must shield from wrong , 
There the poor Bee , ( the sweeting Trades man ) fly's 
From Flower to Flower , and home with Honey bees . 
With me Minerva ; and Bellona come , 
For Arts and Arms , must at your Board have room , 
Your Gates will spread , the Rich to entertain , 
But whilst the Mightyones within remain , 
And feast : Remember at the same Gate stands 
The Poor , with crying Papers in their hands , 
To watch when justice up the Glass shall turn , 
Let those sands run , the Poor can never mourn . 
Place in your eyes two Beacons , to descry 
Dangers far off , which strike ere home they fly ; 
Kiss Peace ; let Order ever steer the Helm , 
Left-handed Rule , a State does overwhelm . 
You are your Sovereign's Gardener for one year , 
The Plot of Ground , y' are trusted with , lies here , 
( A City , ) and your care must all be spent , 
To prune and and dress the Tree of Government . 
Lordship off Disorders , Factions , Mutiny , 
And Murmurations against those sit high , 
May your years last day , end as this begins , 
Sphered in the loves of Noble Citizens . 


Our third Presentation is called , The Glory of Furs . 

This is a Chariot Triumphant , garnished with Trophies of Armours . It is drawn by two Luzernes , The Supporters of the Skinner's Arms . On the two Luzernes ride two Antics , who dance to a Drum beating before them , there aptly placed . At the upper end of this Chariot , in the most eminent Seat , carrying the proportion of a Throne , are advanced a Russian Prince and Princess ; richly habited in Furs , to the custom of the Country . 

1.  Under them , sits an old Lord , Furred up to his chin in a short cloak . 

2.  By him , a Lady with Martin skins about her neck , and her hands in a Muff . 

3.  then , a judge in Robes Furred . 

4.  then , an University Doctor , in his Robes furred . 

5.  then , a Fro● in a short furred Cassock , gird to her . 

6.  then a Skipper in a furred Cap.  

I● all these persons , is an implication of the necessary , ancient and general use of Furs , from the highest to the lowest . 

On the Top of this Throne , ( at the four corners ) are erected the Arms of the City , in four Pendants : On the point of the ●ore front , a large square Banner plays with the wind , which Fame ( who is in this Chariot , ) holds in her hand , as she stands upright , Being the Speaker . 

Fame's turn is now to Speak ; for who but Fame 
Can with her thousand Tongues abroad Proclaim , 
Your this day's Progress ( rising like the Sun , ) 
Which through the yearly Zodiac on must run . 
Fame hath brought hither from great Mosco's Court , 
( The seven-mouthed Volga , spreading the report , ) 
Two Russian Princes , who to feast their eyes , 
With the rich Wonders of these rarities , 
Ride in this glorious Chariot ; How amazed 
They look , to see streets thronged , and windows glazed 
With beauties , from whose eyes such beams are sent , 
Here moves a second starry Firmament . 
Much , on them , startling admiration wins , 
To see these Brave , Grave , Noble Citizens , 
So streamed in mu●titudeses , yet flowing in State , 
For all their Orders are Proportionate . 
Russia , now envies London , seeing ( here ) spent 
Her richest Furs , in graceful ornament , 
more Brave and more Abounding , than her own : 
A golden Pen he earns , that can make known 
The use of Furs , so Great , so General , 
All men , may these , their Winter Armours call . 
th' invention of warm Furs the Sun did fret , 
For Russians lapped in these , slighted his heat , 
Which seen , his fiery Steeds he drove from thence , 
And so the Muff has dwelled in cold ere since . 
What royalties , add Furs to Emperors , Kings , 
Princes , Dukes , Earls , in the distinguish , 
Of all their several Robes ? The Furs worn here , 
Above th' old Roman State make Ours appear : 
The reverend judge , and all that climb the trees 
Of sacred Arts , ascend to their Degrees , 
And by the colours changed of Furs are known : 
What Dignity , each Corporation 
Puts on by Furs , witness these infinite eyes , 
Thank then the bringers of these Rarities . 
I wish ( Grave Praetor ) that as Hand in Hand , 
Plenty and Bounty bring you safe to Land , 
So , Health may be chief Carver at that Board , 
To which you hasten . Be as Good a Lord 
I'th'eyes of Heaven , as this day you are Great 
In Fame's applause : Hie to your Honoured Seat . 
The fourth Presentation is Called Brittannia's watch-tower . 

This is a Magnificent Structure , Advancing itself from the Platform , or Groundwork upward , with the Bewry of eight Antique Terms , By whose strength is supported a Four square Building ; The Top of which is a Watch-tower , or Lantern , with eight Columns of silver : And , on the Highest point of this Watch-tower , is Advanced a Banner , bearing the Colours of the Kingdom . 

At four Corners of the upper Square , stand four Pendants ; In which are the Arms of the four Companies of which his Lordship is Free.  

At rach end of this Platform , stands a great Corinthian Brazen Pillar , on a Pedestal of Marble . 

On the Capitals of those Pillars , stand two Angels , in Postures ready to fly : holding Garlands of Victory in one hand , stuck with White and red Roses , and Branches of Palm in the other . 

The Capitals and Bases of the Pillars are Gold , and are Emblems of the two Houses of York and Lancaster ; once divided , but now joined into One Glorious Building , to Support This Royal Kingdom , & Consequently This City . 

At Night , in place of the Angels , are set two Great Lights : and so is the Watch-tower at that Time , Filled with lighted Tapers . 

Upon the same Square , in four several Places , are Advanced four stately Pyramids , being Figures , of the four Kingdoms Embellished with Escutcheons . 

In the upper seat of all ( fashioned into a Throne ) is placed Britannia , Majestically attired , fitting to her Greatness . 

Beneath Her , and round about Her , are these Petsons : viz. Magnanimity with a drawn Sword.  

A Shipwright with a Mallet , holding a Scutcheon , in which is drawn a Ship under sail . then , A person representing Victory , with a Palm Tree . Providence with a Trumpet , ready to Foresee Dangers , and awaken Men to meet them . 

All These have been , and still are , Watch-towers , and Lanterns , in the Nighrs of Fear and Trouble , to Guard the Kingdom , and in the Kingdom , This City . 

In other Eminent places are seated some of those Kiuges of England ( in Robes Ermined ) whose loves and Royal favours , in former times were Watch-towers to Grace London , stuck full with the Beams and Lights of Honours , Titles , Offices , Magistracies and Royalties , which they Bestowed upon Herald  

Edward Confessor , called London's Chief Ruler , a Port-reve . Richard 1. appointed two Bailiffs over London . 

King john gave the City a Lord Maior and two Sheriffs . Henry 3. added Aldermen . 

These were Tender over the Renown of the City , and still heaped on her head , Royalties upon Royalties . 

And albeit most of our Kings , have in most of all of the twelve Companies , Entered their Names , as Free of the Societies , thereby to Royalize their Brotherhoods : And that many of our Kings likewise , besides Princes and Great Personages , have been Free of This Company , whose Names I forbear to set down , because they have in former years been fully expressed : yet no Company , did ever , or can hereafter , receive such Graces from Kings , as This Ancient , and Honoured Corporation of Skinners , hath had , and still have , In regard that All our Kings and Princes , sit in their high Courts of Parliament in Robes Ermined , ( being the richest Fur ) the workmanship of which goes through the Skinner's fingers , wearing likewise under their Crowns , Royal Caps of Honour Ermined . 

Three of such Crowns , being the rich Arms of This Company , thereby expressing as well their Honour , as Antiquity . 

Britannia delivers thus much . 

Shall the proud wife of Neptune , or shrill Fame , 
Or Troynovant herself , Ring out your Name : 
And I be Dumbe , or sparing , to Sound high , 
The Glories of This Day ? no , They shall Fly 
Like Soaring Eagles , to That Curled Main 
whose Head my Rocky Bridle , In does Rein : 
The Great Britannia , bred you in her Womb , 
Hear then a Mother's Counsel ; You are Come 
Aboard a Goodly Ship , where all your State , 
Fame , Honour and Renown ( Embarked ) must wait 
The voyage of twelve Moons . High Admiral 
You are to All That Fleet , which Thus you Call 
To s●yle in This vast Ocean . Nor must you 
Walk Heartless on the Hatches , I here 's a New 
State-navigation , to be studied Now , 
With an High reared , Undaunted , Fixed Brow. 
Be su●e to have Brave Ordnance , and charged well ; 
In this your S●ip , Trust None , For Officers sell 
Their Captains Trust ; let None but your own Eyes , 
Rule Chartley and Compass , There your Safety lies . 
Your Own Hands steer the Helm , But strongly Steer , 
And spite of storms , be stout when you stand There . 
Emblem of Mercy ! Your Keen sword does sleep , 
But why a Sword , if not to Kul , and Keep 
Vices ( like Slaves ) in Awe ? Fullness of Wine 
Is a Fowl Dropsy , That and Lust Entwine : 
Pride a swollen Timpany , Sloth , the Beggar's Gout , 
( In Tradesmen's Hands and Feet , It runs about , ) 
no Cure for this ! Oaths thick as Smallshot fly 
From Children , no Defence to Put this by ! 
You May , you Must. I Counsel not , but Read 
A Lesson of my love ; By which Love led 
I 'll on , and Bring you to your Honoured Chair , 
Whilst Aves ( Round about you ) Dance i' th' Air . 


The last Presentation is called the Sun's Bower . 

The upper part of this , is adorned with several Flowers , which interwoven together , dress up a comely Green Arbour , in which the Sun si●s , with golden Beams about his Face ; an Attire glittering like gold ; and a mantle bright as his garment , fringed with gold , his hair curled and yellow . About him are placed , Spring , Summer , Autumn , and Winter , in proper Habiliments . Beneath these , is a Wilderness , in which are many sorts of such Beasts , whose rich Skins serve for Furs : As the Rear , Wolf , Leopard , Lucern , Cat - A-mountaine , Foxes , Sables , Coneys , Ferrets , Squirrels , etc.  Of these Beasts , some are climbing , some standing , some grinning , with lively , natural postures . In a Scroll , hanging on a Bough , This is written in Capital letters . 

Deus ecce Furentibus obstat . 
See , for all some Beasts are fell , 
there 's one , that can their curstness quell . 
Sol is the Speaker . 

Heaven's bright Oriental Gates I opened this Morn , 
And Hither wheeled my Chariot to adorn 
These splendours with my Beams : ne'er did the Sun 
In his Celestial Circle faster run 
Than Now , to see these Sights : OH how I joy 
To view a Kingdom , and a New-built Troy 
So flourishing so full , so fair , so dear 
To th' Gods. they leave Jove's Court to revel here . 
All o'er the World , I travel in one Day , 
Yet oft am forced to leave my beaten way , 
Frighted with Uproars , Battles , Massacres , 
Famines , and all that Hellish brood of wars : 
I meet no Peace but here . OH blessed Land ! 
That seest fires kindling round , and yet canst stand 
Unburnt for all their flames ; OH Nation blessed ! 
When all thy Neighbour's shriek , none wound thy breast . 
To Crown these joys , with me are come along , 
The four Lords of the year , who by a strong 
Knit Charm , bring in this goodly Russian prize , 
As earnest of a more rich Merchandise : 
Half of our Race , Time , and my Hours have run , 
Nor shall they give o'er till the Goal be won . 


The Sun at Night being covered with a veil of Darkness : The Person , representing London , thus takes leave . 

The Sun is mantled in thick Clouds of Black , 
And by his hidden Beams , threatens the wrack 
Of all these Glories : Every pleasure dies 
When Raven-winged Night , from her Cave flies ; 
None but these Artificial Stars keep fire 
To Light you Home , these burn with a desire 
To lengthen your brave Triumphs ; but their heat 
Must cool , and die at length , though never so Great . 
Peace therefore guide you on : Rest , charm your eyes , 
And Honours wait to cheer you when you Rise . 


Let it be no Ostentation in Me the Inventor , to speak thus much in praise of the works , that for many years , none have been able to Match them for curiosity : They are not Vast , but Neat , and Comprehend as much Art for Architecture , as can be bestowed upon such little Bodies . The commendations of which must live upon Mr. Gerard Christmas the Father , and Mr. john Christmas the Son . 

FINIS . 

