A Pilgrims Solace . Wherein is contained Musical Harmony of 3. 4. and 5. parts , to be sung and played with the Lute and Viols . 

By John Douland , Bachelor of Music in both the Universities : and Lutenist to the Right Honourable the Lord Walden . 

1612 

LONDON : Printed for M. L. J. B. and T. S. by the Assignment of William Barley . 

TO THE RIGHT HO norable , THEOPHILUS , LORD WALDEN , SON AND HEIR TO THE MOST NOBLE , THOMAS , BAR ON OF WALDEN , EARL OF SUFFOLK , LORD CHAMBERLAINE OF HIS MAJESTY'S HOUSEHOLD , KNIGHT OF THE MOST Noble Order of the Garter , and one of his Majesty's most Honourable Privy Counsel . 

Most Honoured Lord : 

AS to exell in any quality is very rare , so is it a hard thing to find out those that favour Virtue and Learning ; but such being found , men of judgement are drawn ( I know not by what Sympathy ) to love and Honour them , as the Saints and Sovereigns of their affections and devices : wherefore ( most Worthy Lord ) your Honour being of all men noted ( as natural born heir of your most Renowned father and mother ) to be the only and alone Supporter of goodness and excellency , known to none better ( unless I should be the most ungrateful of all others ) than myself , who am held up only by your gracious hand ; for which I can show no other means of thankfulness than these simple fruits of my poor endeavours which I most humbly present as a public pledge from a true and devoted heart , hoping hereafter to perform something , wherein I shall show myself more worthy of your Honourable service . In the mean time you shall have a poor man's prayers for your Lordship's continual health and daily increase of Honor.  

Your Honour's humble servant JOHN DOULAND . 

TO THE READER . 

Worthy Gentlemen , and my loving Countrymen ; moved by your many and fore-tasted courresies , I am constrained to appear again unto you . True it is , I have lain long obscured from your sight , because I received a Kingly entertainment in a foreign climate , which could not attain to any ( though never so mean ) place at home , yet have I held up my head within this Horizon , and not altogether been unaffected else where . Since some part of my poor labours have found favour in the greatest part of Europe's , and been printed in eight most famous Cities beyond the Seas . viz : Paris , Antwerp , Collein , Nurenburge , Franckfort , Liepsig , Amsterdam , and Hamburge : ( yea and some of them also authorised under the Emperor's royal privilege , ) yet I must tell you , as I have been a stranger ; so have I again found strange entertainment since my return ; especially by the opposition of two sorts of people that shroud themselves under the title of Musicians . The first are some simple Cantors , or vocal singers , who though they seem excellent in their blind Division-making , are merely ignorant , even in the first elements of Music , and also in the true order of the mutation of the Hexachord in the Systeme , ( which hath been approved by all the learned and skilful men of Christendom , this 800 years , ) yet do these fellows give their verdict of me behind my back , and say , what I do is after the old manner : but I will speak openly to them , and would have them know that the proudest Cantor of them , dares not oppose himself face to face against me . The second are young men , professors of the Lute , who vaunt themselves , to the disparagement of such as have been before their time , ( wherein I myself am a party ) that there never was the like of them . To these men I say little , because of my love and hope to see some deeds ensue their brave words , and also being that here under their ownenoses hath been published a Book in defence of the Viol de Gamba , wherein not only all other the best and principal instruments have been abased , but especially the Lute by name , the words , to satisfy thee Reader I have here thought good to insert , and are as followeth : From henceforth , the stateful Instrument Gamba Viol , shall with ease yield full various , and devicefull Music as the Lute : for here I protest the Trin●…ie of Music , Parts , Passion , and Division , to be as gracefully united in the Gamba Viol. , as in the most received Instrument that is , etc.  Which Imputation , me thinks , the learneder sort of Musicians ought not to let pass unanswered . Moreover that here are and daily doth come into our most famous kingdom , diverse strangers from beyond the seas , which aver before our own faces , that we have no true method of application or fingering of the Lute . Now if these gallant young Lutenists be such as they would have the world believe , and of which I make no doubt , let them remember that their skill lieth not in their finger's ends : Cucullus non facit Monachum . I wish for the Honour therefore and general benefit of our Country , that they undertake the defence of their Lute profession , seeing that some of them above other , have most large means , convenient time , and such encouragement as I never knew any have , belceve me if any of these objections had been made when those famous men lived which now are thought worthy of no fame , not derogating from these skilful men present ; I dare affirm that these objections had been answered to the full , and I make no doubt but that those few of the former time which live yet , being that some of them are Bachelors of Music , and others which assume unto themselves to be no less worthy , will be as forward to preserve their reputation . Perhaps you will ask me , why I that have travailed many countries , and aught to have some experience , doth not under go this business myself ? I answer that I want ability , being I am now entered into the fiftieth year of mine age : secondly because I want both means , leisure , and encouragement . But ( Gentle Reader to conclude , although abruptly ) this work of mine , which I here have published , containeth such things as I myself have thought well of , as being in mine opinion furnished with variety of matter both of judgement and delight , which willingly I refer to the friendly censure , and approbation of the skilful : hoping it will be no less delightful to all in general , than it was pleasing to me in the composition , Farewell . 

Your friend john Douland . 

THE TABLE . 

Disdain me still , that I may ever love . I 
Sweet stay a while , why will you ? TWO 
To ask for all thy love . III 
Love those beams that breed : FOUR 
Shall I strive with words to move . V 
Were every thought an eye . VI 
Stay time a while thy flying . VII 
Tell me true Love. VIII 
Go nightly , cares the enemy to rest . IX 
From silent night , true register of moans . X 
Lasso vita mia , mi fa morire . XI 
In this trembling shadow . XII 
If that a Sinners sighs be Angels food . XIII 
thou mighty God 1. part . XIIII 
When David's life by Saul . 2. part . XV 
When the poor Cripple . 3. part . XVI 
Where Sin sore wounding . XVII 
My heart and tongue were twins . XVIII 
Up merry Mates , to Neptune's praise . XIX 
Welcome black night . XX 
Cease these false sports . XXI 
A Galliard to Lachrimae . XXII 


FINIS . 

CANTUS . I  

Disdain me still , that I may e - ver love , For who his Love enjoys , can love , can love no more . The war once past with ease men co - wards prove : And ships returned , do rot up - 'pon the shore . And though thou frown , I 'll say thou art most fair , most fair : And still I 'll love , and still I 'll love , I 'll love , though still , though still I must de - spayre . 

As he●e to life so is desire to love , 
and these once quenched both life and love are gone . 
Let not my sighs nor tears thy virtue move , 
like base metals do not melt too soon . 
Laugh at my woes although I ever mourn , 
Love surfeits with reward , his nurse is scorn . 
ALTUS . I  

Disdain me still that I may ever love : For who his Love enjoys can love , can love no more . The war once past , with ease men cowards prove : And ships returned , do rot , do rot upon the shore . And though thou frown , thou frown , I 'll say thou art most fair , most fair , And still I 'll love , I 'll love though still I must despair . 

BASSUS . I  

Disdain me still that I may ever love : For who his Love enjoys , can love , can love no more . The war once past , with ease men cowards prove : And ships returned do rot upon the shore . And though thou frown I 'll say thou art most fair , most fair , And still I 'll love , though still I must despair . 

TENOR . I  

Disdain me still that I may ever love : For who his Love enjoys can love , can love no more . The war once past , with ease men cowards prove : And ships returned do rot upon the shore . And though thou frown , I 'll say , I 'll say , thou art most fair , most fair , And still I 'll love , and still I 'll love , and still I 'll love , I 'll love , though still , still I must despair , de - spayre . 

CANTUS . To my worthy friend Mr. William jewel of Exeter College in Oxford . II  

Sweet stay a while , why will you rise ? The light you see comes from your eyes : The day breaks not , it is my heart , To think that you and I must part . OH stay , OH stay , or else my joys , my joys , my joys must die , And per rish in their in - fan - cie . 

Dear let me die in this fair breast , 
far sweeter than the Phoenix nest . 
Love raise desire by his sweet charms 
Within this circle of thine arms : 
And let thy blissful kisses cherish 
Mine infant joys , that else must perish . 
ALTUS . II  

Sweet stay a while , why will you rise ? The light you see comes from your eyes : The day breaks , breaks not , it is my heart , To think that you and I must part . OH stay , OH stay , or else my joys must die , my joys must die , And poe - rish in their infancy . 

BASSUS . II  

Sweet stay a while , why will you rise ? The light you see comes from your eyes : The day breaks not , it is my heart , To think that you , that you and I must part . OH stay , OH stay , or else my joys , my joys must die , and perish in their infancy . 

TENOR . II  

Sweet stay a while , why will you rise ? The light you see comes from your eyes : The day breaks not , it is my heart , To think that you , that you , that you and I must part . OH stay , stay , stay ; OH stay , stay , stay , or else my joys , my joys must die , must die , die , my joys must die , And perish in their infancy . 

CANTUS . III  

TO ask for all thy love , and thy whole heart 't were madness , I do not sue , nor can ad - mit ( fai - rest ) from you to have all , yet who giveth all hath nothing to in - part , but sad nesse . 

He that receiveth all , can have no more than seeing . 
My Love by length of every hour , 
Gathers new strength , new growth , new flower . 
You must have daily new rewards in store , still being . 
You cannot every day give me your heart for merit : 
Yet if you will , when yours doth go , 
You shall have still one to bestow : 
For you shall mine when yours doth part inherit . 
Yet if you please , I 'll find a better way , then change them : 
For so alone dearest we shall 
Be one and one , another's all ▪ 
Let us so join our hearts that nothing may estrange them . 
ALTUS . III  

TO ask for all thy love and thy whole heart , 't were madness : I do not sue , nor can admit ( Fairest , fairest ) from you to have all , Yet who giveth all , gi' - veth all , hath nothing to impart but sadness . 

BASSUS . III  

TO ask for all thy love , and thy whole heart , 't were mad - nesse : I do not sue nor can add - mit ( Fairest ) from you to have all , Yet who giveth all , hath no - thing , nothing to in - part but sadness . 

TENOR . III  

TO ask for all thy love , and thy whole heart , 't were madness : I do not sue , nor can admit ( Faith - rest , Faith - rest ) from you to have all : Yet who giveth all , giveth all , hath nothing to in - part but sad - nesse . 

CANTUS . FOUR  

Love those beams that breed , all day long breed , and feed , this burr - ning : But alas tears cool this fire in vain , in vain , The more I quench , the more I quench , the more there doth re - main . Love I quench with floods , floods of tears , night - lie tears and mour - ning . 

I 'll go to the woods , and alone , make my moan , o cruel : 
For I am deceived and bereaved of my life , my jewel . 
OH but in the woods , though Love be blind , 
He hath his spies , my secret haunts to find . 
Love than I must yield to thy might , might and spite oppressed , 
Since I see my wrongs , woe is me , cannot be redrested . 
Come at last , be friendly Love to me , 
And let me not , endure this misery . 
ALTUS . FOUR  

Love those beams that breed , that breed all day long , breed and feed this , this burr - ning : Love I quench with floods , with floods , floods of tears , night - lie tears , tears and mor - ning . But alas tears cool this fire in vain , in vain , The more I quench , the more there doth remain . 

BASSUS . FOUR  

Love those beams that breed , all day long breed , and feed this burr - ning : But , but alas tears cool this fire in vain , the more I quench , the more , the more there doth remain . Love I quench with floods , floods of tears , night - lie tears and mor - ning . 

TENOR . FOUR  

Love those beams that breed , all day long breed , and feed , and feed this burning : Love I quench with floods , floods of tears , night - lie , night-ly tears & morning . But alas tears cool , tears cool this fire , in vain , in vain , The more I quench , the more I quench , the more , the more there doth remain . 

CANTUS . v.  

Shall I strive with words to move , when deeds re-ceive not due re - guard ? Shall I speak , and neigh - there please , nor be free - lie heard ? All woes have end , though a while de - laid , our pa - tience promise - ving . OH that times strange of - fects could but make , but make her lo - ving . I wooed her , I loved her , and none but her add - mire . OH come dear joy , and an - swear my de - sire . She alone my wound shall know , though she will not heal . Storms calm at last , and why may not she leave off her frow - ning ? OH sweet Love , help her hands my of - fe - cti - on crow - ning . 

ALTUS . v.  

Shall I strive with words to move , when deeds re-ceive not due regard ? Shall I speak , and neigh - there please , nor be free - lie heard ? All woes have end though a while delayed , our patience proving , OH that times , strange times , strange ef-fects , of - fects , could but make her lo - ving . I wooed her , I loved her , and none but her add - mire . OH come dear joy , and answer , answer my de - sire . Grief a - 'las though all in vain , her rest - less an-guish must reveal : She a - loan my wound shall know , though she will not heal . Storms calm at last , and why may not she leave off her frowning ? OH sweet Love , help Love , help her hands , her hands my of - fe - ction crow - ning . 

BASSUS . v.  

Shall I strive with words to move , when deeds re - ceive not due regard ? Shall I speak , and neigh - there please , nor be free - lie heard ? All woes have end , though a while delayed , our pa-ti-ence proving . OH that times , strange ef-fects could but make her , make her lo - ving . ay , I wooed her , I loved her , and none but her admire , OH come dear joy , and answer my desire . Grief a - 'las though all in vain , her restless an - guish must reveal : She a - loan my wound shall know , though she will not heal . Storms calm at last , and why may not she leave off her frowning ? OH sweet Love help her hands , my of - fe - ction crowning , crowning . 

TENOR . v.  

Shall I strive with words to move , when deeds re - ceive not due regard ? Shall I speak , and neigh - there please , nor be free - lie heard ? All woes have end , though a while , a while de - laid , our patience , patience promise - ving : OH , OH that times , that times , strange , strange times , strange of - fects , could make her , could make her lo - ving . ay , I wooed her , I loved her , and none but her add - mire , OH come dear joy and answer , and answer my de-sire . Grief a - 'las though all in vain , her restless an-guish must reveal : She alone my wound shall know , though she will not heal . Storms calm at last , and why may , why may not she leave off , leave off her frow - ning ? OH , OH sweet Love , sweet Love help , help Love , help her hands my , my of - fe - cti - on crowning . 

CANTUS . VI  

Were every thought an eye , and all those eyes could see , Her subtle wiles their sights would be-guile , and mock their ielou - sie . De - sire lives in her heart , Di - a-na in her eyes . 'T were vain to wish women true , 't is well , if they prove wise . Such a Love deserves more grace , then a truer heart that hath no conceit , To make use both of time and place , When a wit hath need of all his sleight . Her fires do in - ward burn , they make no outward show . And her de - lights a - mid the dark shades , which none dis - cover , grow . The flowers growth is un - seen , yet every day it grows . So where her fan - cy is set it thrives , but how none knows . 

ALTUS . VI  

Were eve - ry thought an eye and all those eyes could see , Her subtle wiles their sights would be - guile , and mock their ielou - sie . De - sire lives in her heart , in her hart , Di - a - na in her eyes , in her eyes . 'T were vain to wish women true , 't is well , ij . if they prove wise . Such a Love de - serves more grace , then a truer heart that hath no conceit , To make use both of time and place , and place , When a wit hath need of all his sleight . Her fires do in ward burn , they make no outward show . And her de-lights a - mid the dark shades , which none dis - cover , grow . The flowers growth is unseen , is unseen , yet eve - ry day it grows , it grows . So where her fan - cy is set it thrives , ij . but how none knows . 

BASSUS . VI  

Were eve - ry thought an eye , and all those eyes could see , Her sub - till wiles their sight would be - guile , and mock their ielou - sie . De - sire lives in her heart , in her heart , Di - a - na in her eyes , in her eyes . 'T were vain to wish women true , 't is well if they prove wise . Such a Love deserves more grace , then a truer hart that hath no con - ceit , To make use both of time and place , and place , When a wit hath need of all his sleight . Her fires do in - ward burn , they make no outward show , And her de - lights a - mid the dark shades , which none dis - cover , grow . The flowers growth is unseen , is un - seen , yet every day it grows , it grows . So where her fan - cy is set it thrives , but how none knows . 

TENOR . VI  

Were eve - ry thought an eye , and all those eyes could see , Her subtle wiles their sight would be-guile , and mock their ielou - sie . De - sire lives in her heart , her heart , Diamond - nam in her eyes , in her eyes . 'T were vain to wish women true , 't is well if they prove wise . Such a Love de - serves more grace , then a truer heart , that hath no conceit , To make use both of time and place , When a wit hath need of all his sleight . Her fires do in - ward burn , they make no outward show , And her de - lights a - mid the dark shades , which none dis-cover , grow . The flowers growth is un - seen , un - seen , yet every day it grows , it grows . So where her fan-cy is set , it thrives , but how none knows . 

CANTUS . VII . 

Stay time a while thy fly - king , Stay and pit - tie me dy - king . Come , come close mine eyes , bet - ter to die blessed , then to live , to live thus di - stres - sed . For fates and friends have left me , And of come - fort be - reft me . 

To whom shall I complain me , 
When thus friends do disdain me ? 
't is time that must befriend me , 
Drowned in sorrow to end me . 
Come , come close mine eyes , better to die blessed , 
then to live thus distressed . 
Tears but augment this fuel , 
I feed by night , ( o cruel ) 
Light griefs can speak their pleasure , 
Mine are dumb passing measure . 
Quick , quick , close mine eyes , better to die blessed , 
then here to live distressed . 
ALTUS . VII . 

Stay time a while thy fly - king : Stay , and pit - tie me dy - king . Come , come , close , close mine eyes , better to die blessed , then to live , to live thus distressed . For Fates and friends have left me , And of come - fort be-reft me . 

BASSUS . VII . 

Stay time a while thy fly - ing : Stay , and pit - tie me dy - king . Come , come , close , close mine eyes , better to die blessed , then to live , to live thus distressed . For Fates and friends have left me , And of comfort be-reft me . 

TENOR . VII . 

Stay time a while thy fly-ing : Stay , stay , and pit - tie , pit - tie me dy - king . Come , For Fates and friends have left me , And , and of com-fort , come - fort be-reft me . Come , close mine eyes , better to die blessed , then to live , to live thus distressed . 

CANTUS . VIII . 

Tell me true Love where shall I seek thy being , In thoughts or words , in vows or promise making , In rea - sons , looks , or pas - zions , ij . never seeing , In men on earth , or woe - men's minds partaking . thou canst not die , and therefore li - ving , therefore living tell me where is thy seat , is thy seat , thy seat , Why why , doth this age expel thee ? 

2 When thoughts are still unseen and words disguised ; vows are not sacred held , nor promise debt : 
By passion reasons glory is surprised , in neither sex is true love firmly set . 
Thoughts feigned , words false , vows and promise broken 
Made true Love fly from earth , this is the token . 
3 Mount then my thoughts , here is for thee no dwelling , since truth and falsehood live like twins together : 
Believe not sense , eyes , ears , touch , taste , or smelling , both Art and nature 's forced : put trustin neither . 
One only she doth true Love captive binds 
In fairest breast , but in a fairer mind . 
OH fairest mind , enriched with Love's residing . retain the best ; in hearts let some seed fall , 
In stead of weeds Love's fruits may have abiding ▪ at Harvest you shall reap increase of all . 
OH happy Love , more happy man that finds thee , 
Most happy Saint , that keeps , restores , unbindes thee . 
ALTUS . Repetition . VIII . 

Tell me . thou canst . thou , thou canst not die , and there - fore , therefore living tell me , tell me , where is thy seat , ij . why doth this age expel thee ? 

BASSUS . VIII . 

Tell me true Love.  thou , thou canst not die , and therefore living tell me , tell me , where is thy seat , thy seat , where is thy seat , why doth this age expel thee ? 

TENOR . Repetition . VIII . 

Tell me . thou canst . thou , thou canst not die , and there - fore living , there - fore livre - ving tell me , tell me , where is thy seat , thy seat , why doth this age , ij . expel , expel thee ? 

ALTUS . IX . 

Go nightly cares , Go nightly cares , the enemy to rest , Forbear , forbear a while to vex my grieved spirit , So long , so long your weight , so long , ij . your weight . hath line upon my breast , that lo I live , that lo I live , ij . of life bereaved quite , OH give me time to draw my weary breath , Or let me die , as I de - sire the death . ☞ 

Welcome sweet death , ij . ij . ☜ sweet death welcome , O life , no life , A hell , then thus , and thus I bid the world fare - well . 

CANTUS . IX . 

Go nightly cares 

BASSUS . IX . 

Go nightly cares . 

False world farewell the enemy to rest , now do thy worst , I do not weigh thy spite : 
Free from thy cares I live for ever blessed , 
Enjoying peace and heavenly true delight . 
Delight , whom woes nor sorrows shall amate , nor fears or tears disturb her happy state . 
And thus I leave thy hopes , thy joys untrue , and thus , and thus vain world again adieu . 
CANTUS . To my loving Countryman Mr. john Forster the younger , Merchant of Dublin in Ireland . X 

From silent night , true re - gister of moans , From saddest Soul consumed with deepest sins , From hart quite rend with sighs , with sighs and heavy groans , My way - ling Muse her woe , her woe , her woeful work begins . And to the world brings tunes of sad despair , And to the world brings tunes of sad despair , Sounding naught else but ☞ 

sorrow , sorrow , naught else , ij . but sorrow , naught else but sore - row , ☜ grief and care . and 

CANTUS . X.  

From silent . 

BASSUS . X.  

From silent . 

2 Sorrow to see my sorrow's cause augmented , and yet less sorrowful were my sorrows more : 
Grief that my grief with grief is not prevented , for grief it is must ease my grieved sore . 
Thus grief and sorrow cares but how to grieve , 
For grief and sorrow must my cares relieve . 
3 If any eye therefore can spare a tear to fill the wellspring that must wet my cheeks , 
OH let that eye to this sad feast draw near , refuse me not my humble soul beseekes : 
For all the tears mine eyes have ever wept 
Were now too little had they all been kept . 
ALTUS . XI . 

Lasso vita mia , mi fa morire , Lasso vita mia mi fa , mi fa morire , Crudel , crudel amor mio cor con - sum , Da mille , mille , mille ferite , ij . mille , mille feri - te , Che mi fa ij . ij . morir , morir , Ahi me , Ahi me , Deh , che non mi fa morire , morire , Deh , che non mi fa morire , mi fa morire , Crudel , ij . a - mor , crudel , cru - deal , ij . amor , mi fa sofrir mille mar - ☞ 

tyre . mille , mille , mille martyr . mi fa sofrir mille martyr . mille , mille , mille , ij . mille , mille , martyr . ☜ mi fa so - frir mille , ij . mar - tire , marti - re . 

CANTUS . XI . 

Lasso . 

BASSUS . XI . 

Lasso . 

CANTUS . XII . 

IN this trembling , trembling shadow , cast from those boughs which thy wings shake , far from human trou - bless , hu - mane troubles , trou - bless placed : Songs to the Lord , to the Lord would I make , Dark - nesse , ij . from my mind then take , For thy rites , thy rites none may begin , Till they feel thy light , ij - with - in . 

As I sing , sweet flowers I 'll strew , from the fruitful valleys brought : 
Praising him by whom they grow , him that heaven and earth hath wrought , him that all things framed of naught , 
Him that all for man did make , 
But made man for his own sake . 
Music all thy sweetness lend , while of his high power I speak , 
On whom all powers else depend , but my breast is now too weak , trumpets shrill the air should break , 
All in vain my sounds I raise , 
Boundless power asks boundless praise , 
ALTUS . XII . 

IN this trembling , trembling sha' - dough , In this trembling , trembling shadow , cast from those boughs which thy winds , thy winds shake , Far from human troubles , far from hu - mane trou - bless placed , Songs to the , to the Lord would I make , Songs to the Lord would I make , Darkness from my mind , my mind then take : For thy rites none none may begin , thy rites , thy rites none may , none may begin , Till they feel , they feel thy light within . Songs , etc.  

BASSUS . XII . 

IN this trembling , trembling shadow , cast from those boughs which thy winds shake , thy winds shake , Far from human trou - bless , human trouble's placed , Songs to the Lord , to the Lord ( songs ) would I make , Darkness from my mind , my mind then take : For thy rites none , none may begin , thy rites none may begin , Till they feel , they feel , thy light with - in . Songs , etc.  

TENOR . XII . 

IN this trembling , trembling sha' - dough , In this trembling , trem-bling sha' - dow , cast from those boughs which thy winds shake , cast , cast from those boughs which thy winds shake , thy winds shake , far from hu - mane trou - bless , human troubles placed , Songs to the Lord , to the Lord would I make , to the Lord would I make , Darke - nesse from my mind , my mind then take : For thy rites , thy rites , none may begin , thy rites , thy rites none , none may begin , Till they feel thy light , thy light with - in . Songs , etc.  

CANTUS . XIII . 

IF that a sinners sighs be Angels food , Or that re - pentant tears be Angels wine , Ac - cept OH Lord in this most pensive mood , These hearty sighs and doleful plaints of mine , That went with Peter forth most sinful - lie : But not as Peter did , weep , weep weep , weep bit - ter - lie ▪ 

ALTUS . XIII . 

IF that a sin-ners sighs be Angels food , a sinner's sighs be Angels food , sighs be Angels food , Or that re - pentant tears , repentant tears be An - gels wine , be Angels wine , Accept OH Lord , OH Lord in this most pensive , pensive mood , These here - tie sighs , and doleful plaints of mine , That went with Peter forth , ij . most sinful - sinful - lie : But not as Peter did , not as Peter did , Peter did , weep , did , weep , weep , weep , weep bit - ter - lie . That went , etc.  

BASSUS . XIII . 

IF that a sin - ners sighs be Angel , food , sighs be Angels food , Or that repentant tears be Angels wine , Accept OH Lord , OH Lord , Accept OH Lord , in this most pensive mood , These hearty sighs and doleful plaints of mine , That went with Peter , with Peter forth most sinfully : But not as Peter , Pe - ter did , weep , did weep , did weep , weep , bit - ter - lie . That went , etc.  

TENOR . XIII . 

IF that a sinners sighs , a sinner's sighs be Angels food , sighs be Angels food , Or that repentant tears , re - pentant tears be Angels , Angel's wine , Accept OH Lord , accept OH Lord in this most pensive mood , this most , most pensive mood , These hearty sighs , and doleful , doleful plaints of mine . That went with Pe - ter forth , with Pe - ter forth most sinfully , sinfully : But not as Pe - ter , not as Peter did , Peter did , weep , Peter did , weep , weep bitterly , weep bitter - lie . That went , etc.  

CANTUS . The first Part. XIIII . 

Thou mighty God , that rightest every wrong , Listen to patience , Listen to patience , Listen to patience , patience in a dying , a dying , ij . song . When job had lost his Children , Lands , and goods , Patience , patience as - swa - ged his excessive pain , And when his sorrows , his sore - rows , sor - rows came as fast as floods , as floods , hope kept his hart , his heart , his heart , till come - fort came again , till comfort came a - gain , came a - gain . 

ALTUS . XIIII . 

Thou mighty , mighty God , that rightest every wrong , Listen to patience , listen to patience , to patience in a dying , dying song . When job had lost , had lost his Children , Lands , and goods , Patience as - swaged , assuaged , patience asswa - ged his excessive pain , excessive pain : And when his sorrowcs , his sore - rows came , and when his sorrows , his sorrows came as fast , as fast as floods , Hope kept his hart , till comfort came again , till comfort came again , comfort came again , again . And when , etc.  

BASSUS . XIIII . 

Thou mighty God that rightest every wrong , every wrong , Listen to patience , to patience , livre - sten to patience in a dying , dying Song . When job had lost his Children , Lands , and goods , Patience , pati - ence asswa - ged , patience assuaged his excess - sieve pain : And when his sorrows came , sorrows came as fast as floods , Hope kept his heart , ij . till comfort came again , And when , etc.  

TENOR . XIIII . 

Thou mighty God that rightest every wrong , eve - ry wrong , Li - sten to patience , to patience , Listen to patience , ij . Listen , listen to pa - tience , patience , in a dying , dying Song . When job had lost his Children , his Children , Lands , Lands and goods , Pate - tience assuaged , ij . assuaged his excessive pain , pain , excessive pain , And when his sorrows came , and when his sorrows , his sorrows came as fast , as fast as floods , Hope kept his hart , his hart , till comfort came again , till comfort , comfort came again . And when his sorrows came as fast as floods , 

CANTUS . The second Part. xv.  

When David's life by Saul was often sought , Da - vids life by Saul , by Saul was of - ten sought , And worlds of woes , worlds of woes , of woes did compass , compass him a - bout , about , On dire revenge he never , never had a thought , a thought , But in his griefs , but in his griefs , his griefs , his griefs , Hope still did help him out , Hope still did help him , help him out . 

ALTUS . xv.  

When David's life , Da - vids life by Saul , by Saul was often sought , David's life by Saul was often sought , And worlds of woes did compass him , ij . compass him about , On dire re - venge , he never , never had a thought , a thought , But in his griefs , his griefs , his griefs , Hope still did help , did help him out , but in his griefs , his griefs , Hope still did help him out . On dire , etc.  

BASSUS . xv.  

When David's life , Da - vids life by Saul was often sought , And worlds of woes , worlds of woes did compass him about , On dire revenge he never had a thought , But in his griefs , ij . ij . his griefs , Hope still did help , help him out . On dire , etc.  

TENOR . xv.  

When David's life by Saul , David's life by Saul was often sought , was often sought , David's life by Saul was often sought , often sought , And worlds of woes , of woes , did compass him about , did compass him about , On dire revenge , ij . he never had a thought , had a thought , he never had a thought , But in his griefs , in his griefs , but in his griefs , his griefs , but in his griefs , Hope still did help him out , Hope still did help , did help , help him out . On dire , etc.  

CANTUS . The third Part. XVI . 

When the poor Cripple by the Pool did lie , Full many , many years in there - se - ry and pain , no sooner he on Christ had set his eye , But he was well , he was well , was well and comfort , comfort came a - gain , a - gain . no David , job , nor Cripple in more grief , in more grief , Christ give me patience , patience , and my hope 's relief . 

ALTUS . XVI . 

When the poor , poor Cripple by the Pool did lie , Full many years , many , many years in misery and pain , no sooner he on Christ , on Christ had set his eye , But he was well , he was well , but he was well and comfort came again , he was well , and comfort came again . no David , David , job , nor Cripple , ij . in more grief , in more grief , Christ give me patience , patience , and my hopes relief , my hopes re - lief . 

BASSUS . XVI . 

When the poor Cripple by the Fool did lie , full many years in misery and pain , and pain , no sooner he on Christ , on Christ had set his eye , But he was well , he was well , and comfort came again , and comfort came again . no Dam - vid , job nor Cripple in more grief , Christ give me , give me pa - tience , Christ give me patience , and my hopes relief , 

TENOR . XVI . 

When the poor , poor Cripple by the Pool did lie , full many , many years , ij . in mice - ry and pain , ij . no sooner he on Christ had set his eye , ij . had set his eye , his eye , but he was well , he was well , and comfort , comfort came a - gain , comfort came a - gain . no Dam - vid , no job , nor Cripple , nor Cripple , Cripple in more grief , in more grief , Christ give me patience , give me patience , pa - tience , and my hopes re - lief . 

CANTUS . XVII . 

Where Sin sore woun - ding , daily doth oppress me , There Grace a - bounding , Grace a - bounding freely , freely doth re - dress me : So that resounding still I shall confess thee , Father , Fa - there of mercy , Father of mercy , mercy Father of mer - cy . 

Though Sin offending daily doth torment me , 
Yet Grace amending , since I do repent me , 
At my lives ending will I hope present me clear to thy mercy . 
The wound Sin gave me was of Death assured , 
Did not Grace save me , whereby it is cured : 
So thou wilt have me to thy love enured , free without merit . 
Sin's stripe is healed , and his sting abated , 
Death's mouth is sealed , and the Grave amated , 
Thy Love revealed , and thy Grace related gives me this spirit . 
ALTUS . XVII . 

Where sin sore woun - ding , sore wounding , sin sore woun - ding daily doth oppress me , There Grace abounding , abounding , Grace aboun-ding , Grace abounding , abounding , freely , freely doth re - dress , redress me : So that resounding still I shall confess thee , Father of mercy , mercy , Father of mer - cy , Father of mercy , of mercy , mere - cy : So that , etc.  

BASSUS . XVII . 

Where Sin sore wounding , wounding , There Grace abounding , abounding , free-ly , freely doth redress me , freely , free - lie doth redress me : Still I shall confess thee , Father of mercy , mercy , Father of mercy , mere - cy . Still I , etc.  

TENOR . XVII . 

Where Sin , where Sin sore woun - ding , sore woun - ding daily doth oppress me , there Grace abounding , Grace a - bounding , freely , freely doth re - dress me , freely , freely doth redress , doth re - dress me : So that resounding still I shall confess thee , Fa - there of mercy , mere - cy , Father of mer - cy , Father of mercy , mercy . So that , etc.  

CANTUS . XVIII . 

MY heart and tongue were twins , at once con - ceived , th' eldest was my heart , born dumb by desti - nigh , The last my tongue , of all sweet thoughts be - rea - ved : Yet Conclusion . strung and tuned to play hearts har - mother - nigh . then this be sure , Conclusion . since it is true per - fection , That neigh - there men nor Gods , nor Gods can force of - fection . 

Both knit in one , and yet a sunder placed : what heart would speak the tongue doth still discover . 
What tongue doth speak is of the heart embraced , and both are one to make a new found Lover . 
New found , and only found in Gods and Kings , whose words are deeds , but words , nor deeds regarded . 
Chaste thoughts do mount and fly with swiftest wings , my love with pain , my pain with loss rewarded . 
ALTUS . XVIII . 

MY heart and tongue were twins , at once conceived , th' eldest was my heart , born dumb by desti - nigh , The last my tongue , of all sweet thoughts bereaude : Yet strung , strung and tuned to play , strung and tuned Conclusion . to play hearts harmony . then this be sure , be sure , since it is true perfection , That neither men nor Gods , men nor Gods , that neither men nor Gods , nor Gods can force affection . 

BASSUS . XVIII . 

MY heart and tongue were twins at once conceived , th' eldest was my heart , born dumb by de - stinie , The last my tongue of all sweet , sweet joys bereaude , Yet strung and tuned , and tuned to play , to play heart's Conclusion . har - money . then this be sure since it is , it is true perfection , that neigh - there men , neither men nor Gods , nor men nor Gods , can force , can force affection . 

TENOR . XVIII . 

My heart and tongue were twins at once con - ceived , th' eldest was my heart , my heart born dumb by destiny , The last my tongue , of all sweet thoughts , sweet thoughts be-rea - ved , Yet strung and tuned to play , Conclusion . to play hearts harmony . then this be sure , this be sure , since it is true , it is true perfection , That neither men , ij . neither men nor Gods , nor Gods can force affection . 

TENOR . XIX . 

UP merry mates , to Neptune's praise , Your voices high advance : The watery Nymphs shall dance , and E - olus shall whistle to your lays . Stereman , how stands the wind ? What course ? no worse , and blow so fair , then sink , sink , sink , sink despair , Come solace to the mind , ere night we shall , we shall the ha' - ven find . OH happy , hap - pie days , who may con - ta'en , but swell with proud does - deign , when seas are smooth , sails , sails full , and all things , all things please ? Conclusion . The golden means that con - stant spi - rit bears , in such extremes that nor pre - sums not fears . Conclusion . 

ALTUS . Dialogue . XIX . 

OH Happy , happy days , who can , who can contain , but swell with proud disdain , when seas , when seas are smooth , sails full , and all things please ? Conclusion . The golden means that con - stant spi - rit bears , In such extremes , that not presumes nor fears . 

BASSUS . Dialogue . XIX . 

Full North , North-east , Full South South-west . OH happy days , happy days , who can contain , but swell with proud disdain , when seas are smooth , seas are smooth , sails full , and all things please ? Conclusion . The golden mean that constant spirit bears , In such extremes that nor presumes , nor fears . 

CANTUS . XIX . 

OH Happy days , who may , who may contain , but swell with proud disdain , when seas are Conclusion . smooth , sails full , and all things please ? The golden mean that constant spirit bears , In such extremes , that nor presumes nor fears . 

Stay merry mates , proud Neptune lours , 
Your voices all deplore you , 
The Nymphs stand weeping o'er you : 
And Aeolus and Iris bandy showers . 
Mr. Boats man hale in the Boate. 
S. Hark , hark the ratlings , 
M. 't is hail . 
S. Make fast the tackle . 
M. Strike sail . 
Make quick dispatches , 
Shut close the hatches . 
Hold stern , cast Ancour out , 
This night we shall at random float . 
OH dismal hours , 
Who can forbear , 
But sink with sad despair . 
When seas are rough , sails rend , and each thing lours . 
CANTUS primus . xx.  

Chorus . Hymen , OH Hymen , mine of treasures more di - vine , what deity is like to thee , that freest from mortality . 

CANTUS secundus . xx.  

Well - come , well - come black night Hymen's fair day , help , help , help Hymen loves due debt to pay , loves due debt is chaste de - light . which if the turtles , the turtles , the Turtles want to night , Hy-men forfeits his Devil - e - tie , and night in love , in love her dignity , Help , help black night Hymen's fair day , Help Hymen , ij . Love's due debt to pay Chorus . Hymen , OH Hymen mine of treasures more divine , what deity is like to thee that freest from mor - ta - li - tie . Chorus . 

QVINTUS . xx.  

Chorus . Hymen , OH Hymen , mine of trea - sores more divine , what deity is like to thee , to thee , that freest from mor - ta-li - tie ? 

BASSUS . xx.  

Chorus . Hymen , OH Hymen , mine of treasures more di - vine , what di - e - tie is like , is like to thee , that freest from mortali - tie ? 

Stay ( happy pair ) stay but a while , 
Hymen comes not , love to beguile , 
These sports are alluring baits , 
And sauce are to Love's sweetest Cates : 
Longing hope doth no hurt but this , 
It heightens Loves attained bliss . 
then stay ( most happy ) stay a while , 
Hymen comes not , Love to beguile . 
TENOR . xx.  

Chorus . Hymen , OH Hymen , mine of treasures more de - vine , what deity , what deity is like to thee , that free - est from mor - ta-li - tie ? 

CNTUS primus . XXI . 

Chorus . Cease , etc.  Hymen OH Hymen , bless this night , that loves dark work , loves dark work may come to light 

CANTUS secundus . XXI . 

Cease , cease , cease these false sports , Hast , hast , hast away , love 's made a truant by your stay , Good , night , good night yet virgin , virgin Bride ; but look ere day , ij . ere day be spied , You change that fruitless name , least you your sex defame , Fear not Hymen's peaceful war , you 'll conquer , ij . ij . though you subdued are , good night , And ere the day be old , rise to the sun , ij . ij . to the Sun , ij . a Marigold . Chorus . Hymen , OH Hymen , bless this night , this night , bless this sight , that loves dark works may come , may come to light . Chorus . 

QVINTUS . XXI . 

Chorus . Cease these false . Hymen , OH Hymen , bless this night , that loves dark works , ij . dark works , that loves dark works may come to light . 

BASSUS . XXI . 

Cease these false sports Chorus . Hymen , OH Hymen , bless this night , that Love's dark works , ij . Love's dark , works dark works may come to light . 

TENOR . XXI . 

Chorus . Cease these false sports . Hymen , OH Hymen , bless this night , this night , that loves dark works , loves dark works , that loves dark works may come to light . 

XXII . 

Galliard to Lachrima . 

FINIS . 

