THE PROPHETESS : OR , THE HISTORY OF DIOCLESIAN . 

Written by Francis Beaumond and John Fletcher . 

WITH ALTERATIONS and ADDITIONS , After the Manner of an OPERA . 

Represented at the Queen's Theatre , By Their MAJESTY'S Servants . 

LONDON , Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judge's Head in Chancery-lane near Fleetstreet . 1690.  

The persons in the PLAY . 

Charinus , Emperor of Rome . 
Diocles , after Dioclesian , First a Private Soldier , then elected Empero 
Maximinian , Nephew to Diocles , and Emperor by hi● Donation . 
Cosroe , King of Persia . 
Aper , Murderer of Numerianus , the late Emperor . 
Niger , An Honest Man , and Great Commander . 
Camurius , A Captain , and Creature of Aper's . 
Senators . 
Persian Lords . 
Persian Ambassadors . 
Geta , Servant to Diocles.  
Guard.  
Soldiers . 
Suitors . 
Lictors . 
Flamen . 
Countrymen . 
The WOMEN . 

Aurelia , Sister to Charinus . 
Cassana , Sister to Cosroe . 
Delphia , A Prophetess . 
Drusilla , Niece to Delphia . 
The MASQUE . 

Cupid , Sylvanus , Bacchus , Flora , Pomona , 
Gods of the Rivers , Fauns , Nymphs , Heroes , Heroines , Shepherds , Shepherdess's , 
the Graces and Pleasures , with all the Followers of the Gods and Goddesses . 
THE PROPHETESS . 

ACT I  

SCENE I  

Scene A Palace . Enter Delphia and Drusilla . Drus .  't is true , that Diocles is courteous , 
And of a pleasant nature , sweet , and temperate ; 
His Cousin Maximinian , proud , and bloody . 


Delp .  Yes , and mistrustful too , my Girl , take heed : 
Although he seem to love thee , and affect 
Like the more Courtier , curious compliment ; 
Yet have a care . 


Drus .  You know all my Affections , 
And all my Heart desire's , are set on Diocles. 
But Aunt , how coldly he requites this courtesy ! 
How dull , and heavily he looks upon me ! 
Although I woo him sometimes beyond modesty , 
Beyond a Virgin's care ; how still he sleights me , 
And puts me still off with your Prophecy , 
And the performance of your late Prediction , 
That when he 's Emperor , then he 'll Mary me ; 
Alas , what hope of that ? 


Delp .  Peace , and be patient ; 
For though he has now no Badge of Honour on him , 
no Eye of Favour shining : 
And though my sure Prediction of his rising 
( Which can no more fail , than the Day , or Night does ; 
Nay , let him be asleep , will overtake him , ) 
Has found some rubs , and stops ; yet hear me Niece , 
And hear me with a faith , it shall come to him . 
I 'll tell thee the occasion . 


Drus .  Do good Aunt , 
For yet I am ignorant . 


Delp .  Chiding him one Day , 
For being too near , and sparing for a Soldier , 
Too gripping , and too greedy : he made answer , 
When I am Caesar , than I will be liberal . 
ay , presently inspired with holy Fire , 
And my Prophetic Spirit burning in me . 
Gave answer from the Gods ; and this it was : 
Imperator eris Romae , cum Aprum grandem interfeceris . 
thou shalt be Emperor , OH Diocles , 
When thou hast killed a mighty Boar. From that time 
( As giving credit to my words ) he has employed 
Much of his life in Hunting : many Boars , 
Hideous , and fierce , with his own Hands he has killed ; 
But yet not lighted on the fatal one , 
Should raise him to the Empire . Be not sad Niece , 
' E'er long he shall . Come , let us entertain him ; 
For by this time , I guests , he comes from Hunting : 
And by my Art I find this very instant , 
Some great design 's on foot . 


Drus .  Heaven prospero it . But see 
The Emperor , and his Sister coming hither . 


Delp .  And Niger busy in discourse with ' 'em . 
Now Fate is working for us . Let 's away . Exeunt . 


Enter Charinus , Aurelia , Niger . Cham   You buzz into my Head strange Likelihoods , 
And fill me full of doubts ; but what proofs Niger , 
What certainties , that my most Noble Brother 
Came to his end by murder ? tell me that ; 
Assure me by some Circumstance . 


Nig.   I will , Sir. 
And as I tell you truth , so the Gods prospero me : 
I have often named this Aper . 


Char.   True , you have ; 
And in mysterious Senses I have heard you 
Often break out abruptly . 


Nig.   Most true , Sir. 
Fear of your unbelief , and the Time's giddiness , 
Made me I durst not then go farther . If now you please , 
Out of your wont Goodness , to give credit , 
I shall unfold the Wonder . 


Aur.   Do it boldly : 
You shall have both our hearty Loves , and Hear . 


Nig.   This Aper then , this too much honoured Villain , 
( For he deserves no mention of a good man ) 
Great Sir , give Ear ; this most ungrateful , spiteful , 
Above the memory of Mankind , mischievous ; 
With his own bloody Hands . 


Char.   Take heed . 



Nig.   I am in , Sir ; 
And if I make not good my Story . 


Aur.   Forward ; 
I see a Truth would break out , be not fearful . 


Nig.   I say . this Aper , and his damned Ambition , 
Cut off your Brother's Hopes , his Life , and Fortunes : 
The honoured Numerianus fell by him ; 
fell basely , most untimely , and most treacherously : 
For in his Litter , as he bore him company , 
Most privately and cunningly he killed him . 
Yet still he fills the faithful Soldiers Ears 
With Stories of his Weakness , and loose Life ; 
That he dare not venture in the open Air , 
And show his Warlike Face among the Soldiers ; 
The tenderness and weakness of his Eyes , 
Being not able to endure the Sun yet . 
Slave that he is , he gives out his Infirmity 
( Because he would dispatch his Honour too ) 
To arise from Wantonness , and Love of Women . 
And thus he juggles still . 


Aur.   O most pernicious , 
Most bloody , and most base ! Alas , dear Brother , 
Art thou accused , and after Death , thy Memory 
Loaden with Shames and Lies ? Those pious Tears 
thou daily showerd'st upon my Father's Monument , 
( When in the Persian Expedition 
He fell , most strangely , by a stroke of Thunder ) 
Made thy Disgrace and Sins ? Those Eyes wept out 
The fair Examples of a Noble Nature , 
Those Holy Drops of Love , turned by Depravers 
( Malicious poisoned Tongues ) to thy Abuses ? 
We must not suffer this . 


Char.   Now I see the Cause 
Why this inhuman , bloody Villain Aper 
Will not come near me . 


Nig.   no , he dare not , Sir ; 
He has an Inmate here , that 's called a Conscience , 
Bids him keep off . 


Char.   My Brother honoured him ; 
First , made him Captain of his Guard , next , his Friend ; 
then to my Mother ( to assure him nearer ) 
He made him Husband . 


Nig.   And withal , Ambitious ; 
For than he trod so high , his false Feet itched , Sir , 
To step into the Throne . 


Aur.   If you believe , Brother , 
Aper a bloody Monster ( as 't is plain ) 
Let 's leave disputing , and do something Noble . 


Char.   Be ruled , good Sister ; I am as yet too weak 
To meet him in the Field ; he has under him 
The Flower of all the Empire , and the Strength , 
The Britain and the Germane Cohorts , pray be patient . 
Niger , how stands the Soldier to him ? 


Nig.   In Fear ( Sir ) more 
Than Love or Honour ; he has lost their Affections , 
By his most covetous and greedy Gripping . 
Are you desirous to do something on him , 
That all the World may know you loved your Brother ? 
And do it safely too , without an Army ? 


Char.   Most willingly . 



Nig.   then send out a Proscription , 
send suddenly ; and to that man that executes it , 
( I mean , that brings his Head ) a large Reward , 
no common Sum : then doubt not , you shall see , 
Even from his own Camp , from those men who follow him , 
follow , and flatter him , we shall find one ; 
Or , if he miss , a hundred who will venture it . 


Aur.   For his Reward , it shall be so , dear Brother ; 
So far I 'll honour him , who kills the Villain ; 
For so far runs my Love to my dear Brother , 
Let him be what he will , Mean , Old , or Crooked , 
He shall have Me ; nay , which is more , I 'll love him : 
I will not be denied . 


Cham   You shall not , Sister : 
But you shall find my Love shall go along with it . 
See a Proscription drawn , and for his Recompense 
My Sister , and Half-partner in the Empire : 
And I will keep my Word . 


Aur.   Now you do bravely . 



Nig.   And though it cost my Life , I 'll see it published . 



Cham   Away , and do it instantly . 



Nig.   I am gone , Sir. 
It shall be soon dispatched . 


Cham   Be prosperous . 



Aur.   And let the Villain fall . 



Nig.   Fear nothing , Madam . Exeunt . 



Scene a Countryhouse at the Side of a Wood , with the Prospect of a pleasant Country at a distance . Enter Diocles , Maximinian , and Geta with a Boar on his Back . Dio.   Lay down the Boar.  



Get.   Withal my heart , I am weary on 't ; 
I shall turn Jew , if I carry more such Burdens . 
Do you think , Master , to be Emperor , 
With kill Swine ? You may be a good Butcher , 
Or allied to an honourable Family of Tripe-wives : 
Can you be such an Ass , my Reverend Master , 
To think these Springs of Pork will shoot up Caesar's ? 


Max.   The Fool says true . 



Dio.   Come , leave your fooling , Sirrah , 
And think of what thou shalt be when I am Emperor . 


Get.   Would it would come with thinking , then , o my conscience , 
I should be at the least a Senator . 


Max.   A Sowter , 
For that 's a Place more fitted to thy Nature . 
If thou hast such an Expectation . 
Or say the Devil could perform this Wonder , 
Can such a Rascal as thou art hope for Honour ? 
Such a Log-carrying Clown ? 


Get.   Yes , and bear it too , 
And bear it swimmingly . I 'm not the first Ass , Sir , 
Has born Office , and performed it reverently . 


Dio.   thou being the Son of a Tyler , 
Canst thou hope to be a Senator ? 


Get.   thou being the Son of a Tanner , 
Canst thou hope to be an Emperor ? 


Dio.   thou sayest true , Geta , there 's a Stop indeed : 
But yet the Bold and Virtuous — 


Get.   You say right , Master , 
Right as my Leg ; for we , the Virtuous , 
Thou we be Kennel-rakers , Filth , and Scoundrels , 
We , the Discreet , and Bold — Yet , now I remember it , 
Tilers have better Title to be Senators , 
And aught to step before you thick-skinned Tanners ; 
For we are higher born than you , no base ones , 
None of your Groundlings , Master . 


Dio.   I like thee well ; 
thou hast as good a mind as I have , to this Honor.  


Get.   As good a mind ( Sir ) for a simple Plasterer ; 
And when I come to execute my Office , 
Than you shall see . 


Max.   What ? 



Get.   An Officer in Fury ; 
An Officer as he ought to be . Do you laugh at it ? 
Is a Senator in hope worth no more Reverence ? 
By these Hands , I 'll clap you by the Heels 
The first Hour I come into my Office.  


Max.   OH , my Conscience , the Fellow believes it . 



Dio.   ay , do , do , Geta : 
For if I once be Emperor — 


Get.   then will I 
( For Wise men must be had to prop the State ) 
Not bate a single Ace of a sound Senator . 


Dio.   But what shall we do the whilst ? 



Get.   Kill Swine , and souse 'em , 
And eat 'em when you have Bread ? 


Max.   Why didst thou run away 
When the Boar made toward thee ? Art thou not Valiant ? 


Get.   no indeed am I not , 
And think it no Dishonour to confess it . 
I took a Tree , 't is true , gave way to the Monster : 
Hark what Discretion says , Let Fury pass ; 
From the Tooth of a mad Beast , and the Tongue of a Slanderer , 
Preserve thine Honour . 


Dio.   He talks already like a Senator . 
Go , take it up , and carry it in ; 't is a huge one ; 
We never killed a larger Swine ; so fierce too , 
I never met with yet . 


Max.   Take heed , it stirs again . Geta runs up a Tree . 
How nimbly the Rogue runs up ? He climbs like a Squirrel . 


Dio.   Come down , ye Dunce ? is it not dead ? 



Get.   I know not . 



Dio.   His throat 's cut , and his Bowels out . 



Get.   that 's all one , 
I am sure his Teeth are in . 


Dio.   Come , take him up , I say , and see him dressed ; 
he 's fat , and will be lusty Meat ; away with him , 
And get some of him ready for our Dinner . 


Get.   Shall he be roasted whole ? 
I 'll run in the Wheel myself . 


Max.   Sirrah , leave prating , 
And get some Piece of him ready presently ; 
We are weary both , and hungry . 


Get.   Well , I 'll about it . 
What an Inundation of Brews shall I swim in ? Exit . Geta.  


Dio.   thou art still dull and melancholy , Cousin , 
Distrustful of my Hopes . 


Max.   Why , can you blame me ? 
I can't believe a Juggler . 


Dio.   thou knowest she is a Prophetess . 



Max.   A small one , 
And as small Profit to be hoped for by her . 


Dio.   thou art the strangest man ! How does thy Hurt ? 
The Boar came very near you . 


Max.   A Scratch , a Scratch . 



Dio.   It aches , and trouble's thee ; that makes thee angry . 



Max.   Not at the Pain , but at the Practice , Uncle ; 
The butcherly , base Custom of our Lives now . 
Had a brave Enemy's Sword drawn so much from me , 
Or Danger met me in the Head of the Army , 
To have blushed thus i my Blood , had been my Honour : 
But to live base , like Swineherds , and believe too ; 
To be fooled out with Tales , and Old Wives Dreams , 
Dreams when they 're drunk , or splenatick . 


Dio.   Certain , you much mistake her . 



Max.   Mistake her ? hang her . To be made her Purvey'rs , 
To feed her old Chaps , to provide her daily , 
To bring her Feasts , while she sits grunting at us , 
And blowing out her Prophecies at both Ends.  


Dio.   she 's a holy Druid . 



Max.   Heaven knows , I don't believe it . 



Dio.   thou hast a perfect Malice . 



Max.   So I would have , 
Against these purblind Prophets ; for , look you , Sir , 
Old Women will lie monstrously , so will the Devil ; 
They would at least seem Holy , so would he . 
He gives 'em leave now and then to use their Cunnings , 
Which is , to kill a Cow , or blast a Harvest , 
Make young Pigs pipe themselves to Death , choke Poultry , 
And chafe a Dairy-maid into a Fever , 
With pumping for her Butter . 
But when he makes these Agents to raise Emperors , 
When he disposes Fortune as his Servant , 
And ties her to Old Wives Tails — 


Dio.   You argue learnedly : 
Did you not hear the Prophecy ? 


Max.   Yes , and laugh at it ; 
And so will any man can tell but Twenty , 
That is not blind , as you are , blind and ignorant . 
Do you think she knows your Fortune ? 


Dio.   I do think it . 



Max.   Very well , Sir : 
You than believe ( for methinks 't is most necessary ) 
She knows her own Fate . 


Dio.   I believe it certain . 



Max.   Dare you but be so wise to let me try it ? 
For I am doubtful . 


Dio.   How ? 



Max.   Come nearer to me , 
Because her cunning Devil shan't prevent me : 
Close , close , and hear . If she can turn this Destiny , 
I 'll be of your Faith too . 


Dio.   Do it ; I fear not : 
For if she knows not this , sure she knows nothing ; 
I am so confident . 


Max.   Faith , so am I , 
That I shall make her old Sides hum . 


Enter Delphia . Dio.   She comes : Go take your Stand.  



Max.   Now show your Holiness , or you howl for 't , Beldame . 



Del.   Now my Son Diocles , 
Are you not weary of your Game to day ? 
And are you well ? 


Dio.   Yes , Mother , well and lusty : 
Only you make me hunt for empty Shadows . 


Del.   You must have patience ; Rome was not built in one day . 
And he that hopes , must give his Hopes their Currents . 
You have killed a mighty Boar.  


Dio.   But I am no Emperor . 
Why do you fool me thus , and make me follow 
Your flattering Expectation Hour by Hour ? 
Rise early , and sleep late , to feed your Appetites ? 
Forget my Trade , my Arms ? forsake my Honour ? 
Oppose myself to Hazards of all sorts , 
Only to win the barbarous Name of Butcher . 


Del.   Son , you are wise . 



Dio.   But you are cunning , Mother ; 
And with that Cunning , and the Faith I give you , 
You lead me blindly , to no End , no Honour . 


Del.   Be provident , 
And tempt not the God's Dooms , stop not the Glory 
They are ready to fix on ye : you are a Fool then . 
Cheerful and grateful Takers , the God's love , 
And such as wait their Pleasures with full Hopes : 
The Doubtful and Distrustful , Heaven frowns at . 
What I have told by Inspiration , 
I tell you once again , must and shall find you . 


Dio.   But when ? or how ? 



Del.   Cum Aprum interfeceris . 



Dio.   I have killed many . 



Del.   Not the Boar they point at : 
Nor must I reveal further , till you clear it . 
The Lots of Glorious men are wrapped in Mysteries , 
And so delivered : Common and slight Creatures , 
That have their Ends as open as their Actions , 
Easie and open Fortunes follow . 


Max.   I shall try 
How deep your Inspiration lies hid in you , 
And whether your brave Spirit have a Buckler 
To keep this Boar-spear off ; I 'll make ye smoke else . 


Dio.   Knowing my Fortune so precisely , Mother , 
Methinks you should be studied in your own , 
In your own Destiny , methinks , most perfect . 
Can the Stars now , 
Or secret Inspirations you boast of , 
If a hard Fortune hung , and were now ready 
To pour itself upon your Life , deliver ye ? 
Can they now say , Take heed ? 


Del.   Ha! Pray come hither . 



Max.   I would know that ; I fear your Devil will cozen you , 
And stand as close as you can , I shall be with ye . 


Del.   I find a present Ill  



Dio.   How ? 



Del.   But I scorn it . 



Max.   Do you so ? Do you so ? 



Del.   Yes , and laugh at it , Diocles. 
Is it not strange , these wild and foolish men 
Should dare to oppose the Power of Destiny ? 
That Power the Gods shake at ? Look yonder , Son.  


Max.   Have you spied me ? then have at ye . 



Del.   Do , fling boldly ; 
Spare not , and hit me if thou canst . 


Dio.   Fling , Cousin . 



Max.   I cannot : my arm 's dead , I have no feeling . 
Or if I could fling , so strong is her armed Virtue , 
she 'd catch the flying Dart.  


Del.   Poor , doubtful People , 
I pity your weak Faiths . 


Dio.   O mercy , Mother ! 
And from this Hour I 'll serve you as a Deity . 


Del.   no more of that . 



Max.   O let my Prayers prevail too ! 
Here , like a Tree I dwell else ; free me Mother , 
And greater than great Fortune I 'll Adore ye . 


Del.   Be free again , and have more pure Thoughts in ye . 



Dio.   Now I believe your words most constantly ; 
And when I have that Power you promised me — 


Del.   Remember then your Vow ; my Niece , Drusilla . 
I mean to Mary her , and then you prospero . 


Dio.   I shall forget my Life else . 



Enter Niger , Geta , and Soldiers . Get.   And shall he have , as you say , that kills Aper ? 



Del.   Now mark , and understand . 



Nig.   The proscription 's up , i' th' Marketplace , 't is up , 
There you may read it . He shall have half the Empire . 


Get.   A pretty Farm i'faith . 



Nig.   And th' Emperor's Sister , the fair Aurelia for his Wife . 



Get.   You say well Friend : But hark ye , 
Who shall do this ? 


Nig.   You , if you dare ? 



Get.   I think so . 
Yet I could poison him in a Cup of Wine , 
He love's that mightily . But when I have done this , 
May I lie with the Gentlewoman ? 


Nig.   Lie with her ? ay , what else man ? 



Get.   Yes , indeed , 
I have known a married man that never lay with his Wife ; 
Those dancing Days were done . 


Nig.   These are old Soldiers , 
I 'll try their Appetites . Save you , brave Soldiers . 


Max.   You talked ( Sir , ) of Proscriptions . 



Nig.   't is true , there 's one set up from the Emperor , 
Against Volutius Aper ? 


Dio.   Aper ? 



Del.   Now ; now have you found the Boar ? 



Dio.   I have the meaning now , most blessed Mother — 



Nig.   He has scorned his Master ; 
And bloodily cut off by Treachery , 
His Noble Brother . 


Dio.   He is living , 
But weak , and sickly , Sir.  


Nig.   Did you see him ? 



Max.   No.  



Nig.   He is murdered ; 
So you shall find it mentioned from the Emperor . 
And honest faithful Soldiers , pray believe it , 
For by the Gods you 'll find it so ; he 's murdered , 
The manner how , read in the large Proscription . 


Del.   It is most true Son. Aper's a Villain , and a Murderer . 



Dio.   I thank you Mother , 
And dare believe . Hark you Sir , is the recompense 
As you related ? 


Nig.   As firm as Faith , Sir. 
Bring him alive , or dead . 


Max.   You have taken a fit time . 
The General being out of Town : for tho'we love him not , 
Yet had he known this first , you had paid for 't dearly . 


Dio.   't is Niger ; honest Niger : now I know him . 
A true sound man , the business may be done . 
Make no great stay , for your own safety , here . 


Nig.   I am gone ; I thank you . Exit Nig.  



Dio.   Pray , Maximinian , pray . 



Max.   I 'll Pray , and Work too . 



Dio.   I 'll to the Marketplace , and read the offer , 
Now I have found the Boar.  


Del.   find your own Faith : remember what you Vowed . 



Dio.   O , Mother . 



Del.   prosper . 



Get.   If my Master , and I do this , there must be two Emperors . 
What Honour to this Empire will it be , 
To have two such Emperors , as I , and He ? Exeunt . 


End of the First Act.  

ACT II  

SCENE I  

The Scene continues . Enter Delphia , and Drusilla . Dru.   Leave us , and not vouchsafe a parting kiss 
To her , that in his hopes of Greatness life's , 
And goes along with him in all his Dangers ? 


Del.   I grant 't was most unkind . 



Drus .  O you give it too mild a name ; 
'T was more than barbarous ! and you joined in it . 


Del.   ay , my Drusilla ? 



Drus .  Yes , you have blown his Pride to such a vastness , 
He thinks the Empire of the Earth too little . 
This makes him quite forget his humble being ; 
And can I hope that he , who only fed 
With the imagined Food of future Empire , 
Disdaining those who gave him Means , and Life , 
To nourish such Desires ; when he 's possessed 
Of his ambitious Ends ( which must fall on him , 
Or your Predictions false ) will ever 
Descend to look on me ? 


Del.   Were his intents , 
Perfidious as the Seas , or Winds , his Heart 
Composed of Falsehood ; yet the benefit , 
The greatness of the Good he has from you , 
( For what I have conferred , is thine Drusilla ) 
Must make him firm , and thankful . But if all 
Remembrance of the Debts he stands engaged for , 
find a quick Grave in his Ingratitude : 
My powerful Art , that guide's him to this height , 
Shall make him Curse the Hour he ' ere was raised , 
Or sink him to the Centre . 


Drus .  I had rather 
Your Art could force him to return that Ardour , 
To me , I bear to him ; or give me Power 
To moderate my Passions . Yet I know not , 
I should repent your Grant , though you had signed it , 
( So well I think him worthy of my Love ) 
But to believe that any check to him , 
In his vast Hopes , could yield content to me , 
Were Treason to my Love , that knows no pleasure , 
The Object which it dotes on , being miserable . 


Del.   Pretty simplicity , I love thee for 't , 
And will not sit an idle looker on , 
And see it wronged . Dry thy innocent Eyes , 
And cast off jealous Fears : ( yet Promises 
Are slender Comfort , ) and but fancy aught 
that 's possible in Nature , or in Art , 
That may advance thy Comfort , and be bold 
To tell thy Soul , 't is thine : therefore speak freely . 


Drus .  You give me a new Life . To conceal from you 
My Virgin Fondness , were to hide my Sickness 
From my Physician . O dear Aunt , I languish 
For want of Diocle's sight ; he is the Sun 
That keeps my Blood in a perpetual Spring ; 
But in his absence , cold benumbing Winter 
Seizes on all my Faculties . Would you bind me , 
( Who an your Slave already ) in more Fetters ? 
O bear me then ( but 't is impossible 
I fear to be effected ) where I may 
See how my Diocles breaks through his Dangers , 
And in what heaps his Honours fly upon him ; 
That I may meet him in the Height , and Pride 
Of all his Glories ; and there 
Challenge him as my own . 


Del.   Enjoy thy Wishes . 
This is an easy Boon , which at thy Years 
I could have given to any . 
It shall be done , as fits my Skill , and Glory . 
From Ceres , I will force her winged Dragons , 
And in the Air , hung over the Tribunal ; 
( The Music of the Spheres attending on us ) 
There , as his good Star thou shalt shine upon him , 
If he prove true ; and as his Angel , guard him : 
But if he dare be false , I in a moment 
Will put that Glorious Light out , with such horror , 
As if eternal Night had seized the Sun , 
And all things were returned to the first Chaos , 
Or raise some Monster to devour him quick . 


Dru.   I fear th' Event ; but I will do 
Whatever you command . 


Del.   Rest then assured , 
I am the Mistress of my Art , and fear not . Exeunt . 


Scene a Forest . Enter Aper , Camurius , and Guard , with a Close Litter , richly adorned with Figures of Gold , Trophies , and Plumes of White Feathers . Aper .  Your Care of your sick Emperor , Fellow-soldiers , 
In Colours to the Life , does show your Love , 
And zealous Duty : OH continue it . 
And though I know you long to see and hear him , 
Impute it not to Pride , or Melancholy , 
That keeps you from your Wishes ; such State-vices 
( Too too familiar with Great Princes ) are 
Strangers to all the Actions of the Life 
Of good Numerianus . Let your Patience 
Be the Physician to his wounded Eyes , 
( Wounded with pious Sorrow for his Father ) 
Which Time and your long Patience will recover , 
Provided it prove constant . 


1 Gua.   If he sergeant , 
I will hereafter trust a prodigal Heir , 
When he weeps at his Father's Funeral . 


2 Gua.   Or a young Widow , following a Bedrid Husband 
( After a three-years Sickness ) to the Fire . 


1 Gua.   Note his Humility , with what soft Murmurs 
He does inquire his Pleasures . 


2 Gua.   And how soon he is instructed . 



1 Gua.   See how low he bows . 



Aper .  All your Commands ( Dread Caesar ) I 'll impart 
To your most ready Soldier , to obey 'em ; 
So take your Rest in Peace . It is the Pleasure 
Of mighty Caesar , ( his Thanks still remembered 
For your long Patience , with a Donative 
Fitting his State to give , shall quickly follow ) 
That you continue a strict Guard upon 
His sacred Person , and admit no Stranger , 
Of any other Legion , to come near him ; 
For none but you he 'll trust . I receive 
Your Answer in your Silence . Now , Camurius , 
Speak without Flattery ; has not Aper acted 
This Passion to the Life ? 


Cam.   I would applaud him , 
Were he saluted Caesar : But I fear , 
These long-protracted Counsels will undo us : 
And 't is beyond my Reason , he being dead , 
You should conceal yourself , or hope it can 
continue undiscovered . 


Aper .  That I have killed him , 
Yet feed these ignorant Fools with Hopes he life's , 
Has a great end in 't : The Pannonian Cohorts 
( That are my own , and sure ) are not come up ; 
The Germane Legions waver , and Charinus 
( Brother to this dead Dog ) ( Hell's Plagues on Niger , ) 
Is jealous of the Murder , and I hear , 
Is marching up against me , 't is not safe , 
Till I have Power to justify the Act , 
To show myself the Author . Be careful , therefore , 
For a small time , ( till I have fully sounded 
How the Tribunes and Centurions stand affected ) 
That none come near the Litter . If I find them 
Firm to my Party , I 'll dare disclose myself ; 
And then , live Aper's Equal . 


Cam.   Does not the Body begin to putrify ? 



Aper .  That exacts my Haste . 
When but even now I feigned Obedience to it , 
As I had some great Business to impart , 
The Scent had almost choked me . Be careful therefore 
All keep at distance . 


Cam.   I am taught my Part , 
Haste you to perfect yours . Exit Aper . 


1 Gua.   I had rather meet 
An Enemy in the Field , than stand thus nodding , 
Like a Rug-gowned Watchman . 


Enter Diocles , Maximinian , and Geta.  Max.   A Watch at Noon ! This is a new Device . 



Cam.   Stand.  



Dio.   I am armed against all Danger . 



Max.   If I do not second you , 
A coward 's Name pursue me . 


Dio.   Now my Fate guide and direct me . 



Cam.   You are rude , and saucy , 
With your forbidden Feet to touch this Ground , 
Sacred to Caesar only , and to these 
That do attend his Person . Speak , what are you ? 


Dio.   What thou , nor any of thy Faction are , 
Nor ever were ; Soldiers , and honest Men.  


Cam.   So blunt ? 



Dio.   no Instruments of Craft , Engines of Murder , 
That serve the Emperor only with oiled Tongues , 
Sooth and applaud his Vices ; and when   wrought 
So far upon his Weakness , that he 's grown 
Odious to all the Subject , and himself , 
You rid him out of the way . 


Cam.   Treason . 



Dio.   't is Truth , and I will make it good . 



Cam.   Lay hands upon 'em , or kill 'em instantly . 



Get.   I 'll keep my Distance ; I do not like the Sport.  



Dio.   what 's he that is 
Owner of any Virtue worth a Roman , 
Or does retain the Memory of the Oath 
He made to Caesar , that dares lift his Sword 
Against that Man who ( careless of his Life ) 
Comes to discover such a horrid Treason , 
As when you hear 't , and understand how long 
  been abused , will make you mad with Fury . 
I am no Stranger , but , like you , a Soldier , 
Trained up one from my Youth ; and I see some 
With whom I have served ; and ( not to praise myself ) 
Must needs confess , they have seen Diocles , 
In the late Britain Wars , both dare and do 
Beyond a Common Man  


1 Gua.   Diocles ! 



2 Gua.   I know him ; the bravest Soldier of the Empire . 



Cam.   Stand ; if thou advance an Inch , thou art dead . 



Dio.   Die thou , Kills Cam.  
That durst oppose thyself against a Truth , 
That will break out , though Mountains cover it . 


Get.   I fear this is a Sucking Big , no Boar , 
He falls so easy . 


Dio.   Hear me , Soldier's ; 
And if I make it not apparent to you 
This is an Act of Justice , and no Murder , 
Cut me in pieces : I 'll disperse the Cloud 
That has so long obscured a bloody Act , 
Never equalled yet . You all know with what Favours 
The good Numerianus ever graced 
The Provost Aper . 


1 Gua.   We all know it well . 



Dio.   And that those Bounties 
Should have contained him ( if he ever had learned 
The Elements of Honesty and Truth ) 
In Loyal Duty : But Ambition never 
Looks backward on Desert , but with blind haste 
Boldly runs on . But I loose time . You are here 
Commanded by this Aper to attend 
The Emperor's Person : no , my Friends , you are cozened , 
The good Numerianus now is past 
The sense of Wrong or Injury . 


All Gua.   How ? dead ! 



Dio.   Let your own Eyes inform you . 



Opens the Litter , and shows the Body of the murdered Emperor . Get.   Is this an Emperor's Cabinet ? 
Fough ! I have known a Charnel-house smell sweeter . 
If Emperor's Flesh have this savour , what will mine do , 
When I am rotten ? 


1 Gua.   Most unheard of Villainy ! 



2 Gua.   And with all Cruelty to be revenged . 



1 Gua.   Who is the Murderer ? Name him , that we may 
Both punish it in him , and all his Family . 


Dio.   Who but Aper ? 
That barbarous , and most ungrateful Aper , 
His desperate Poniard printed on his Breast 
This deadly wound . 
Nay , weep not , let your Loves speak in your anger ; 
And to confirm you gave no suffrage to 
This damned Plot , lend me your helping Hands 
To punish the Parricide : And if you find 
That there is worth in Diocles to deserve it , 
Make him your Leader . 


All.   A Diocles ! A Diocles ! A Diocles.  



Dio.   we 'll force him from his Guards . Now my Stars , 
If you have any good for me in store 
Show it , when I have slain this fatal Boar. Exeunt . 


Delphia , and Drusilla , appear in the Air , in a Chariot drawn by Dragons . Del.   Fix here , and rest a while your Sail-stretched Wings , 
That have outstripped the Winds . The Eye of Heaven 
durst not behold our speed , but hid itself 
Behind the grossest Clouds ; and the pale Moon 
Plucked in her Silver Horns ; trembling for fear 
That my strong Spells should force her from her Sphere . 
Such is the power of Art  


Drus .  Good Aunt , where are we ? 



Del.   Look down Drusilla . Yonder lofty Towers , 
And spacious Streets , where every private House 
Appears a Palace to receive a King : 
The Site , the Wealth , and Beauty of the Place . 
Will soon inform thee 't is Imperial Rome : 
Rome , the great Mistress of the conquered World.  


Dru.   But without Diocles , it is to me , 
Like any Wilderness we have passed o'er . 
Shall I not see him ? 


Del.   Yes , and in full glory ; 
And glut thy eager Eyes with looking on 
His prosperous success . Contain thyself : 
For though all things beneath us are transparent , 
The sharpest sighted , were he Eagle-eyed , 
Cannot discover us . Nor will we hang 
Idle Spectators to behold his Triumph . 
Enter Diocles , Maximinian , Senators , Guard , with Aper Prisoner , Geta , and Officers . But when occasion shall present itself , 
Do something to add to it . See , he comes . 


Drus .  How Godlike he appears ! with such a grace 
( The Giants , that attempted to scale Heaven 
When they lay dead on the Phlegraean Plain ) 
Mars did appear to Jove . 


Del.   Forbear . 



Dio.   Look on this , 
And when with horror thou hast viewed thy deed , 
( Thy most accursed deed ) be thy own Judge , 
And tell me if thou canst persuade thyself , 
To Hope , or Pled for Mercy ? 


Ape .  no ; I confess , my life 's a burden to me . 



Dio.   thou art like thy name , a cruel Boar. 
I long have hunted for thee ; and since now 
thou art in the Toil , it is in vain to hope , 
thou ever shalt break out . 
Yet since my future Fate depends upon thee , 
Thus to fulfil great Delphia's Prophecy , 
Aper ( thou fatal Boar ) receive the honour kills Aper . 
To fall by Diocles' Hand . Shine clear my Stars , 
That met when I had entrance to the World , 
And give Applause to this great Work.  


Del.   Strike Music from the Spheres . 



Drus .  O now you honour me ! A Symphony of Music in the Air.  



Dio.   Ha! Music in the Air ! 



All.   This is miraculous ! 



Max.   This shows the Gods approve the Person , and the Act. 
But hark 


First SONG . 

Great Diocles the Boar has killed , 
Which did infest the Land ; 
What Heart is not with Rapture filled ? 
Who can his Joys command ? 
Down , down the bloody Villain falls , 
Hated , contemned of All ; 
And now the mighty Spirit calls , 
For Rites of Funeral . 
CHORUS . 

Sing Io's ! praise the Thundering Jove , 
Pallas and Venus share ; 
Since the All-charming Queen of Love , 
Inspires the God of War.  
Second SONG , by a Woman . 

Charon , the peaceful Shade invites , 
He hastes to Waft him o'er ; 
Give him all necessary Rites , 
To land him on the Shore . 
Sound all your Instruments of War , 
Fifes , Trumpets , Timbrels play ; 
Let all Mankind the Pleasure share , 
And bless this happy Day . 
CHORUS . 

Sound all your Instruments , etc.  


Max.   Now if the Senate 
( For in the Soldiers Eyes I read their Love ) 
Think Diocles worthy to supply the place , 
Of dead Numerianus ; as he stands 
His Heir in his revenge ; with one consent 
Salute him Emperor . 


1 Sen.   Long live Diocles , 
Augustus , Pater Patriae , and all Titles 
That are peculiar only to the Caesar's , 
We gladly throw on him . 


1 Gua.   We confirm it , 
And will defend his honour with our Swords , 
Against the World ; raise him to the Tribunal . 


1 Sen.   Fetch the Imperial Robes : And as a sign 
We give him absolute power of Life , and Death , 
Bind this Sword to his Side . 


2 Sen.   Omit no Ceremony , that may be for his honour . 



While they Invest him with the Imperial Robes , this Martial Song is sung : Trumpets and Ho-boys joining with them . LET the Soldiers rejoice , 
With a general Voice , 
And the Senate new Honours decree 'em ; 
Who at his Army's Head , 
Struck the fell Monster dead , 
And so boldly , and bravely did free ' 'em . 
CHORUS . 

Rejoice , Rejoice , etc.  
To Mars let 'em raise , 
And their Emperor's praise , 
A Trophy of the Armies own making ; 
To Maximinian too , 
Some honours are due , 
Who joined in the brave undertaking . 
CHORUS . 

Rejoice , Rejoice , etc.  
With Flowers let 'em strew , 
The way as they go , 
Their Statues with Garlands adorning , 
Who from Tyrannies Night 
Drove the Mists in their Sight , 
And gave 'em a glorious Morning . 
CHORUS . 

Rejoice , Rejoice , etc.  
then a Symphony of Flutes in the Air , and after this SONG . 

Since the Toils and the Hazards of war 's at an end , 
The Pleasures of Love should succeed 'em ; 
The Fair should present what the Senators send , 
And complete what they have decreed ' 'em . 
With Dances and Songs , with Tambours and Flutes , 
Let the Maids show their Joy as they meet him ; 
With Cymbals and Harps , with Viols and Lutes , 
Let the Husbands and True Lovers greet him . 
CHORUS . 

Let the Priests with Processions the Hero attend , 
And Statues erect to his Glory ; 
Let the Smoke from the Altars to Heaven ascend , 
All sing Great Diocles Story . 


Max.   Still the Gods 
Express that they are pleased with the Election . 


Get.   My Master is an Emperor , and I feel 
A Senators Itch upon me . Would I could hire 
These fine invisible Fiddlers to play to me 
At my Instalment . 


Dio.   I embrace your Loves , 
And hope the Honours which you heap on me 
Shall be with Strength supported . I desire no Titles , 
But as I shall deserve ' 'em . I will keep 
My Name , but with this difference , I will add 
To Diocles but two short Syllables , 
And be called Dioclesianus . 


Get.   This is fine . 
I 'll follow the Fashion , and when I am a Senator , 
I 'll be no more plain Geta , but be called 
Lord Getianus . 


Dru.   He never thinks of me , nor of your Favour . 



Enter Niger . Del.   If he dares prove false , 
These Glories shall be to him as a Dream , 
Or an Enchanted Banquet . 


Nig.   From Charinus , 
From Great Charinus , who with joy has heard 
Of your proceedings , and confirms your Honours . 
He , with his beauteous Sister , fair Aurelia , 
Are come in Person , like themselves attended , 
To gratulate your Fortune . 


Dio.   For thy News , 
Be thou in France Proconsul . Let us meet 
The Emperor with all Respect and Honour . 


Trumpets . Enter Charinus , Aurelia , Attendants . Dru.   O Aunt ! I see this Princess does eclipse 
The lustre of my Beauty , though I were 
Myself to be the Judge . 


Del.   Rely on me . 



Cham   't is Virtue , and not Birth , that makes us Noble . 
Great Actions speak Great Minds , and such should govern ; 
And you are graced with both . Thus , as a Brother , 
A Fellow , and Copartner in the Empire , 
I do embrace you : May we live so far 
From Difference , or emulous Competition , 
That all the World may say , although two Bodies , 
We have one Mind . 


Aur.   When I behold this Object , 
The dead Numerianus , I should wash 
His Wounds with Tears , and pay a Sister's Sorrow 
To his sad Fate : but since he life's again 
In your most brave Revenge , I bow to you , 
As to a Power which gave him second Life , 
And will make good my Promise . If you find 
That there is Worth in me that may deserve you , 
Although my Youth and Fortune may require 
Both to be sued and sought to , here I yield 
Myself to be your Wife . 


Dio.   O you Gods ! 
Teach me how to be thankful ; you have poured 
All Blessings on me , that ambitious Man 
could ever fancy . Till this happy minute 
I never saw Beauty , or believed there could be 
Perfection in a Woman . On my Knees 
I thus receive you ; and , if you vouchsafe it , 
This day I am doubly married , to the Empire , 
And your fair self . 


Del.   False and perfidious Villain — 


Dru.   Let me fall headlong on him . O my Stars ! 
This I foresaw , and feared . 


Cham   Call in a Flamen ; this Knot 
Shall instantly be tied . 


Del.   But it shall not , 
If Art or Hell have any strength . 


Enter a Flamen . Thunder and Lightning . The Stage 't is darkened on a sudden . A dreadful Monster comes from the further end of the Scenes , and moves slowly forward . Cham   Prodigious ! 



Max.   How soon the day 's o'ercast ! 



Fla.   The Signs are fatal . 
Juno smiles not upon this Match , and shows 
She has her Thunder too . Defer the Marriage , 
Or this fell Monster will devour you all . 


Dio.   Can there be a Stop to all my Happiness ? 



Cham   We were too violent , 
And I repent my haste . First let us pay 
All Rites of Funeral to my dead Brother ; 
Perhaps that may appease the angry Gods.  


The Music flourish . They who made the Monster separate in an instant , and fall into a Figure , ready to begin a Dance of Furies . Cham   't is wonderful . Here , take up the Body ; 
And when we have placed his Ashes in his Urn , 
we 'll try the Gods again . 


Exeunt Trumpets and Drums , sounding and beating a dead March.  Del.   So , 't is deferred yet , in despite of Falsehood . 
Comfort , Drusilla ; for he shall be thine . 
Some Rites I must perform to Hecate , 
To perfect my Designs ; Which finished once , 
He shall be made obedient to thy Call , 
Or in his Ruin I will bury all . 


End of the Second Act.  

ACT III  

SCENE I  

Scene a Room , Chairs in it , the hangings and Figures Grotesk . Enter Maximinian . Max.   What powerful Star shined at this Man's Nativity , 
And blessed his homely Cradle with full Glory ? 
What Throngs of People press and buzz about him , 
And with their humming Flatteries sing him Caesar ? 
How the fierce-minded Soldier bows before him ? 
Charinus sues , the Emperor entreats him ; 
And his bright charming Sister dotes on him : 
All worship him ; yet I 'm still Maximinian : 
What have I got by this ? I have gone as far 
To woo this purblind Honour , as he has ; 
And done as much , run through as many Perils : 
Only the Executioner of Aper , 
( Which I mistake ) has made him Emperor , 
And me his Slave . 


Enter Delphia and Drusilla . Del.   Stand still , he cannot see us , till I please . 
This Discontent I have forced into him , 
For thy Cause , my Drusilla . 


Max.   Can the Gods see this ? 
See it with Justice , and confer their Blessings 
On him , that never flung one Grain of Incense 
Upon their Altars , never bowed his Knee yet ? 
And I , that have marched Foot by Foot , struck equally , 
Contemning his base , covetous — 


Del.   Now we 'll appear . 



Max.   Bless me , ye Gods ! And with all Reverence — Knelt . 


Del.   Stand up , my Son ; 
And wonder not at thy ungrateful Uncle : 
I know thy Thoughts , and I appear to ease ' 'em . 


Max.   O Mother ! did I stand the tenth part to you 
Engaged and fettered , as my Uncle does , 
How would I serve , how would I fall before you ? 
How worship and adore you ? 


Del.   Peace , and flatter not ; 
Necessity and Anger draws this from you , 
Of both which I forgive you . For your Uncle , 
'T was I foretold this Honour , it fell on him , 
fell to his full Content . He has forgot me , 
For all my Care , forgot me , and his Vow too ; 
And I have forgot him ; let him stand fast now . 
Come hither : My Care shall be for you . 


Max.   O blessed Mother ! She charms him . Maximinian , 



Del.   Stand still , and let me work . So now , 
Go and appear in Court , and eye Aurelia ; 
Stand in her View , make your Addresses to her ; 
Prepare some Music , and then show yourself , 
And mark the Consequence : I 'll say no more , 
But Fortune is your Servant ; go , and be happy . 


Max.   I know all this is holy Truth . 



Del.   Believe , and prospero . Exit Maximinian . 



Dru.   Yet all this cures not me : 
You had full as much Belief from Dioclesian . 


Enter Geta , Lictors , and Suitors with Petitions . Del.   Be not dejected , I have warned you often ; 
The proudest Thoughts he has , I 'll humble . who 's this ? 
OH , 't is the Fool , and Knave , grown a grave Officer : 
he 's hot with high Preferment . 


Get.   what 's your Bill ? For Gravel for the Appian Way , 
And Pills . Is the Way Rheumatic ? 


1 Suit.   't is Piles , an 't please your Worship . 



Get.   Remove me those Piles to Port Esqueline , 
't is fitter for the Place . You shall be paid . 


1 Suit.   I thank your Honour . 



Get.   Thank me when you have it ; 
Thank me another way , you you are an Ass else . 
I know my Office. Lord , how these Fellows throng ! 
That Knave has eaten Garlic ; whip him , and bring him back . 


2 Suit.   I beseech your Worship ; 
here 's an old Reckoning for the Dung and Dirt , Sir.  


Get.   It stinks like thee ; away . Yet let him tarry . 
Let 's see your Bill : Give your Petitions 
In seemly sort , and keep your Caps off decently . 
For scouring the Watercourses through the City ? 
A fine Periphrasis for a Kennel-raker . 
Did you scour all , my Friend ? You had some Business . 
Who shall scour you ? you 're to be paid , I take it , 
When Surgeons swear you have performed your Office.  


3 Suit.   Your worship 's merry . 



Get.   We must be sometimes witty , 
To neck a Knave ; 't is useful to our Gravity . 
I 'll take no more Petitions ; I am pestered ; 
Give me some Rest ? 


3 Suit.   I have brought the Gold ( an 't please ye ) 
About the Place you promised . 


Get.   See him entered . How does your Daughter ? 



3 Suit.   The better for your Worship . 



Get.   This is too little : But let me see your Daughter ; 
't is a good forward Girl . I 'll take no more Petitions . 


Lic .  You see the Edile's busy . 



Get.   Look to your Places , or I 'll make you smoke else . 
I drank a Cup of Wine at your House yesterday , 
It was smart Wine , my Friend . 


Lic .  send him the Piece ; he likes it . 



Get.   And eat the best Wild Boar at that same farmer 's . 



2 Suit.   I have half left yet ; your Worship shall command it 


Get.   A Bit will serve . Give me some rest . Gods help me 
How shall I labour when I am a Senator ? 


Del.   't is a fit Place indeed . Save you , Sir. 
Does not your Worship know us ? 


Get.   These Women are so troublesome . 
There be Houses providing for such wretched Creatures , 
Houses of small Rents , to set old Wives a spinning . 


Dru.   We are no Spinsters , Sir , nor , if you look on us , 
So wretched as you take us . 


Del.   Does your Mightiness 
( For that 's a great Destroyer of the Memory ) 
Yet understand our Faces ? 


Get.   Prithee keep off , Woman . 
It is not fit I should know every Creature . 
What though I was familiar heretofore ? 
I must not know thee now : my Place neglects thee ; 
Yet ' cause I have a glimpse of your remembrance , 
Give me your Suits , and wait me a Month hence . 


Del.   Our Suits ( Sir ) are , to see the Emperor , 
The Emperor Dioclesian , to speak with him ; 
And not to wait on you . We have told you all Sir.  


Get.   I laugh at your simplicity , poor Women . 
To see the Emperor ; you are deceived now ; 
The Emperor appears but once in seven Years , 
And then he shines not on such Weeds as you are . 
Yet now I think on 't ; wait in that Room of State , 
Perhaps he may come forth . All leave me but my Officers . 


Del.   I thank you , Sir ; Ex. Suit.  
Come my Drusilla , we shall see him there . Ex. Del. Drus . 


Get.   I am too merciful , I find it Friends ; 
Of too soft a nature for an Officer ; 
I bear too much remorse . 


Lic .  't is your own fault , Sir : 
For look ye , one so newly warm in Office , 
Should lay about him blindfold , like true Justice ; 
Hit where it will : the more you Whip and hang Sir , 
( Thou without cause , let that show itself afterwards ) 
The more you are admired , and feared , Sir.  


Get.   I think it should be so . 



Lic .  Your Countrymen are by nature Choleric , 
And prone to Anger . 


Get.   Nay , I can be Angry ; 
And the best is , I need show no reason for 't . 


Lic ,  You need not , Sir , your Place is without reason ; 
And what you want in Learning , and in Judgement , 
Make up with Rule , and Rigour . 


Get.   A rare Counsellor ! 
Instruct me further . Is it fit , my Friend , 
The Emperor , my Master Dioclesian , 
Should now remember , or the Times , or Manners , 
Called him , plain , downright Diocles ? 


Lic .  He must not ; it stands not with his Royalty . 



Get.   I grant ye . 
I being then the Aedile Gestianus , 
A Man of Place , and Judge ; is it held requisite 
I should commit to my consideration , 
Those Rascals of removed , and ragged Fortunes , 
Who with unreverend Mouths , called me Slave Geta ? 


Lic .  You must forget their Names ; your Honour bids you . 



Get.   I will forget 'em , but I 'll hang their Natures . 
I will ascend my Place , which is of Justice ; 
And Mercy I forget thee . 


Lic .  A rare Magistrate ! another Solon sure . 



Get.   An Hour hence I 'll sit in State , in this Place , 
And then , hang all are brought before me . Exeunt . 


A Curtain falls representing the entrance into the inner part of a Magnificent Palace . A noble Arch ; behind it two Embroidered Curtains , part of the first tied up on either side , the farther Curtain hanging down . Figures of Diana , on each side of the Arch standing on large Pedestals . Enter Diocles.  Dio.   How am I crossed , and tortured ? 
My most wished Happiness , my lovely Mistress , 
Who must complete my Hopes , and link my Greatness , 
Yet severed from my Arms ? Tell me , high Heaven , 
How have I sinned , that you should speak in Thunder ? 
In horrid Thunder , when my Heart was ready 
To leap into her Breast , the Priest was ready , 
The fair Aurelia ready . You gave the honour , 
And ere you gave it full , could you destroy it ? 
Enter Delphia , and Drusilla . Or was there some dire Star ? some Devil that did it ? 
Some sad malignant Angel to my honour ? 
With you , I dare not rage . 


Del.   With me thou canst not , 
Thou it was I ; nay look not pale , and frighted ; 
I 'll fright you more : with me thou canst not quarrel . 
I raised the Thunder to rebuke thy falsehood . 
Look here , to her thy falsehood . Now be angry , 
And be as great in Evil , as in Empire . 


Dio.   Bless me ye Powers ! 



Del.   True , thou hast need of Blessing . 
'T was I that at thy great Inauguration , 
Hung in the Air unseen . 'T was I that honoured thee 
With various Music , and sweet sounding Airs . 
But why did I all this ? To keep thy Honesty , 
Thy Vow , and Faith ; that once forgot , and slighted , 
All other Blessings leave you ; nay Aurelia 
( Unless thou soon repent ) shall scorn , and hate thee . 


Drus .  Yet consider , 
As you are Noble , as I have deserved ye ; 
For yet you are free . If neither Faith , nor promise , 
Nor Deeds of former times may be remembered ; 
Let these new dropping Tears , for I still love you , 
These Hands held up to Heaven . — 


Dio.   I can pity you , but that is all ; I 'll not dissemble with you , 
I must not offer more , 't were most unwise in me . 


Del.   How ? were it not wise ? 



Dio.   Nor honourable , 
A Princess is my Love , she dotes on me ; 
A fair , and lovely Princess is my Mistress . 
I am an Emperor : consider Prophetess , 
I am now for Queens , for none but Divine Beauties ; 
To look so low as this cheap common sweetness , 
Would speak me mean still , and my Glories nothing . 
I grant I made a Vow ; what was I then ? 
As she is now , of no note , ( Hope made me Promise , ) 
But as I am , to keep this Vow were monstrous , 
A madness , and a low inglorious fondness . 


Del.   Take heed , proud Man  



Drus .  Prince's may love with Titles , 
But I with Truth . 


Del.   Take heed : here stands thy Destiny . 
Thy Fate depends on her . 


Dio.   thou doting Sorceress ; 
Wouldst have me love this thing ? that is not worthy 
To wait upon my Saint , to be her Shadow . 
A Princess is her slave ; when she appears 
Bows her beck . The mighty Persia's Daughter 
( Bright as the breaking East , as midday Glorious ) 
Waits her commands , is proud to serve her Pleasures . 
Some honourable Match I will provide for her , 
That shall advance you both ; mean time I 'll smile on you . 


Exit . Del.   Mean time I 'll haunt you . Cry not Child , be confident . 
' E'er long thou shalt more pity him , ( observe me ) 
And pity him in truth , than now thou seekest him . 
My Art shall fail me else ; come , no more weeping . Exeunt . 


Scene the former Chamber , hung with Grotesk-work . Enter Geta , and Lictors . Get.   Set me my Chair . 
And now I 'll put on a Face of Authority . 
A Whipping , Torturing , Hanging Face ; 't is well . 
Now , bring in the Offenders . 


1 Lic .  There are none yet , Sir , but no doubt there will be . 



Get.   How ? am I ready ? and my Anger too ? 
The fury of a Magistrate upon me , 
And no Offenders to execute my Rage on ? 
Ha! no Offenders Knaves ? 


1 Lic .  There are Knaves indeed , Sir ; 
We hope shortly to have 'em for your Worship . 


Get.   no Man to hang , or Whip ? are you good Officers , 
To provide no Fuel for a Judge's Fury ? 
In this Place , something must be done . This Chair 
When I sit down , must savour of severity : 
Therefore I warn ye all , bring me lewd People , 
Or likely to be lewd ; Twigs must be cropped too . 
Let me have Evil persons in abundance , 
Or make 'em Evil , 't is all one ; do but say so , 
That I may have fit matter for a Magistrate , 
then let me work . If I sit idle once more , 
And lose my longing ; as I am true Aedile , 
And as I hope to rectify my Country , 
You are the Scabs I 'll scratch from the Commonwealth ; 
You are those Rascals of the State I 'll punish , 
And you shall find , and feel it . 


1 Lic .  You shall have many , many notorious People . 



Get.   Let 'em be People , 
And keep notorious to yourselves . Mark me Lictors , 
If I be angry ; as my Place will ask it : 
And want fit matter to execute my Authority on : 
I 'll hang a hundred of you . I 'll not stay 
To inquire further into your Offences . 
It is sufficient that I find no Criminals , 
And therefore I must make some ; let that suffice . 
For so runs my Commission . 


Enter Delphia , and Drusilla . Get.   What are these ? 



Del.   You must not mourn still ; some recreation 
To allay this sadness , must be sought . what 's here ? 
Some senseless People Worshipping a Sign in Office.  


Get.   Lay hold on her , and hold her fast ; 
she 'll slip through your Fingers like an Eel else ; 
I know her Tricks . Hold her , I say , and bind her . 
Or hang her first , and then I 'll tell you wherefore . 


Del.   What have I done ? 



Get.   thou hast done enough to undo thee . 
thou hast pressed to the Emperor's presence without my Warrant , 
I being his Key , and Image . 


Del.   You are , indeed , an Image ; 
And of the coursest Stuff , and the worst making , 
That ' ere I looked on yet . 
I 'll make as good an Image of an Ass . 


Get.   Besides , thou art a Woman of a lewd life . 



Del.   I am no Whore , Sir , nor no common fame 
Has ' ere proclaimed me vicious to the People . 


Get.   thou art to me , a damnable lewd Woman , 
Which is as strong a proof as if Forty swore it . 
I know thou art a keeper of tame Devils , 
And whereas great and grave Men of my Place , 
Can by the Law be allowed but one a piece 
For their own Services and Recreation , 
thou , like a Traitorous Quean , keep'st twenty Devils , 
Twenty in Ordinary . 


Del.   Pray , Sir , be pacified , 
If that be all ; and if you want a Servant , 
You shall have one of mine shall serve for nothing ; 
A faithful , diligent , and a wise Devil . 
For what use do you want one ? 


Get.   Let her go . 
We men of business must use speedy Servants . 
Let me see all your Family . 


Del.   You shall ; I have Devils of all kinds ready for you . 



Get.   Let me see ; a Devil for Intelligence ? no , no , 
He will lie beyond all Travellers . A State Devil ? 
Neither ; he 'll outdo me at my own Weapon . 
An Evidencing Devil ? he 'll out-swear me , 
And turn my Plots upon myself . An impudent Devil ? 
That can outface a Judge upon the Bench. 
He may hang others , than he may hang me . 
A holy Devil ? one that can outdo 
The Highpriest in Hypocrisy . that 's dangerous : 
he 'll broach some new Religion ; and we are 
Already overstockt with seeming Saints ; 
Or overzealous mad men , that are as bad . 
A Devil that can speak all Languages : 
To entertain Ambassadors in their own Tongues , 
Or else some pleasant Airy , Dancing Devils , 
To treat the Ladies with , who visit me . 
Those would do well . 


Del.   It shall be done . 
Sat there ; and if you love your own Life , stir not . 
' Ill give you a taste of my Art immediately . 
You see those Antic Figures in the hangings . 


Get.   Yes , very well . 



Del.   They are all Spirits ; all at my command . 
My Servants all , and they shall entertain you ; 
Come forth , and Dance before this mighty Aedile . 
Come forth , and leave your Shadows in your places . 


The Figures come out of the hangings and Dance : And Figures exactly the same appear in their places : When they have danced a while , they go to sit on the Chairs , they slip from 'em , and after join in the Dance with ' 'em . Get.   Shall these Devils be at my command ? 



Del.   They shall be more obedient than your slaves . 
You shall have other Spirits if you please , 
Shall take you up , and bear you through the Air ; 
Hurricania , appear ; and take him up . 


Get.   OH deliver me ! deliver me ! Get. runs off , the Lictors follow him . 



Del.   So ; I have frighted him sufficiently , 
he 'll trouble us no more . Come my Drusilla , 
th' Ambassadors of Persia are now 
With th' Emperor Charinus and Aurelia , 
Demanding freedom for their Master's Sister , 
The fair Cassana , whom the haughty Princess 
Shall still retain , and send th' ambassadors 
In discontent away . Come , do not grieve , 
thou soon shalt see this proud ingrateful man , 
So miserable , thou shalt pity him . Exeunt . 


Scene a Magnificent Palace . Enter Charinus , Aurelia , Cassana , Ambassadors , and Attendants . Aur.   Never dispute with me , you shall not have her ; 
Nor name the greatness of your King , I despise him . 
Your Knees move nothing ; should your Master bow thus , 
It were his Duty , and my Power should scorn him . 


Cham   She is her Woman ( never sue to me ) 
And in her Power to render her , or keep her . 
She is my Sister , not to be compelled , 
Nor have her own snatched from her . 


Amb.   We only beg her , 
To name what Ransom she will please to think of , 
Jewels , or Towns , or Provinces . 


Aur.   no Ransom , 
no not your Kings own Head , his Crown upon it , 
And all the low submissions of his People . 


Amb.   Fair Princess' , ought to have tender thoughts . 



Aur.   Is she too good , 
To wait upon the mighty Emperor's Sister ? 
What Princess of that Sweetness , or that Excellence ? 
Sprung from the proudest , and the mightiest Monarches , 
But may be highly blessed , to be my Servant ? 


Case .  't is most true , mighty Princess . 



Aur.   Has my fair usage 
Made you so much despise me , and my Fortune , 
That you grow weary of my Entertainments ? 
Henceforward , as you are I will command you ; 
And as you were ordained my Prisoner , 
My Slave , and one I may dispose of any way , 
no more my fair Companion : tell your King so . 
I 'll use her as I please , and that 's your Answer . 


Amb.   Our Master with a mighty Army's near ; 
I know he 'll venture all to free his Sister ; Aside . 
You are the cause then of the War : for since 
Entreaty can't prevail , force must compel . Ex. Amb.  


Music and a SONG . 

Enter Maximinian , he stands gazing on the Princess all the time of the Song . What shall I do to show how much I love her ? 
How many Million of Sighs can suffice ? 
That which wins other Hearts , never can move her , 
Those common methods of Love she 'll despise . 
I will love more than Man ' ere loved before me , 
Gaze on her all the Day , melt all the Night ; 
Till for her own sake at last she 'll implore me , 
To love her lesle to preserve our delight . 
Since Gods themselves could not ever be loving , 
Men must have breathing Recruits for new Joys : 
I wish my Love could be always improving , 
Thou eager Love more than Sorrow destroys . 
In Fair Aurelia's Arms leave me expiring , 
To be Embalmed by the Sweets of her Breath ; 
To the last Moment I 'll still be desiring : 
Never had Hero so glorious a Death . 


Max.   Now , if thou beest a Prophetess , and canst do 
Things of that wonder that thy Tongue delivers , 
Canst raise me too , now show thy mighty Power . 
How she turns me ? 
How sweet , how fair , and lovely she appears ? 
Her Eyes , like bright Noon-beams , shoot thorough me . 


Aur.   O my dear Friend , where have you been ? 



Max.   Where am I ? 
Who does she take me for ? Work still , work strongly . 


Aur.   Why have you fled my Love , and my Embraces ? 



Max.   Is this real ? I dare not trust my Senses . 



Aur.   Can a Clap of Thunder , 
The Cause being as common as the Noise is , 
Strike Terror to a soldier 's Heart ? a Monarch's ? 
Through all the Fires of angry Heaven , through Tempests , 
That sing of nothing but Destruction , 
Even underneath the Bolt of Jove , then ready , 
And aiming dreadfully , I would seek you , 
And fly into your Arms.  


Max.   I shall be mighty ! 



Cham   Fie , Sister , fie : 
What a forgetful Weakness is this in you ? 
What a light Carriage ? These are Words and Offers 
Due only to your Husband Dioclesian . 


Aur.   't is strange , 
That only empty Names compel Affections . 
This Man you see , give what Name or Title , 
Let it be never so mean , never so despised ; Brother , 
This lovely Man — 


Max.   Thou I be hanged , I 'll on . 



Aur.   This sweet young Man — 



Max.   O Prophetess ! Incomparable Woman ! 



Aur.   This Man , I say , 
Let him be what he will , or bear what Fortune , 
This most unequalled Man , deserves the Bed of Juno . 


Cham   You are not mad ? 



Max.   I hope she is ; I am sure I am little better . 
Enter Diocles My Uncle comes . Now if she 's firm , I am happy . 


Cham   For Honour's sake , be careful . 



Dio.   O my fair Mistress ! 



Aur.   What Man is this ? Away ; What saucy Fellow ? 
How came this base mean Creature to my Presence ? 


Dio.   Have you forgot me , Fair ? Or do you jest with me ? 
I 'll tell you how I came ; pray look more kindly . 
Nothing but Frowns and Scorns ! 


Aur.   Who is this Fellow ? 



Dio.   I 'll tell you who : I am your Husband , Madam . 



Aur.   Husband to me ? 



Dio.   Yes , to you , Madam : I am Dioclesian . 



Max.   more of this sport , and I am made . O Mother ! 
Complete what is begun . 


Dio.   I am he , Madam , 
Revenged your Brother's Death , slew cruel Aper . 
I am he the Soldier court's , the Emperor honours , 
Your Brother love's . I am he ( my beauteous Mistress ) 
Will make you Empress of the World.  


Aur.   't is false , thou art not he : thou that brave Man ! 



Cham   Is there no Shame , no Modesty in Woman ? 



Aur.   thou one of his high Rank ! 



Dio.   Good Gods ! What ails she ? 



Aur.   Generous , and Noble ! Fie , thou art no such Person 
thou art a poor Dalmatian Slave , a low thing , 
Not worth the Name of Roman . Stand off , further . 


Dio.   What can this mean ? 



Aur.   Come hither , my Endymion ; 
Come show thyself , and bless all Eyes look on you . 


Dio.   Ha! What is this ? 



Aur.   thou fair Star that I live by , 
Look lovely on me , break into full Brightness . 
Here is a Face now of another making , 
Another Mould ; here 's a Divine Proportion ; 
Eyes fit for Phoebus' self to gilled the World with . 
Look there , and wonder . Now behold that Fellow , 
That admirable Face , cut with an Axe out . 


Dio.   And do you speak this truly ? 



Cham   she 's mad , and you must pardon her . 



Dio.   By Heaven , she hangs on him ! 



Cham   Be not disturbed , Sir ; 't is but the Fondness of her Fit.  



Dio.   I am fooled ; and if I suffer this — 



Cham   Pray be pacified ; this Fit will soon be off . 
Let her go , Sir ; a little Rest will bring her to herself . 


Dio.   You , Sir , Exit Aurelia . 



Max.   Well , Sir.  



Dio.   Base as thou art , how durst you touch that Lady ? 



Max.   I am your Kinsman , Sir ; no such base Fellow : 
I sought her not , nor had I any reason 
To thrust a Princess from me ; 't was no Manners . 
What she bestowed was Courtesy , and I thank her . 


Dio.   Villain , be gone . 



Max.   I will , and I will go with Glory off , 
And magnify my Fate . Exit Maximinian . 


Dio.   Good Sir , leave me ; I am a Trouble to myself now . 



Cham   I am sorry for 't , and hope 
you 'll find it but a Woman's Fit to try you . 


Dio.   It may be so . 
Into what misery has Fortune brought me , Exit Charinus . 
And how long must I suffer ? Poor humble Being's , 
Thou they know Want and Hunger , know not these , 
Know not these kill Fates : A little serves 'em , 
And with that little they 're content . OH Honour ! 
How greedily Men seek thee ! and once purchased , 
How many Enemies to Man's Peace bring'st thou ? 
Enter Delphia and Drusilla . When I presumed I was blessed with this fair Woman , 


Del.   Behold him now , and tell me how thou lik'st him . 



Dio.   When all my Hopes were up , and Fortune showed me 
To all the World , the Greatest , Happiest Monarch ; 
then to be cozened , to be cheated basely , 
By my own Kinsman too ! I 'll kill the Villain . 
But can I kill her Hate too ? no , he woos not ; 
She seeks him . Shall I kill an Innocent ? 
O Fortune ! 
Couldst thou find none to fool , and blow like Bladders , 
But Kings , and their Contents ? 


Del.   What think you now , Girl ? 



Dru.   Upon my Life , I pity his misfortune . 
See how he weeps ! I cannot hold my Tears now . 


Del.   Away , Fool ; 
He must weep bloody Tears before thou hast him . 
How fare you now , brave Dioclesian ? 
For shame ! tired with your Love ? Has too much Pleasure 
Dulled your mighty Faculties ? 


Dio.   Art thou there , 
more to torment me ? Dost thou come to mock me ? 


Del.   I do , I come to laugh at all thy Sufferings ; 
I who have wrought 'em , come to scorn thy Sorrows . 
I told thee once , this is thy Fate , this Woman ; 
And as thou usest her , so thou shalt prospero . 
It is not in thy power to turn this Destiny , 
Nor stop the Torrent of thy Miseries . 
thou who didst think no Power could cross thy Pleasure , 
Shalt find a Fate above thee . 


Dru.   Good Aunt , speak mildly ; behold how pitiful he looks . 



Dio.   I find , and feel too , that I am miserable . 



Del.   thou art , most miserable . 



Dio.   And didst thou work this Mischief ? 



Del.   I did , and will pursue it . 



Dio.   OH stay , and have some pity : Fair Drusilla , 
thou that hast loved me , let me beg of thee , 
I know my Suit must seem unjust to thee , 
To make thy Love the means to lose itself : 
Yet , Oh! have pity on me . 


Dru.   I will have pity . 



Del.   Peace , Child ; this Softness may become thy Love , 
But not my Anger : The same Kindness he shows thee , 
The same Aurelia shall show him , no farther ; 
Nor shall the Wealth of all his Empire change this . 


Dio.   I must speak fair . Lovely young Maid , forgive me ; 
Look gently on my Sorrows ; you can grieve too , 
I see it in your Eyes ; and thus I thank you . Knelt . 


Dru.   O Aunt ! now I am blessed ! 



Dio.   Be not both young and cruel . Kneeling I beg it still . 



Dru.   Rise , Sir , I grant it . Now , Aunt , he is my own . 



Enter Aurelia . Del.   thou art deceived ; not yet , Girl . 



Aur.   O my dear Lord ! how have I wronged your Patience ? 
How wandered from the Truth of my Affections ? 
How like a wanton Fool , shunned that I loved most ? 
But you are full of Goodness to forgive , Sir , 
As I of Grief to beg , and Shame to take it . 
Sure I was not myself ; some Dream wrought on me , 
Or strange Illusion : Can you pardon it ? 


Dio.   All my Delight ! 
My Life ! I with more pleasure take thee , 
Than if there had been no such Dream ; for certain , 
It was no more . 


Aur.   Now you have forgiven me , 
I 'll take my leave . The good Gods bless such Goodness . Ex. Au.  


Del.   You see how Kindness prospers . Be so just 
To marry my Drusilla ; see then what Joys , 
What Pleasures , greater than this Lady can bestow , 
Shall always wait on you . 


Dio.   I 'll die a Dog first . 
Now I am reconciled , I will enjoy her , 
In spite of all thy Spirits , and thy Witchcrafts . 


Del.   thou shalt not , Fool.  



Dio.   I will , old doting Devil . 
Look thou appear no more to cross my Pleasures : 
And wert thou any thing but Air and Spirit , 
My Sword should end the Difference . Exit Diocles.  


Del.   I contemn thy Threats . Come , look up , Girl : 
The Persians shall lay an Ambush for 'em , 
And they shall fall into the Net , they shall . 
If he repent not soon , I have a Spell 
Shall make him feel on Earth the Plagues of Hell. Exeunt . 


The End of the Third Act.  

ACT IU.  

SCENE I  

Scene the Great Curtain . Enter Delphia and Drusilla . Del.   't is done , Drusilla , the great Work is done ; 
Charinus , Maximinian , Aurelia , 
Are all the Persian Monarch's Prisoners ; 
He has 'em in his Power . Now smile , Drusilla . 


Dru.   Where was my Diocles when this was done ? 



Del.   Why he was with 'em ; but his Power was vain , 
As vain all the Resistance he could make ; 
They bore their Prisoners off , and he was left — 


Dru.   How , left ! O do not torture me with Doubt , 
But tell me he is safe , and tell me quickly , 
Or I shall die with Fear . 


Del.   He is ( my Girl ) in his own Army , safe ; 
thou shalt behold him instantly . 


Dru.   Lie still , my trembling Heart , since he is well . 
But how was this effected ? 


Del.   I made the Persians lay an Ambush for 'em , 
then drew 'em from the Camp to take the Air , 
Attended with a strong and chosen Guard. 
I made 'em wander at a Distance from 'em , 
And brought 'em where the Persians lay concealed , 
And put 'em in their power . then Dioclesian , 
Calling aloud for Succour to the Guard , 
Soon gave 'em the Alarm , and made 'em fly 
With all the Wings of Speed , to rescue 'em ; 
Which they had quickly done , had I not raised 
A Mist , which hid the Persians from their Sight , 
Guiding 'em till they bore their Prisoners off . 
Here comes the Emperor , ready to burst 
With Anger and Despair , for this Disgrace : 
we 'll stand aside , and mark him . 
When Niger , and the rest of 'em are gone , 
we 'll show ourselves . 


Enter Dioclesian , Niger , Senators , Guard , and Soldier's . Dio.   Talk not of Comfort ; I have broke my Faith , 
And the Gods fight against me . 
could it else have been 
In Nature , that a few weak Persians 
could ( almost in my Army's sight ) have forced , 
And bore in Triumph off , all that I loved , 
My Brother and Copartner in the Empire , 
The Persian Prisoner , and my lovely Mistress ? 
( A Jewel which I prized above my Life . ) 
could this have been , and I want power to rescue 'em , 
If the Immortal Gods I have provoked , 
Had not given Spirit to the Undertakers , 
And in their bold Design protected ' 'em ? 


Nig.   Great Caesar , 
Your Safety does confirm you are their Care ; 
And that howe'er their Practices reach others , 
You stand above their Malice . 


1 Gu.   Do but lead us on , 
With that invincible and undaunted Courage 
Which waited bravely on you , when you appeared 
The Son of Conquest ; you shall see us force 
( Thou all the Enemies of the East conspire 
Against your Undertake ) the proud Persian 
Out of his strongest Hold.  


Dio.   You give me , Fellow-soldiers , a new Life ; 
And though ( for some great Sin ) I am marked out 
The Object of Heaven's Hate ; though Jove stood ready 
To dart his threefold Thunder on my Head , 
It could not fright me from a fierce Pursuit 
Of my Revenge . I will redeem my Friends , 
And with my Friends , my Honour , at least fall , 
Fall like myself , a Soldier , and a Roman . 


Nig.   Now we hear great Dioclesian speak . 



Dio.   Draw up your Legions . 
And let it be your care ( my much loved Niger ) 
To hasten their remove . And fellow Soldiers , 
Your love to me , will teach you to endure , 
As much as I shall , and I ask no more . 


1 Gua.   Die he accursed , 
Who thinks of rest , or sleep , before he has 
The Persians in his view . 


Nig.   We know the Honour , 
The Dignity of Rome , and what 's above 
All can be urged ; the quiet of your Mind , 
Depends upon our haste . 


All.   Happiness , and glorious Victory attend great Caesar . 



Exeunt all but Dioclesian . Dio.   The cheerfulness of my Soldiers , gives assurance 
Of good success abroad , if first I make 
My Peace at home here ; there is something chides me , 
And sharply tells me , that my breach of Faith , 
To Delphia , and Drusilla , is the ground 
Of my misfortunes ; she was my better Angel , 
And thus I do invoke her . All-knowing Delphia ! 
thou more , much more than Woman , 
Look on thy Creature . 
And as thou twice hast pleased to show thyself 
To reprehend my falsehood ; now vouchsafe 
To see my low submission . Del. and Drus . show themselves . 


Del.   what 's thy will ? 
False , and ungrateful ( and in that deserving 
All human sorrows ) dar'st thou hope from me , 
Relief , or Comfort ? 


Dio.   Penitence can appease 
th' offended Powers ; and Sacrifice takes off 
Their heavy anger 's ; thus I tender both . 
The Master of great Rome ; and in that Lord 
Of half the Sun gives heat , and being to , 
Thus sues for Mercy . Be but as thou wert , 
The Bark , and Pilot of my future Fortunes , 
And once more steer my Actions to the Port 
Of glorious Honour ; then if I fall off , 
Or break my Faith again to this sweet Virgin , 
Join with those Powers who punish Perjury , 
To make me an example , to deter 
Others from being false . 


Drus .  Upon my Soul , 
You may believe him now : he never proposed 
Aught but what 's Noble to me ; he only tried 
How I could bear unkindness . I see truth 
Triumphant in his sorrow . Dearest Aunt , 
Both credit him , and help him . Sure you can't , 
You can't deny us both , when we thus Pled ; 
Thus , on our Knees , we both implore your Pardon , 
Your Favour , and Assistance . 


Dio.   How happy had I been , had I never looked , 
Beyond this abstract of all Woman's goodness ! 


Del.   Rise both , 
I know you are sincere , and I forgive you : 
But had you persevered in your Ingratitude , 
I had pursued you with such dreadful torments , 
That Life itself had been a burden to you . 


Dio.   could you have added to this Affliction ? 



Del.   Yes , much more : The proud Aurelia 
Should have received the same Indignities 
She had imposed on the fair Persian Princess : 
Which would have gauled her haughty Spirit so , 
Till Spite , Rage , and Dispair had made her mad , 
And kill herself . 


Dio.   And I had been the cause of all this woe . 



Del.   I 'll show you what a Noble Monument 
You would have raised to the Memory of this Princess . 


She waves her Wand thrice . Soft Music is heard . then the Curtain rises , and shows a stately Tomb : Aurelia lying in the midst of it , on a Bed of State.  Del.   What say you now , my Son ? 
Is my Art to be contemned ? 


Dio.   't is wonderful ! 



Del.   Approach it ; view it nearer . 



Dio.   Ha! 't is the real Person of Aurelia ! 
The liveliness of her Complexion ; 
The brightness of those all-commanding Eyes 
Assure me 't is no Vision . 't is the true , 
The real , living Princess . 


Del.   You are deceived , it is Illusion all . 



Delphia stamps , and it vanishes : behind it is seen a large Cupola , supported by Terms on Pedestals . The Prophetess waves her Wand , the Terms leap from their Pedestals , the Building falls , and the Terms and Cupola are turned into a Dance of Butterflies . Dio.   Miraculous ! 



Del.   Come Son , be not dejected ; 
I know the causes of your discontent ; 
Know you believe your Fame and Honour suffers 
In their Captivity . Hear Dioclesian ; 
Despise me , punish me for an Impostor , 
If Fortune waits not on thy Sword , and Victory , 
And glorious Victory attends thy Arms ! 
If thou redeemest not all thy Friends , and hast not 
Thy mightiest Enemies at thy disposal . 


Dio.   Now you revive me . 



Del.   Yet remember , 
When you are raised up to the highest point 
Of human Happiness ; such as move beyond it , 
Must of necessity descend : think on it ; 
Remember you 're a man , and use those Blessings 
The Gods bestow , with moderation . 


Dio.   I william 
And when I have attained this Happiness , 
Even in the height of my exalted Glory ; 
Something I 'll do , something so singular , 
All Monarches shall admire , and but few imitate . 


Del.   You shall never repent it . 



Dio.   Come my Drusilla , 
Give me thy Hand , and pray for my success . Exeunt 


Scene a Forest . Enter Niger , Geta , Guard , and Soldier's . Nig.   How do you like your entrance to the War ? 
When the whole Body of the Army moves , 
Is 't not a glorious sight ? 


Get.   't is a fine May-game . 
But Eating and Drinking is forbidden in 't ; 
I mean with leisure . We walk on , and feed 
Like hungry Boys that haste to School ; or as 
We carried Fish to the City , dare stay no where 
For fear our Ware should stink . 


1 Gua.   that 's the necessity of our speedy March.  



Get.   Sir , I love my ease : I hope a Captain , 
( And a Gowned Captain too , one who has sat 
In Furs upon a Seat of Judicature , 
Representing the Emperor ) may be dispensed with . 
I tell you , and do not mock me , when I was Poor , 
I could endure like others , Cold , and Hunger ; 
But since I grew Rich , let my Finger ache , 
Or feel but the least pain in my great Toe , 
Unless I have a Doctor , my own Doctor too , 
That will insure my Life ; I think I am gone . 


Nig.   Come , fear not , you shall want nothing . 



1 Gua.   we 'll make you fight , as you were mad . 



Get.   Not too much of fight , Friend ; 
It is thy Trade , thou art a private Soldier . 
We Officers , by our Places , must be fine , 
And strut , and make a noise , get all we can , 
But still be careful to preserve our Carcases . 


1 Gua.   You are mistaken ; you must kill for Exercise , 
A Dozen or two a Day . 


Get.   thou talk'st 
As thou wert Losing thyself . However , 
I 'll have the fear of Heaven before my Eyes , 
And do no hurt , I warrant you . 


Nig.   Come , march on then ; 
And humour him for our mirth sake . 


1 Gua.   Come Captain ; now we are near the Enemy , 
You shall have sport I warrant you , and quickly . 


Get.   Sport do you call it ? 
Knocking out one another's Brains a sport ? 
Deliver me ! 


1 Gua.   here 's a brave Soldier ! 



Nig.   he 's one pleases the Emperor with his Folly , 
And in that a Wise man , and a Valiant . 


1 Gua.   Nay then I honour him . 



Nig.   March on I say . Exeunt . 



A flat Scene of Tents . Enter Cosroe , Cassana , and Persians . Charinus , Maximinian , Aurelia Prisoners ; with Soldier's . A Throne . Cos .  Now , by the Persian Gods , most truly welcome ; 
Encompassed thus with Tributary Kings 
I entertain you . Led her to my Throne , 
And seat her by me . Now , bow all of you , 
To do her honour . O my best Cassana ! 
Sister , and Partner of my Life , and Empire , 
we 'll teach you to forget with present Pleasures , 
Your late Captivity . And this proud Roman , 
That used thee as a slave , and did disdain 
A Princely Ransom ; shall , if she repined , 
Be forced by various Tortures , to adore 
What she of late contemned . 


Case .  All Greatness ever 
Attend my Noble Brother . Thomas Persia's styled 
The Nurse of Pomp , and Pride , we 'll leave to Rome 
Her Native Cruelty : For know Aurelia , 
A Roman Princess , and a Caesar's Sister ; 
Thou late like thee , a Captive ; I can forget 
Thy barbarous usage . And though thou to me 
( When I was in thy power ) didst show thyself 
A most insulting Tyranness ; I to thee 
Will prove a gentle Mistress . 


Aur.   O my Stars ! 
A Mistress ! can I live and own that name 
To Flesh , and Blood ? I was born to command , 
Trained up in Sovereignty ; and I in Death 
Can quit the name of Slave : she who scorns Life , 
May mock Captivity . 


Cham   Rome , will be Rome , 
When we are nothing ; and her Powers the same 
Which you once quaked at . 


Max.   Dioclesian life's ; 
Hear it and tremble ; lives ( thou King of Persia ) 
The Master of his Fortune , and his Honours : 
And though by Devilish Arts we were surprised , 
And made the prey of Magic , and of Theft , 
And not wone Nobly ; we shall be redeemed , 
And by a Roman War. And every wrong 
We suffer here , shall be returned with Interest , 
On the insulting Doer . 


1 Per.   Sure these Romans , are more than men . 



2 Per.   Their great Hearts will not yield ; 
They cannot bend to any adverse Fate , 
Such is their confidence . 


Cos .  then they shall break . 
Why , you rebellious Wretches , dare you still 
Contend , when the least Breath , or Nod of mine , 
Makes you a prey to Praetors . The vain name 
Of Roman Legions , I slight , and scorn . 
And for that boasted Bugbear Dioclesian , 
Whose Army now is almost in our view , 
( That you presume on ) ohs were he the Master , 
Of Spirit enough to meet me in the Field ; 
He soon should find that our Immortal Squardrons , 
Dare meet his boldest Troops , and scatter 'em 
As a high towering Falcon on her stretches 
Scatters the fearful Fowl. And by the Sun , 
The Moon , the Winds , the Nourishers of Life , 
And by this Sword , the Instrument of Death ; 
Since you submit not humbly to our Mercy , 
But yet dare hope for Liberty by force . 
If Dioclesian has not the Courage 
Bravely to free you with his Sword ? all slavery 
That Cruelty can find out to make you wretched , 
Falls heavy on you . 


Max.   If the Sun keeps his Course , 
And the Earth bear his Soldiers March , I fear not . 


Cham   Let us have Liberty , or full Revenge . 



Aur.   I ; Liberty , or Revenge . A Trumpet sounds . 



Enter a Persian . Per.   An Officer from the Roman Camp , 
Desire's admittance to your Majesty . 


Cos .  Admit him . 
Enter Niger . Now speak thy Message freely . 


Nig.   My great Master . 
The Lord of Rome , ( in that all power is spoken ) 
Hoping that thou wilt prove a Noble Enemy , 
And , in thy bold Resistance , worth his Conquest ; 
Defies thee , Cosroe . 


Max.   there 's Fire in this . 



Nig.   And to encourage thee to meet him bravely , 
And tug for Empire , dares thee to the Field , 
With this assurance ; if thy Sword can win him ; 
Or force his Legions with thy Barbed Horse , 
But to forsake their Ground : That not alone 
Winged Victory shall perch upon thy Tent ; 
But all the Provinces , and Kingdoms held 
By Roman Garrisons in this Eastern World , 
Shall be delivered up , and he himself , 
Acknowledge thee his Sovereign . In return 
Of this large offer , he asks only this ; 
That till the doubtful Dye of War determine 
Who has most Power , and should command the other , 
thou treat thy Noble Prisoners like their Births , 
And not their present Fortunes : and to bring 'em 
Guarded into thy Tent ; with thy best force , 
Thy ablest men of War , and thou thyself 
Sworn to make good the Places . And if he fail 
( Spite of all opposition thou canst make ) 
In his own Person to cut out his way , 
And bring 'em safely off , the Day is thine ; 
And he , like these , thy Prisoner . 


Cos .  Thou I receive this 
But as a Roman boast ; yet I embrace it , 
And love the sender : Tell him I will bring 
My Prisoners to the Field , and without odds 
Against his single Force , alone defend 'em ; 
Or else , with equal Numbers : Tell him this . 
I 'll give the Signal instantly . Courage brave Princes , 
And let Posterity Record , that we Ex. Nig.  
This memorable Day restored to Persia , 
That Empire of the World , Great Phillip's Son 
Ravished from us , and Greece gave up to Rome . 
And this our comfort be , we cannot fall 
Ingloriously , since we contend for all . Exeunt . 


Enter Geta , and two of the Guard.  Get.   A curse upon your Trade ! if ' ere I catch 
These Rogues in Rome , I 'll swear the Peace against ' 'em . 
Run for a Surgeon quickly , or I faint . 


1 Gua.   Bear up man ; 't is but a scratch . 



Get.   A Cut across the Coxcomb , 
Is but a scratch with you — Pox o your occupation ; 
Your scurvy , scuffling Trade . I was told before 
My Face was bad enough ; but now I look 
Like Bloody-bone , and Rawhead , to fright Children ; 
I am for no use else . 


2 Gua.   thou shalt fright men . 



1 Gua.   Behold how terrible you look , see your Face 
In the Pummel of my Sword.  


Get.   I die ! I am gone ! o my sweet Phisnomy ! 



Enter Three or Four Persians . 2 Gua.   They come : now fight , or die indeed . 



Get.   I will scape this way . 
I cannot hold my Sword ; what would you have 
A maimed man do ? 


1 Gua.   Nay , than I have a Goad to prick you forward , Ox.  



2.  Gua.   Fight like a Man , or die like a Dog.  



Get.   Shall I , like Caesar , fall 
Among my Friends ? no Mercy ? Et tu Brutus ? 
You shall not have the Honour of my Death ; 
I 'll first fall by the Enemy . He beats off the Persians . 


1 Gua.   O brave ! brave Geta ! he plays the Devil now . 



Enter Niger . Alarm . Nig.   Make up for Honour : 
The Persians shrink , the Passage is laid open ; 
Great Dioclesian , like a second Mars , 
Performs more than a Man ; his Shield stuck full 
Of Persian Darts , which now are his Defence 
Against his Enemy's Swords , still leads the Way . alarm 's continued . 
Of all the Persian Forces , one strong Squadron 
In which their King in his own Person fights , 
Stands firm , and yet unrouted ; break through that , 
The Day , and all is ours . 


All.   Victory , Victory . Exeunt shouting . then a Retreat . 



Scene Part of a Wood : Beyond it large Tents ; in the middle a Royal Pavilion ; through it is seen the Prospect of a Camp at a great distance . While the Song is singing , Enter in a Triumphal manner , Singers and Dancers , Roman Officers , Dioclesian Crowned with Laurel , Charinus , Aurelia , Maximinian , Niger , Geta , Guard. then Cosroe , Cassana , Persian Princes , Prisoners , guarded by Roman Soldiers . Delphia and Drusilla at a distance . SONG . 

Sound , Fame , thy Brazen Trumpet sound ; 
Stands in the Centre of the Universe , 
And call the listening World around , 
While 〈…〉 Tuneful Sounds rehearse , 
In Artful Numbers , and well-chosen Verse , 
Great Dioclesian's Story . 
Let all rehearse , 
In lofty Verse , 
Great Dioclesian's Glory . 
Sound his Renown , 
Advance his Crown 
Above all Monarches that ever blessed the Earth . 
O sacred Fame , 
Embalm his Name , 
With Honour here , and Glory after Death . 
All sing his Story , 
Raise , raise his Glory 
Above all Monarches that ever blessed the Earth . 
O sacred Fame , 
Embalm his Name , 
With Honour here , and Glory after Death . 


Dio.   I am rewarded in the Victory ; 
Your Freedom is ten thousand Triumphs to me . 
You ( Sir ) share in my Glories , and Aurelia , 
Unkind Aurelia , still commands the Victor . 
Nephew , remember by whose Gift you are free , 
For I can only pity you . Nor be thou forgot , 
My first poor Bondman , Geta ; I am glad 
thou art turned a Fighter . 


Get.   'T was against my will ; but now I am content with it . 



Cham   O Romans ! Countrymen ! 
You never can bestow Honour enough 
Upon your Emperor : Think on new Titles , 
Transcending all Example . 


Nig.   We will have 
His Statue of pure Gold set in the Capitol ; 
And he that bows not to it as a God , 
Forfeits his Head.  


Max.   I shall burst with Envy ; 
And yet these Honours , which conferred on me , 
Would raise me to the Clouds , never move him . 


Dio.   Suppose this done , yet still I am a Man ; 
And all these Glories you would heap upon me , 
Cannot defend me from a shaking Fever , 
Or bribe the all-destroying Dart of Death , 
To spare me one short Moment . 
Shall I praise Fortune ? or build my Happiness 
On her uncertain Favour , that yet was never 
Constant to any Man ? Should my Reason fail , 
( As Flattery oft corrupts it ) here 's an Example , 
To show how far her Smiles are to be trusted . 
The Rising Sun , this Morning , saw this Man 
The Persian Monarch , and those Subjects proud 
Who had the Honour to salute his Garment : 
And yet , ever his Diurnal Progress ends , 
He is the Scorn of Fortune : But you 'll say , 
That she forsaken him for his Cowardice , 
But never leaves the Bold . Now by my Hopes 
Of Peace and Quiet here , I never met 
A braver Enemy . To show how much I honour him , 
Great Sir , you are free , your Sister , all are free ; 
Enjoy your Empire , Ransomless return . 


Cos .  To see this Virtue , 
Is more to me than Empire ; and to be 
O'ercome by you , a glorious Victory . 


Max.   Now , in the Devil's Name , what means he next ? 



Dio.   I know that Glory 
Is like Alcides' Shirt , if 't is kept on 
Till Pride has mixed it with our Blood ; nor can we 
Part with it at our pleasure . Pull it off , 
It brings along with it both Flesh and Sinews , 
And leaves us living Monsters . 


Max.   Would it were 
My turn to put it on , I 'd hazard that . 


Dio.   no , I 'll not be forced 
Out of this glorious Castle ; uncompelled 
I will surrender it . Let it suffice , 
I have touched the Height of Human Happiness , 
And fix here my Non ultra . Hitherto 
I have lived a Servant to ambitious Thoughts , 
And fading Glories ; my Remains of Life 
I dedicate to Virtue ; and to keep 
My Faith untainted , farewel Pride and Pomp , 
All Circumstance of glorious Majesty , 
Farewell for ever . 


Max.   What follows now ? 



Dio.   Nephew , I have noted , 
That you have long , with envious Eyes , looked on 
My flourishing Fortune ; you shall have possession 
Of my Felicity ; I deliver up 
My Empire , and this Gem , which once I prized 
Above it . Here Maximinian , take her , and take all : 
I know she 's not averse to it . 


Aur.   I gave myself by a solemn Vow to you , Sir ; 
Dispose of me as you please . 


Dio.   then you are his . 
Noble Charinus , have we your Consent ? 


Cham   I am so amazed , I know not what to say . 
Great Sir , dispose of me , of all . 


Dio.   You are too gracious ; your Approbation 
Is all I beg ; the Soldiers Love I doubt not . 
His Valour , Gentlemen , will deserve your Favours , 
Which let my prayers further . Now all is yours : 
But I have been too liberal , and given that 
I must entreat for now . 


Max.   How ! Was I flattered with imagined Greatness ? 
am I become your Sport ? 


Dio.   Mistake me not ; 't is only the poor Grange , 
The Patrimony which my Father left me , 
't is only that I sue for . 


Max.   't is yours , Sir , all the pleasant Valley round it ; 
All shall be yours , and we 'll attend you thither . 


Dio.   no , Maximinian , no ; 
I have taken leave of Pomp an Ceremony . 
In Rome seek Honour and Renown ; I 'll study 
To find Content elsewhere . Dissuade me not ; 
My resolution 's fixed : And now Drusilla , 
Being as poor as when I vowed to make thee 
My Wife , if since thy Love has felt no change , 
I am ready to perform it . 


Dru.   I still loved 
Your Person , not your Fortunes : In a Cottage , 
Being yours , I am an Empress . 


Del.   And I 'll make the Change most happy . 



Dio.   Let me entreat 
Charinus , Maximinian , and Aurelia , 
To see my Vow performed . You but attend 
My Glories to their Urn. Now Maximinian , 
O'errun the World ; Let me myself subdue : 
Give me Content , and take all Honour , You. Exeunt . 


End of the Fourth Act.  

ACT v.  

SCENE I  

Scene a Palace . Enter Maximinian and Aurelia . Aur.   Why droops my Lord , my Love , my Life , my Caesar ? 
Does not ( with open Arms ) your Fortune court you ? 
Rome owns you for her Master ; I myself 
Obey you as my Husband , love and serve you . 
If you contemn not these , and think 'em Curses , 
I have no other Hope nor no Ambition , 
no Wish beyond this Happiness . 


Max.   O my Aurelia ! 
thou Parent , and thou Nurse of all my Glories , 
And Comfort of my Life ; I had better lived 
Poor and obscure , and never reached the Top 
Of this great Empire , than be in daily danger 
To be thrown headlong down , almost as soon 
As I have reached it . 


Aur.   These are Panic Terrors 
You fashion to yourself . Is not my Brother 
( Your Equal and Copartner in the Empire ) 
Vowed and confirmed your Friend ? the Soldier constant ? 
Has not your Uncle Dioclesian taken 
His Farewell of the World ? What then disturbs you ? 


Max.   The Fear I am not fixed , and the Assurance 
That what I am possessed of 's not my own , 
But still depends upon another's Favour , 
For nothing's more uncertain ( my Aurelia ) 
Than Power that stands not on its proper Basis . 
O , the foundation 's Weak ! But I 'll be plainer , 
I 'll hide no Thought from you . Is not the Empire 
My Uncle's Gift ? and may he not resume it 
Upon the least Distaste ? Does not Charinus 
Cross me in my Designs ? And what is Majesty , 
When 't is divided ? Does not the insolent Soldier 
Call what I have , his Donative ? And what can take 
more from our Honour ? no , ( my wise Aurelia ) 
If I to you am more than all the World , 
As sure you are to me ; if we desire 
To be secure , we must be Absolute , 
And know no Equal . 
When we are obeyed for Fear and not Entreaty , 
then we are safe . 


Aur.   Your Mother brought you 
Into the World an Emperor : You persuade 
But what I would have counselled . Nearness of Blood , 
Respect , Piety , and Gratitude , 
And all the Holy Dreams of Virtuous Fools , 
Must vanish into Nothing , when Ambition 
( The Maker of great Minds , and Nurse of Honour ) 
Puts in for Empire : then you must forget 
Your simple Uncle , think he was the Master 
( In being once an Emperor ) of a Jewel 
Whose Worth and Use he knew not . For Charinus , 
( no more my Brother ) if he be a Stop 
To your Designs , he is to me a Stranger , 
And so to be removed . 


Max.   thou more than Woman , 
thou Masculine Greatness , 
O how I glory in thee ! Those Great Women 
Antiquity is proud of , when thou art named , 
Shall be no more remembered . Be but constant , 
And thou shalt shine among those lesser Lights 
To all Posterity like another Phoebe , 
And be adored as she is . 


Enter Charinus , Niger , and Guards . Aur.   here 's Charinus , with Anger on his brow . 



Max.   Let him storm , 
And you shall hear me thunder . 


Cham   He dispose of 
My Provinces at his pleasure , and confer 
Those Honours ( which are only mine to give ) 
Upon his Creatures ! 


Nig.   Mighty Sir , ascribe it 
To his assurance of your Love and Favour , 
And not to Pride or Malice . 


Cham   no , good Niger , 
Courtesy shall not fool me ; he shall know 
I lent a Hand to raise him , and will defend him 
While he continues Good : But the same Strength , 
If Pride makes him usurp upon my Right , 
Shall strike him to the Centre . You are well met , Sir.  


Max.   that 's as you please to make it . Sir , I hear 
That you repined , and think yourself much wronged , 
Because , without your Leave , I have bestowed 
The Gallian Pro-consulship upon 
A Follower of mine . 


Cham   't is true ; and wonder you durst attempt it . 



Max.   durst , Charinus ! 



Cham   durst , Maximinian ; 
Again I speak it . Think you me so tame , 
So heavy , and unactive , to sit down 
With such Dishonour ? But recall your Grant , 
And speedily ; or by the Roman Gods , 
It quickly shall be tried who has most Power 
In Rome , and in the Empire . 


Max.   thou hast none , 
But by Permission . Alas ! poor Charinus , 
thou Shadow of an Emperor , I scorn thee , 
Thee , and thy Childish Threats . The Gods appoint him 
The absolve Disposer of the Earth 
Who has the sharpest Sword : I am sure , Charinus , 
thou wear'st too dull a one . When cruel Aper 
Had killed Numerianus , thy Brother , 
( An Act that would have made a trembling Coward 
As daring as Alcides ) thy poor Fear 
Made thee wink at it : then rose up my Uncle , 
( The Honour of the Empire , and of Rome ) 
Against the Traitor , and , amid his Guards , 
Punished the Treason . This bold daring Act 
Got him the Soldiers Suffrages to be Caesar ; 
And howsoever his too gentle Nature 
Allowed thee the Name only , as his Gift , 
I challenge the Succession . 


Cham   thou art cozened . 
When the Receiver of a Courtesy 
Cannot sustain the Weight it carries with it , 
't is but a Trial , not a confirmed Act. 
thou hast in those few Days of thy short Reign 
Shamed Noble Dioclesian , and his Gift : 
Nor doubt I , when he 's once rightly informed 
How much the Glorious Roman Empire groans 
Under thy Tyranny , but he will forsake 
His Private Life , and once again resume 
His former Majesty . then doubt not , Soldier's , 
But that this Mushroom , sprung up in a Night , 
Shall as soon wither . And for you , Aurelia , 
If you esteem my Honour , or your own , 
Fly from a certain Ruin. So farewell . 
Ever long you shall hear more . Ex. Charinus , Niger , Guards . 


Aur.   Are you struck dumb , 
That you make no Reply ? 


Max.   My Life , I 'll do , 
And after talk . I will prevent their Plots , 
And turn 'em on their own accursed Heads . 
My Uncle ! Shall I live in fear of him ? 
Shall Justice , Piety , or Gratitude , 
Stop my Ambition in its full Career ? 
no , he who would a mighty Empire sway , 
Must levelly all that stops him in his Way . Exeunt . 


Scene A long Walk in the middle of a great Wood ; at the farther end is a Prospect of Dioclesian is Grange in a delightful Valley . Enter Two or Three Countrymen . 1 Cou.   Dost think this great Man will continue with us ? 



2 Cou.   continue ? yes , what else ? he has bought the great Farm ; 
And all the Grounds about it , all the Woods too ; 
And stocked it like an Emperor . 


1 Cou.   But hark ye . 
We must not call him Emperor . 


2 Cou.   that 's all one , 
He is the King of good Fellows , that 's no Treason ; 
And so I 'll call him , though I be hanged for 't . 


1 Cou.   Now all our Sports again , and all our Gambols ; 
Our Songs , and Evening Dances on the Green.  


2 Cou.   Aye , aye ; he shall have Songs , if that will please him , 
we 'll bawl most fearfully . 


1 Cou.   We must all be Fine , and Neat. 
On goes my Russet Jerkin with blue Buttons . 


2 Cou.   And my green Breeches I was married in . 
we 'll be all Handsome too , and wash our Faces . 
Neighbour , I see a remnant of March Dust 
that 's hatched into your Chaps : Go to the Barbers , 
And mundefie your Muzzel . 


Enter Geta.  1 Cou.   It shall be done : But who comes here ? 



2 Cou.   no doubt 't is some great Man  



1 Cou.   Let us be civil then , and show our Breeding . 
Heaven bless your Worship . 


2 Cou.   Your Greatness , or your Mightiness , what you please , Sir.  



Get.   Thanks my good People . 
Stand off , and know your Duties . As I take it , 
You are the labouring People of the Village , 
That Blow , and Sow ; keep Sheep — Stand farther off yet , 
And mingle not with my Authority , 
I am too mighty for your company . 


1 Cou.   We know it , Sir , and we desire your Worship — 


2 Cou.   Your Honour , Fool — 


1 Cou.   Your Honour , Fool , to take a little notice of us , 
And recommend us , Sir , to our new Landlord . 
And if our Country Sports can please him , Sir.  


Get.   For your Sports ( my Friends ) they may be seen . 
Yes , out of the abundance of my Wisdom 
And Favour , when they 're ready , I 'll behold ' 'em . 
You stare upon me , Friends , as if you knew me . 
't is true , I have been a Rascal as you are ; 
A Fellow of no mention , nor no mark , 
Just such another piece of Dirt , so fashioned . 
But Time , that purifies all things of merit , 
Has set another Stamp on me . Come nearer , 
And be not fearful ; I take off my Austerity . 
Now know me for the great and mighty Steward 
Under this Man of Honour . 


All.   We all acknowledge you . 



Get.   He was a kind of Rascal once like me , 
Or little better , but that must be forgot too . 
Take notice now , y' are all of ye my Vassals . 
I can , as I think fit , dispose of you ; 
Can blow you , and your Cattles out o th' Country . 
But fear me , and have favour . Come along with me , 
And I will hear your Songs , and perhaps like ' 'em . 


1.  Cou.   I hope you will , Sir.  



Get.   't is not a thing impossible . 
Perhaps I 'll sing myself , the more to grace you . 
And if I like your Women . 


2 Cou.   we 'll have the best , Sir , young , handsome Girls . 



Get.   The handsomer , the better . 
You may bring your Wives too , 't will be all one charge to ye : 
For I must know your Families . 


All.   You shall , Sir.  



Enter Delphia . Del.   't is well my honest Friends , I know y' are hatching , 
Some pleasurable Sports for your great Landlord . 
Fill him with Joy , and Pleasure , win him to ye , 
And make his little Grange seem a large Empire , 
Full of all sweet content . Thus win his favour , 
Which daily shall be show'rd upon you all . 


Get.   Will you lend us a Devil to play Gratis ? 
Fiddlers are very chargeable . 


Del.   ay , I , any thing ; and Bagpipes that shall play alone . 



Get.   I thank you . 
Come follow me ; and get all ready instantly . Exeunt . 


Del.   Do , and when you are prepared , come hither Friends , 
you 'll find him in this Grove . 


Enter Diocles , and Drusilla . Dio.   Come , my Drusilla , 
The Partner , maker of my Happiness . 
I hope now you believe me ? 


Drus .  Yes , and dare assure you , 
I am most happy , if you think yourself so . 


Dio.   I am , my sweet . 
I swear to thee , I find now by experience , 
Content dwells not in Courts . 


Drus .  Walk on , Sir , 
The Grove is cool , the gentle Breeze refreshing . 


Dio.   O my Drusilla , 
When Man has cast off his ambitious Greatness ; 
Retired into the sweetness of himself ; 
Built his Foundation upon honest Thoughts , 
Not great , but good Desires , his daily Servants , 
How quietly he sleeps ! how joyfully 
He wakes again , and looks on his Possessions , 
And from his willing Labours feeds with Pleasure ! 
Here hang no Comets in the shapes of Crowns , 
To threaten our contents . Nor here , Drusilla , 
Cares , like Eclipses , darken our endeavours . 


Drus .  I am glad you make the right use of this sweetness . 
This homely , but this innocent retiredness . 


Dio.   't is sweet indeed , 
And every circumstance about it , shows it . 
How liberal is the Spring in every place ? 
The Artificial Court , seems but a Shadow , 
A painted imitation of this glory . 
How sweet the Flowers smell ! here 's Nature in perfection . 
Let all the Perfumes in the Empire pass this , 
The charming'st Ladies Cheek , show such a Colour ; 
Here , in sweet poverty , dwells noble Nature . 
And every thing we add , Adulterates her . 
What music 's this ? Pipes within . 


Del.   You shall want no Delights to entertain you ; 
Your Country Neighbours ( Sir ) are come to welcome you , 
To show their honest Sports ; pray grace 'em , Sir. 
A King shall never feel your Joy. Sat down Son.  


Enter Countrymen , and Women ; they Dance : Before 't is half finished Delphia interrupts ' 'em . Del.   Hold , hold , leave off a while . 



Dio.   What all you Mother ? you look pale , and tremble . 



Del.   no , I am only careful of your safety . 
Be not disturbed my Son , sit down again . 
And now , finish your Dance . 


Enter Maximinian , Aurelia , and Soldiers . They stand at a distance till the Dance is finished . Del.   Do you see that mighty Man ? 
Be not amazed , but let him do his worst . 


Max.   How confident he sits amongst his Pleasures ! 
And what a cheerful Colour in his Face ! 
And yet he sees me too , the Soldiers with me . 


Aur.   What you have resolved to do , do speedily , 
And then you are an Emperor . 


Max.   I william  



Dio.   My Royal Cousin , how I Joy to see you ; 
You , and your lovely Empress ! 


Max.   I am not come to surfeit , 
With these poor , Clownish Pleasures ; but to tell you , 
I look upon you like my Winding-sheet , 
The Urn to all my greatness ; 
For whilst you are alive — 


Dio.   Alive my Cousin ? 



Max.   I say alive , I am no Emperor ; 
I am nothing but my own disquiet . 


Dio.   How , Sir ? 



Max.   't is true , Sir , the Soldiers dote on you . 
I would fain spare you ; but my own security 
Compels me to forget you are my Uncle , 
Compels me to forget you made me Caesar . 
For whilst you are remembered , I am despised . 


Del.   Fear nothing . 



Dio.   Did I not choose this Poverty , to raise you ? 
I gave that Royal Lady to your Arms , 
Blessed you with her bright Beauty ! Gave the Soldier , 
The Soldier that hung to me , fixed him to you . 
Gave you the World's command . 


Max.   This shall not help you . 



Dio.   Hear once for all , and then consider wisely , 
Place round about my Grange a Garrison , 
And if I offer to exceed my Limits , 
Or ever in my common Talk name Emperor , 
Or look for Adoration , nay for Courtesy , 
Above the Days Salute . 


Max.   This will not serve . Soldiers , dispatch him instantly , 
And all the Treasure that I have — Thunder and Lightning . 


1 Sol.   The Earth shakes ! 
We totter up and down , we cannot stand , Sir. 
Methinks , the Mountains tremble too ! 


2 Sol.   How thick the Flashes come ! we shall be burned all . 



Del.   Fall on Soldiers . 
You that sell innocent Blood. Fall on , and bravely . 


Sol.   We cannot stir . 



Del.   You , Sir , you have your Liberty , 
So has this Lady too . Why don't you do it ? 
A Hand with a Flaming Bolt in it appears over their Heads . Are you amazed ? Look o'er thy Head Maximinian , 
Read there the will of Heaven . Nay cruel Lady , 
You have your share in it too . What say you now ? 
Does all your Glory quake ? 


Aur.   O it shakes still ! 



Max.   And dreadfully it threatens . 
We acknowledge , Sir , our base and foul intentions ; 
And faults confessed , they say , are half forgiven . 
By your old Love , the Blood that runs between us . — 


Aur.   By that Love you once bore me ; by that , Sir , 
This blessed Lady now enjoys ! O , Madam , 
Speak for us , or we are lost for ever . 


Drus .  O fear him not , he is all goodness Lady ; 
He has no Pride , no Malice , no Revenge . 
he 's pitiful as a forgiving God. The Hand is taken in . 


Dio.   Rise Madam ; rise my Cousin , I forgive you . 
Great as you are , enjoy your Greatness still , 
While I place all my Empire in content . 
Once more I give you all , learn to deserve it , 
And henceforth study Justice , more than Greatness . 
My poor House is not fit to entertain you . 
But such a hearty Welcome as a poor Man 
And his true Love can make you , and your Empress , 
You freely shall command . 


Aur.   O , Sir , it is enough ; 
We shall enjoy all riches in your Goodness . 


Sol.   Long live the good and gracious Dioclesian . 



Dio.   I thank you Soldiers , and forgive your rashness . 
And Royal Sir , long may they honour you . 
Now Mother , can you treat an Emperor ? 


Del.   Yes , Sir , and like himself . 
He shall be entertained as Nobly , 
As if he were in Rome ; my Art shall fail me else . 
Sat down , and trust to me . They sit all . 


The MASQUE . 

A Prelude . Enter Cupid and Sings . Cup.   Call the Nymphs and the Fawns from the Woods . 



They call within . With.   The Nymphs , etc.  



Cup.   Call the Naides , and Gods of the Floods . 



With.   The Naides , etc.  



Cup.   Call Flora , and Comus . 



With.   Flora , etc.  



Cup.   Silenus , and Momus . 



With.   Silenus , etc.  



Cup.   Call Bacchus , and his merry merry Fellows . 



With.   Bacchus , etc.  



Cup.   Silvanus , and Ceres , and Tellus . 



With.   Silvanus , etc.  



Cup.   All leave for a while their Abodes . 



With.   All leave , etc.  



Cup.   Let the Graces , and Pleasures repair , 
With the Youthful , the Gay , the Witty , and Fair. 
May all harmless Delights , 
Happy Days , and kind Nights , 
For ever attend this blessed Pair . 
Enter a Bachanalian , and a Sylvan , and sing the following Song in Two Parts . Come , come away , 
no delay , 
Come away . 
All know 't is his will , 
then all show their skill , 
To grace Love's Triumphing Day . 


While a Symphony is Playing , a Machine descends , so large , it fills all the Space , from the Frontispiece of the Stage , to the farther end of the House ; and fixes itself by two Ladders of Clouds to the Floor . In it are Four several Stages , representing the Palaces of two Gods , and two Goddesses : The first is the Palace of Flora ; the Columns of red and white Marble , breaking through the Clouds ; the Columns Fluted and Wreathed about with all sorts of Flow'rage ; the Pedestals and Fluting enriched with Gold. The Second is , The Palace of the Goddess Pomona , the Columns of blue Marble , wound about with all kind of Fruitage , and enriched with Gold as the other . The Third is , The Palace of Bacchus , the Columns of green Marble , Wreathed and Enriched with Gold , with Clusters of Grapes hanging round ' 'em . The last is the Palace of the Sun ; it is supported on either Side by Rows of Terms , the lower part white Marble , the upper part Gold. The whole Object is terminated with a glowing Cloud , on which is a Chair of State , all of Gold , the Sun breaking through the Cloud , and making a Glory about it : As this descends , there rises from under the Stage a pleasant Prospect of a Noble Garden , consisting of Fountains , and Orange Trees set in large Vases : the middle Walk leads to a Palace at a great distance . At the same time Enters Silvanus , Bacchus , Flora , Pomona , Gods of the Rivers , Fawns , Nymphs , Heroes , Heroines , Shepherds , Shepherdess's , the Graces , and Pleasures , with the rest of their followers . The Dancer's place themselves on every Stage in the Machine : the Singers range themselves about the Stage . 

CHORUS of all . 

Behold , o mightiest of Gods , behold , 
At thy command we come ! 
The Gay , the Sad , 
The Grave , the Glad , 
The Youthful , and the Old , 
All meet as at the Day of Doom . 
Behold , o mightiest of Gods , behold , 
At thy command we come ! 


The First Entry of Heroes on the Stage . After the Entry , two Wood-gods sing in Parts . AH the sweet Delights of Love ! 
Who would live and not enjoy ' 'em ? 
I 'd refuse the Throne of Jove , 
Should Power or Majesty destroy ' 'em . 
Give me Doubts , and give me Fears , 
Give me Sighs , and give me Tears ; 
But let Love , let Love remove ' 'em . 
I approve 'em , 
I approve 'em ; 
But let Love , let Love remove ' 'em . 


then one of the Fauns Sings . Let Monarches fight for Power and Fame , 
With Noise and Arms Mankind alarm ; 
Let daily Fears their Quiet fright , 
And Cares disturb their Rest at Night . 
Greatness shall never my Soul enthral ; 
Give me content , and I have all . 
Hear , Mighty Love ! to thee I call ; 
Give me Astraea , she 's my All : 
That soft , that sweet , that charming Fair , 
Fate cannot hurt while I have her . 
she 's Wealth , and Power , and only she , 
Astraea's all the World to me . 
CHORUS . 

Hear , Mighty , etc.  


The Second Entry on the First Stage in the Machine , by two Men and two Women . then Two of Bacchus' Followers Sing . Make room , make room , 
For the great God of Wine , 
The Bacchanals come 
With Liquor Divine . 
Make room , etc.  


then this is sung by one of Cupid's Followers . Still I 'm wishing , still desiring ; 
Still she 's giving , I requiring ; 
Yet each Gift I think too small . 
Still the more I am presented , 
Still the lesle I am contented , 
Thou she vow's she has given me all . 
Can Drusilla give no more ? 
Has she lavished all her Store ? 
Must my Hopes to nothing fall ? 
Ah! you know not half your Treasure ; 
Give me more , give over-measure , 
Yet you can never give me all . 


The Third Entry on the Second Stage in the Machine , by Four Women . then , After it this Dialogue , between a Shepherd and a Shepherdess . Shepherd .  Tell me why ( my Charming Fair ) 
Tell me why you thus deny me ? 
Can Despair , 
Or these Sighs or Looks of Care , 
Make Corinna ever fly me ? 
Tell me , tell me , cruel Fair , 
Tell me why you thus deny me ? 


Shepherdess .  O Mirtillo ! you 're above me , 
I respect , but dare not love ye . 
The Nymph who hears , inclines to Sin ; 
Who Parleys , half gives up the Town ; 
And ravenous Love soon enters in , 
When once the Out-work's beaten down , 
then my Sighs and Tears won't move ye . 
no , Mirtillo , you 're above me ; 
I respect , but dare not love ye . 


Shepherd .  could this lovely charming Maid 
Think Mirtillo would deceive her ? 
could Corinna be afraid 
She by him should be betrayed ? 
no , too well , too well I love her , 
Therefore cannot be above her . 
then let Love with Love be paid . 
Ah! my Life , my All I give her , 
Let me now , o now receive her . 


Shepherdess .  Ah! how gladly we believe , 
When the Heart is too too willing : 
Can that Look , that Face deceive ? 
Can he take delight in kill ? 
Ah! I die , if you deceive me ! 
Yet I will , I will believe ye . 
CHORUS in Two Parts . Ah! how gladly , etc.  


The Fourth Entry on the Third Stage , by two Youths . then this Song by one of the Pleasures . ALL our Days and our Nights 
Shall be spent in Delights , 
't is a Tribute that 's due to the Young : 
Let the Ugly and Old , 
The Sickly and Cold , 
Think the Pleasures of Love last too long . 
Be gone , be gone importunate Reason , 
Wisdom , and Council is now out of Season . 
Let us Dance , let us Sing , 
While our life 's in its Spring , 
And give all to the Great God of Love. 
Let us Revel , and Play , 
And rejoice , while we may , 
Since Old Time these Delights will remove . 
Be gone , be gone importunate Reason , 
Wisdom , and Council is now out of Season . 
CHORUS . 

Be gone , be gone , etc.  
The Sixth Entry on the farthest Stage by Two Children . then this CHORUS of all . Triumph , Triumph victorious Love , 
Triumph o'er the Universe ! 
The greatest Heroes bow to thee ; 
All Nature owns thy Deity ; 
thou hast tamed the mighty Jove . 
then all rehearse , 
In Noble Verse , 
The Glory of almighty Love. 
From Pole to Pole his Fame re-sound , 
Sing it the Universe around ! 
Triumph , Triumph victorius Love , 
Triumph o'er the Universe . 


Those who are on the Stage , and those who are in the several divisions of the Machine ; dance a Grand Dance to the time of the Chorus . At the end of it , Drums are heard at a distance . Dio.   What Drums are those ? 



Del.   They are your Friends , my Son. 
Charinus , with the old the honest Soldiers . 
They heard ( Sir , ) of your Danger , and they come 
To rescue you ; but all is well . Go welcome 'em ; 
This Night two Emperors you must entertain . 


Dio.   O Mother ! 
I have the will , but not the power to do it . 


Del.   Leave that to me . Sound all your Instruments ; 
With harmless Sports , and innocent Diversions 
we 'll meet 'em on their March , and treat 'em Nobly . 


Dio.   And let 'em know ; 
Quiet , Content , and true Love , breeds more Stories , 
more perfect Joys , than Kings , and all their Glories . 


The Curtain falls . EPILOGUE . 

YOU see what Charge we 're at , What hazards run , 
What mighty pains we take to be undone . 
Is 't not enough , you study our undoing , 
But we must be contriving our own ruin ; 
To stop the Breaches a Rebellion made , 
We wisely sent for Irish to our aid ; 
Who , would not swear we have the same pretence 
To fetch good Breeding , Wit , and Learning thence , 
As hope our Stage , all others should exceed , 
And mingling with us , mend our English breed ; 
When this is brought to pass , I am afraid 
That in a Playhouse I shall die a Maid ; 
That Miracles don't cease , and I shall see 
Some Player's Martyrs for their Honesty . 
J. H. — the greatest Bigot of the Nation , 
And see him burn for Transubstantiation . 
Or hope to see , from such a Mongrel breed , 
Wits that the Godlike Shakespeare shall exceed : 
Or what has dropped from Fletcher's fluent Pen , 
Our this days Author , or the Learned Ben.  
Now all our Writers , all their gifts impart 
In spite of Nature ; and in scorn of Art 
no wonder Irish Fogs , obscure our Light , 
When such as scarce can read , presume to write . 
O poor Parnassus , thou art eaten bare , 
For every Rhimer has a Common there ; 
The Muses now are errand Strumpets grown , 
Hacknyed by every Scribbler in the Town . 
Well Sirs , since others Faults I have made known , 
Let me propose a Project of my own , 
Depose our Men , our Male Administrators , 
And once try us , us Female Regulators ; 
I 'll be content to live and die a Nun , 
If ere we manage worse than they have done : 
Nay more ; I will be bound to make it good , 
And that is very hard to flesh and Blood , 
If you our total ruin would prevent , 
Make ours , I say , a Female Government . 
FINIS . 

