THE Loving Enemy OR A famous true HISTORY Written originally in the French Tongue , by the most incomparable Penman of this Age , J. P. Camus B. of Belie . MADE ENGLISH By Mayor Wright , As his Recreation , during his Imprisonment . 

the Second Edition Revised . 

LONDON , Printed for Thomas Rooks , in Gresham College , next the stairs , entering upon the Exchange , near Bishopsgate-street : who makes and sells the best Ink for Records . 1667.  

To the HONOURABL And mos . Virtuous Lady , The Lady Mannock , Wife to the Honourable Sir Fra : Mannock , Knight and Baronet , of Giffords' Hall in Suffolk . 

Madam , 

Presuming that the fame of the matchless pen of my Renowned Author , will beget a Curious desire in your Ladyship , to employ some of your spare hours in the lecture of any of his works , I am the more confident to offer at the Altar of your high Perfections , ( where there is no less Judgement to discern then goodness to excuse and pardon faults ) the Translation of this small History the Loving Enemy , being the fruits of my broken and discontented hours , during my Imprisonment in Newgate for the Royal Cause , and the first endeavours of my unskilful pen. I hope it will more easily find a gracious acceptance with your Ladyship , because it is a Sien taken out of th● most flourishing Orchard 〈…〉 the honour of his Nation and glory of our Times , the famous B. of Belie , which I having ventured to transplant and graft upon a Crab-stock in mine own ill cultivated Nursery , ( though it bring forth many leaves and promises pleasing fruit ) may by malevolent eyes be blasted in the bud , if not protected and cherished by the favourable aspect of your Ladyship's Patronization , to whose most eminent virtues and no less ●udicious censure I shall ever make my appeal , and with all humility beg an acknowledgement , as being 

Madam , Your Ladyship's most humbly devoted Servant . I : Wright . 

Neparva averseris , inest sua gratia parvis . 

Disdain not ( Courteous Reader ) to cast thy serious View upon this ( though ) small Epitome of Virtue , In it thou'lt find patterns incomparable not only of Valour and Courtesy , but how to moderate thy hate , and where to place thy Love. We meet not every day with the opportunity of making vast profits , but no moment passeth that affords us not some benefit , and if we manage well these small oeconomies , in time they will amount to treasures of unspeakable riches ; Bees seek not to fraught themselves upon the lofty Cedar , or the broad-spreading Oak , but of the meanest and lowest flowers compose their sweetest and most excellent honey . Wars , Battles , the taking of towns and Citadels , the revolution of States and Empires , are always presaged by some prodigious Comet , great Conjunctions or Eclipses ; and there are writers enough that will employ their wits and pens to describe such high and notable transactions , like birds , rejoicing to spread their unconfined wings in a large free air , or fishes that delight to sport and tipple in the deepest Waters ; But few there are that will bestow the pains to pick and gather up the golden sand that 's found upon the banks of , but , some Rivers , every one being ambitious to dig and spend his labour in full and untouched mines . This was the humble exercise of my most renowned Author , ( the B. of Belie ) who made this worthy observation , [ That the more attentively he reflected upon those things which were brought to his knowledge by means either o● his eyes or ears , the more he found the World to be an immense Volume , which could never be enough studied , nor thoroughly read , and that the things of consideration which it offers to our understandings , infinitely exceed in number those that are read in the best furnished Libraries . ] Thereupon he studied to publish nothing that might come under the notion of trivial or vulgar , much less to transcribe any thing that formerly had been written , to the end that the Readers Curiosity might not be frustrated , but in the lecture of his works might meet with such narrations as never had been seen , read , or happily ever heard of before . Out of this richly adorned plot of most delicious flowers , I have made choice of one to present thee ( Reader ) which , if it hath not lost its fragrancy by transplanting , cannot but recreate thy senses . Yet though thou dost find this defect in it , be favourable in thy censure , and accept of my will to please thee , in endeavouring to put forth in thy mother tongue a history of such truth and quaint composure in the original , that it is applauded , nay admired , by all the Curious and Judicious of the French Nation , the benefit will be thine , the contentment mine , if it liketh thee , Farewell . 

J. W ▪ 

To the most Ingenious , a●● accomplished Gentleman , Mayor Wright upon his version of a choice piece o● I P. Camus B. of Belie , out of French into English . 

Sir , 

Camus is much your debtor , that you have 
Clad him in such rich English , gay and bram 
A witty Author saye's , When our first Sire 
Lost paradise ( by a deserved Ire ) 
He was in Dutch exterminated thence , 
Before tempted in Italian , and in French 
He fell a begging pardon , for of tongues 
The French is softest , and hath weakest lungs ; 
Now therefore Camus by your virtuous pains 
Speaks stronger lines , and in more sinewy strains : 
So have I known on Rome's half-speaking walls , 
Copies improve their first Originals . 
Jam. Howell . 

To Mr. WRIGHT , upon his Translation of the LOVING ENEMY . 

Why should 〈…〉 raise the venturing Merchant more 
That brings bright Pearls from th' Erythraean shore ; 
Or Gold from Indè , to enrich his Countrymen , 
then him that Traffics by a skilful Pen 
T' adorn his Native land with Foreign Wit ? 
W●at Merchandise can be compared to it ? 
Su●h is thy Traffic , such thy precious toil 
In this French Story . In a Foreign soil 
This tree first grew , and is so well transplanted 
By thee to us that it must needs be granted 
It loses nothing by the change of Air , 
But is as full 〈◊〉 Elegance , as fair 
( The Virtue's ●●ill retained ) as fresh in show 
In this , as in th●● Land , where first it grew . 
THOUGH : MAY.  

To Mayor Wright , on his Excellent translation the LOVING ENEMY . 

Bellaie , who whilom with his Trump of Fa●● 
Echoed on Seine landing at Silver Thame , 
Now charms our English ears , and though the 〈◊〉 
Be different , yet the Melodie's all one . 
Those noble foes which he 〈…〉 sings , 
thou makest the subject of thy well-tuned strings 
As deadly Feudes and a Domestic War 
Most happily by both accorded are . 
And though the Partial French may Bellaie cro●● 
we 'll say the Sword hath put the Mitre down . 
I wish thou couldst , who dost so well translate 
The Quarrels , and at last compose the hate 
Of Private persons on our Public Stage ; 
Set Periods to this too uncivil rage , 
( Which empties Families , and Prisons fills , 
And Friends , and Foes , promiscuously kills ) 
And teach by Precedent our Infant-state 
T'abbreviate , and restrain th' excess of Hate , 
Not let the future Gentry be undone 
For what was by their Grandsire's Grandsires done . 
Else we shall think this Worm called Man dares boast 
Who him offends , offends the holy Ghost . 
We read how Music Charmed Beasts , Fish , Fowle , Trees ; 
Mayst thou charm Man , more easily drawn then these , 
And we will crown with groves of Laurel Boughs 
( Th'emblem of Peace ) the Prize of wit , thy brows , 
AUG : RIVERS . 

To Mayor WRIGHT , upon his Excellent Translation of the LOVING ENEMY . 

Th'ingenious Fabler Metamorphosies 
Gods into Men , Men into Deities ; 
●et by enchanting Verse his feigning Pen 
shape's out inhuman Gods , and godless Men. 
But , the just Metamorphoser , BELLAY , 
Such heavenly transformations doth display 
As every hellish passion they control , 
And of a vicious , Frame a virtuous Soul . 
Witness this Story , where pure Love and Peace , 
Make cruel Hatred , Bloody Discord , cease . 
Yet English minds this profit , this delight , 
Had wanted , hadst not thou Judicious WRIGHT 
What thy BELLAY in choicest French hath said 
Into like English , Metamorphosed . 
John Chapperline . 

To my Noble Friend , upon his Translation of the LOVING ENEMY . 

IF generous actions merit any Praise , 
And Heavens Crown their active heads with Bays , 
then may all say , as well as I , there 's skill 
And Elegance , ●● the Translators Quill , 
Who here presents unto the world well dressed 
His like-spent hours , ( bien a la mode ) and lest 
Detraction , Envy , Malice , or despite , 
Mis-judge my Friend , 't was done by Loyal WRIGHT . 
John Lillie . 

To my Dear Friend , Mayor WRIGHT , on hi● Learned Translation , Entitled , THE LOVING ENEMI 

Few words ( I know ) were they as neatly dressed 
As thy Translation , would become me best : 
And , ( could I couch , ( like some ) in every Line 
A New-borne-fancie ) stamp thee All-divine . 
But as my Genius' Rude , and stale , and Dry , 
The Best I am's A Loving Enemy . 
[ An Enemy to BELLET , and his Lines , 
Both stained at once with my unhappy-rythmes : 
An Enemy to Language , most to thee 
Thus hung with Rags , in stead of Tapestry . ] 
Nor is it fit indeed that I should be 
A Friend to that , which is thine Enemy , 
Were it not Loving , and averse the Times , 
Which count best Virtues , but the worst of Crimes ; 
And tells Ambitious-man , wherein he fails , 
Where to Cast Anchor , when to Hoist his Sails , 
With such a Mixture of Refined Wit , 
The Question , is , If Man Composed it ? 
And if a Man , What Angell's Hand did steer 
The Lucky-vessell that Arrived it here , 
With so much Skill , and in a Dress so fine 
BELIE will swear 't is none of His , but thine ? 

Strange ! that a Goal such Tempting-fruit should bear , 
Without the help of Sun , or Rain , to cheer 
The Soil ; and it not Blasted in the Bud , 
Or Burned ( like other things ) for being too good ! 
And yet more Strange , to find so Plump a Style 
' Amongst such Leane-canters , in a School so Vile ! 
But Prisoners Advantage have in this , 
[ they 're Punished before they Act Amiss ; 
And have their Muses freed from all Extreamés 
Being seldom fired by Contracted-beames , 
Nor yet Debased to such Slavist-straines , 
As speak them more of Guts , than Subtle Brains ] 
" Thus Captives are the Men abound with Sense ; 
" Freemen , but Panders to their Eloquence . 
Geo : Wharton . 

To my very much honoured , and judicious Friend , Mayor WRIGHT , upon his LOVING ENEMY . 

This Book , Sir , needs no fillet on the brows , 
Or silken Muse to grace it ; Beauty grows 
In every line , and borrowed Grace defies ; 
Tie Ribbons where you mean to sacrifice . 
O had this fair composure been my own ! 
I should have boasted some perfection , 
And my exalted Soul reached that degree 
( Before I died ) to Love my Enemy . 
But this Piece to your Art owes all her Glory , 
And I but late admitted to your story 
am only now concerned to wonder , how 
You should throne Love and Malice in one brow 
So sweet , I knew not , as the flames were dressed , 
Whether the Fiend , or Angel pleased me best . 
For still Clione ravished as she moved , 
Her rage as excellent , as when she loved ; 
Had there been less of either in her blood , 
I had repent Laurean was so good . 
But with what reason , some bold Critic says , 
Should I , on you translate the Author's praise ? 
This was Bellays . Divide me betwixt you two : 
But what I understand , I owe to you . 
J. SHIRLEY . 

THE LOVING ENEMY . 

AS when insulting Neptune musters his turbulent waves against the boisterous winds , and tosseth ( sometimes ) his billows to the Sky , then hurries them again into his restless bottom , seeming to threat the Earth with P●ssundation ( yet all his storms produce nothing but Froth , for the Allseeing Providence hath so set forth his bounds to the limits of her prefiction , that a small sandy bank bridles in his untamed exorbitance . ) Such is the vain potency of men that oppose themselves to the decrees of Heaven . In vain do Monarches load the Ocean with Ships , and fill the Earth with Armies , if the great God of Hosts assist not in their Battles , these multitudes of Men , and all these Martial preparations are soon of themselves dissolved and dissipated : They make great noise , but to so small purpose , for God is only he that gives the Victory , reserving to himself the disposal of the Events of War , without respect to the disparity of the Combatants . no force can Rout the Party he maintains , for who can withstand his chosen , or break those squadrons that have his Banners for Protection ? 

I speak this only , as calling to mind that numerous Army which the Emperor , Charles the Fifth , brought by Sea and Land to sackage France , which he had already swallowed in his Fancy . It was at that time when he fell into Provence by the Coast of Genua , with so powerful an Army , that it seemed no force was able to oppose him . But God ( who hath taken to his particular charge the preservation of this flourishing Monarchy , since by his Holy Writ we are taught , that amongst all the Flowers the Lily is his choicest favourite ) cast confusion in the face of this mighty Prince , ( who seemed to place his confidence in the multitude of his Soldiers . ) And at the first sight of our King , Henry the Seconds Army , confounded and overthrew all his Designs , to show him how vain are all attempts against God's immutable Decrees ; and that the Honour of th' Immortal flower de Luce , shall continue as long as the World hath being . The Egyptians , said Israel , relied upon the force of their Chariots , and their Horsemen , but God's People put all their confidence in him , and only trust in that Almighty's aid that framed both Heaven and Earth . 

The violent incursion of this so formidable Host ( composed of so many several Nations , that the different Idioms made it seem a kind of Babel ) found an unexpected Remora ; and in very short time was quite discomfited by a strange contagious Sickness that swept the men away by thousands , which blasted the Vain hopes of the Ambitious Emperor . A certain French Gentleman that was taken Prisoner by the Spaniards , his horse being killed under him , gave a notable check to his aspiring thoughts by a witty and generous Answer : This Prisoner being brought before the Emperor , amongst diverse other Questions he was asked , How many day's journey it was from Aix to Paris ? The Gentleman well perceiving the scope of that demand , replied , If by Journeys your Sacred Majesty doth mean Battles , ( as in our language we say the Journey of Ravenna , meaning the battle that was fought that day in that place ) you will find them infinite : Giving the Emperor to understand thereby that France being so undrainable a Source of People , and so fertile a nursery of men , He could never be able to accomplish his ends upon that Hydra , nor conquer , so Martial and Heroic a nation with so much facility as he imagined . The gallantry of this gentleman's answer in the Condition he then was , so pleased the humour of this great Prince , that he esteemed him much the more for it , and gave presently order that he should have all respectful and honourable usage during his Imprisonment . 

Always before a furious storm breaks out you see the Sky o're-spred with Vapours , the Clouds condense themselves , and the rain blacken in them : Lightning precedes the thunder and the noise is heard long ere the thunderbolt falls down . The Rumour of these great forces which the Emperor brought from Italy and the Confines of Genua , bred an extreme terror in Provence : And as Seafaring men who foreseeing tempestuous weather , hasten all they can to make into the Shore and bring their ships to ride in some safe Bay , so the affrighted people of Provence strive to secure their goods and persons within Cities , Castles and strong holds , where they may be sheltered from the Violence of this overpowerfull Enemy , and give testimony of their Valours by a courageous resistance ; But in regard the most considerable places of that Country were too weak defences against th' Impetuosity of so fierce a Torrent , the richest and most noble families pitched upon Avignon , ( a City belonging to the Pope ) which standing neuter , and no way interested in the differences betwixt these two Monarches , was chosen as the fittest and securest place of refuge for the Gentlewomen and Ladies , where ( as in a Sanctuary ) they might preserve their honours , ( dearer to such than life ) from the violence and Insolency of the Soldiers : As for the men following the dictates of true magnanimity , they repaired all to their own Prince's Army , there in testimony of their Loyalty and valour to Sacrifice their blood and lives in the defence of their King and Country . 

' Amongst these occurrences it happened that there were two of the most remarkable families of that Province , who by the Contagion of their too near vicinity had contracted so much of the Italians disposition , that they mutually inherited the hatred , as well as the possessions of their Ancestors . But as the helpless Larks , spying the greedy Marlin leave off the private Skermishes , and seek by soaring wing to procure their safety , and free themselves from the Pounces of their common Enemy ; So at the first appearance of the Imperial Eagle upon the Ligurian shore , these particular quarrels were presently appeased , these adversaries trampling under feet all private grudges , to make a valiant and unanimous opposition against the public Enemy of their King and Country . Whilst they respectively execute their King's Commands , in offices and employments suitable to their births and abilities , their Ladies are in Avignon , where in imitation of their husband's gallantries in this public affliction , they make a show of so much reciprocal amity and freedom , that by their carriage every one thought they had been perfectly reconciled , and had forgotten all former enmities ; so crafty is that faithless Sex , that can so dextrously cover the burning coals of their malicious practices under the white ashes of so fair a dissimulation ; Sex no less subtle and addicted naturally to paint their hearts then their faces , and hide an irreconcilable hatred under the most specious veil of seeming friendship . 

But this great design of the emperor 's , who aimed at nothing less than conquering all France , Vanished into smoke , as the history of those times teacheth us , ( to which I remit him that is more curious , to be more fully satisfied ) this proud Peacock was enforced to truss up his glorious tail : And of so great thunder & storm there remained nothing but dirt and water ; In a word he left Provence with as much shame as he had gotten it with glory , like a straw fire as soon quenched as kindled . He being retreated to his own Seat in Germany , the King having given order for reparation of the breaches and spoils this foreign Army had made in his Country , and disbanded his own , retired to Paris , his Metropolitan City , the residence of his Court and Centre of his Kingdom : And those of Provence went to repossess their former habitations . 

But as these public troubles had qualified for a time th' Inveterate enmity of these two families ( whence I derive the process of this discourse ) the public Peace revived it . As the suppressing of fire in a close Furnace augments the heat , and as a stifferunning stream swells and redouble's its rapidity the more it finde's opposition : So this forced retention increased their animosity ; besides in probability , Ambition and Envy , ( two spurs of the Emulation which commonly grows betwixt equals ) might re-enkindle this hatred upon occasion of service in the Army , where each Chief by advancing his own fortune striven to outvie his Competitor . Insomuch that being returned to their own mansions ( which were not far asunder ) after this public storm rose a particular one betwixt them , so Violent that it could not be allayed without the effusion of much blood . Accursed Duel , Scourge of our Nation , disturber of our tranquillity , wherefore must thou destroy in the sweetness of a quiet Peace , those whom the Sword had spared in the fury of a raging War ? 

Silvin and Poliecte ( the two Enemies ) desirous by this last encounter to set a period to all their differences ( which would never be composed by the mediation of all the friends they had ) seek to make parties & Confederacies on each side , and levy a kind of petty civil war in Provence . In the end to avoid shedding of much blood , they resolved upon a form of battle of six , against six , and to end all their discords , by the death of the one or the other party . Silvin choose his brother and four of his Allies for his assistants against Poliecte and his Associates . Poliecte had a hopeful gentleman to his Son , about twenty years of age , newly come from the Academy , very expert on horseback and at his weapon and of a Courage answerable to his dexterity . As soon as this gallant heard of his Father's engagement against Silvin , he would needs be of the Party ; but the Father having no other Children , was so tender of him , that he could not be persuaded to let him expose himself to that danger , thinking that although his own fortune might be to die in that Combat , his Son surviving would keep up the name and honour of the family . But Laurean being youthful and of a fiery Spirit , was enraged at his Father's resusall , and vowed he would precipitate himself into a thousand deaths rather than suffer his Father to engage without him . Poliecte no way disinherited his agility nor his gallantry , but feared the tenderness of his youth , of the mature vigour and experience of those whom his Enemy had taken for his seconds . At last Laurean exclaimed , entreated , conjured , and stormed so much that his Father was enforced to condescend to his desire , and suffer him to measure his Sword with Silvin's brother and second . 

Without troubling myself to describe every particular of this Combat , not to speak according to the Proverb , as a Clerk at arms ; I will relate you only the Event , which was thus . Silvin was killed outright by Poliecte's own hand , Fructule wounded and disarmed by Laurean , two others of Silvin's side slain in the field , the other two put to flight : of Poliecte's party , only kept the dead Adversaries company , another escaped unhurt , but the four others were so desperately wounded , that Poliecte and his son were carried off as dead ; and although the glory of winning the Field was theirs , it was a dear-bought Victory . They were carried to Avignon , where their Wives yet remained . The one received news of her Husband's death , with such incessant screeking and complaints , as pass all terms of expression ; the other was not much less aggrieved , seeing her Husband and her Son in so deplorable a condition , that their deaths seemed nearer by much than their recovery . Fructule was also brought thither , but through the loss of so much blood he had such frequent Syncopes , that every moment 't was thought he would expire . Silvin's wife ) received her Brother-in-law in this doleful equipage , and with Clione ( her Husbands only daughter and heiress ) so carefully tended him , that within some days there were evident signs of his recovery . Poliecte's wife , was no less busied about her Son and husband , whose desperate wounds put her in continual apprehension of their deaths . Her conjugal and motherly afflictions bred in her most insupportable affections , for her heart being equally balanced , and bearing a share in both their sufferings , could no way condescend to the losing of either of those so nearly and so dear beloved persons . But the Heavens not willing to keep her soul any longer suspended betwixt these two Idols determined to take one of them : Both were so near death , that 't was thought , one while the Father , another while the Son would lead the way ; these sad uncertainties gave strange convulsions to the doleful heart of Eulalie . At last Poliecte , who was more perplexed for his Son then for himself , obtained at length what oft he had desired , which was , that by the shortening of his days his Son's might be prolonged . So he deceased after long languishing and many pangs which his patience and true repentance made very instrumental to the expiation of his offences . 

His death was concealed from Laurean as much as might be , lest that sorrow added to the extreme anguish of his wounds should cut in sunder the weak spun thread of so frail a life ; as soon as there appeared some symptoms of health in him , and that the Consolidation of his wounds gave hopes of his recovery , I know not how the loss of his Father came unto his knowledge , but whether through the motives of his own good disposition , or the great affection he bore towards him that gave him his being in this world , or the suddenness of the grief which seized him unprepared , or whether as yet not thoroughly having gathered strength , but still languishing with pain , his heart was insufficient to resist so violent an assault , this news so strongly wrought upon his fancy , that falling into a continual fever with extravagant rave , he was possessed with a melancholy Imagination that he was dead himself . These kinds of diseases which trouble and pervert the sense and Judgement are the Physician's crosses , and which they hold the least incurable of any ; for what remedies can be applied to one that esteems all medicines useless , or out of a wilful obstinacy refuseth to take any ? This or worse was poor Laurean's condition , none could persuade him to take any kind of nutriment , saying that dead Bodies did not eat , and that it was ridiculous , and against nature to take any victuals ▪ no prescription of the Physicians , no remonstrances of Religious men , nor the incessant tears of the bewailing Mother , could prevail any thing upon his opiniative obstinacy , until one of his own Servants extremely perplexed at his Master's malady , bethought himself of an ingenious Stratagem , which proved no less profitable than pleasing . He knew that men tainted with such Hypochondriake diseases , are sooner cured by condescending to their humours , then contradicting them ; for crossing them doth but imprint their folly deeper in the brain , which nothing but some witty querk of invention can deracinate : so feigning himself dead , he was laid upon a bed in Laurean's sight , and there taking such meat as was brought to him , at last bred an appetite in his Master , who resolved , to imitate the dead man , and eat as he did . By this means , by little and little , his brains began to settle , and proportionably as he recovered strength of body , those melancholy Vapours dispersed themselves , which obfuscated his imagination , and his youthfulnesse added to the cure , and remedies applied to him , called him back from Death's door to the hope of a happy recovery , and in short time his wounds being thoroughly healed , he re-enjoyed as perfect health as ever . But as all worldly pleasures seldom are entire , he scarce had left off mourning for his Father , but he was re-obliged to the like sadness , both of heart and habit , for the decease of Eulalie , who quite overcome with sorrow for her husband's death , and the continual fears she was in for her Son , fell into a lingering disease , which consuming insensibly her spirits , enforced her at last to follow her so much beloved Poliecte , leaving Laurean the most disconsolate man living . 

Now let us see what passeth in the Adversary Silvin's family , where merciless Death sweeping all before him , makes doleful evidences of his uncontrollable puissance , yet nevertheless the coldness of his ashes is not of force enough to extinguish the coals of their implacable anger ; their hatred passeth the grave , which in my judgement is too large an extent , and aught to be the utmost point , the extremity of any malice should reach unto . Fortunate not being able to admit in the wounds ( which the grief for Silvin's loss had caused ) the ingredients of any Consolation , never considering that the Combat where 't was his chance to fall , was fairly carried without any treachery ; and that Poliecte himself , though not killed in the field , was since dead of the wounds her husband gave him , and that Laurean had escaped no better than Fructule : Incensed with furious appetite of revenge , breathes nothing in the ears and heart of Clione but a desire to procure the death of Laurean . Most wicked woman who not satisfied with so much blood as is already spilt ; wilt thou yet bathe thyself in his , whom the Heavens had preserved from so many dangers ? She would fain persuade her brother-in-law Fructule to fight again with Laurean , but he not ignorant of the laws of arms , retained himself within the terms of his profession , expecting some other occasion to satiate the irreconcilable hatred he bore Poliecte's heir . At last Death sent his Summons to Fortunate by an implacable messenger , a burning Fever , yet the violence of her disease could not make her heart relent , nor renounce her unworthy desire of Vengeance ; but she bound her daughter with this execrable Oath , never to marry any man , but such as should first bring her Laurean's head , as a sacrifice to her Father's Ghost . Whether she died absolutely in this mind or not I cannot say , but I 'll assure you after her death , Clione kept but too severely the promise she had made her Mother , although it be rather an act of irreligion then of piety to observe so ill-grounded engagements . 

Being now her Uncle Fructule's ward her beauty , which was transcendent , & the noise of her great riches , made her the mark that the ambition of the most considerable persons of that Province aimed at . But she 's a second Atalanta , her love cannot be purchased without the hazard of the suitors life , she makes herself the price of Laureans head , so deeply her Father's death , & the pressing persuasions of her dying Mother , had engraved in her heart the hatred of this innocent gentleman . But commonly ill intents have bad events , and sad repentance follows for the most part all unadvised enterprises ; Four of the most eager aspirers to the acquisition of this golden fleece , one after the other received a due chastisement for their temerity . The first remained a Cripple all his life , bearing in his deformity a perpetual mark of Laurean's Valour , the second was killed in the field , the third delivered shamefully his arms , and the fourth had served as a trophy to Laureans gallantry , if friends coming in had not separated them , and ravished this palm from our Champion . 

In mean time , as the same waters of the deluge which over-flowed the world , raised the Ark to the very Heavens , so the same means which Clione had invented to destroy her enemy , were to him as steps and degrees of Glory : For 't is incredible how much the success of these combats increased his reputation ; and although the act in itself was not commendable , yet the cause ( in regard he aimed at nothing but his own defence ) seemed so just , that his praises were trumpeted out by the very mouths of those that were jealous and envious at his honour . Seeing he was the only object of Clione's inveterate hatred , and that like Hydra'es' heads , the defeating of his Adversaries begat him fresh Encounters : his friends advised him often to absent himself from Provence , and go to the Court , where the King's presence might be a means to hinder the no less frequent than insolent provocations of Clione's frantic Lovers . But he was so far from consenting to these persuasions , that he slighted and rejected them as frivolous , and contrary to his honour and courage , fancying ( like the Lacedaemonian King ) that no man was stronger , or better than himself as long as he could hold his Sword. And indeed this inflexible magnanimity , scorning the dangers he was like to fall into every moment , made his Valour so cried up through the whole Country , that the most inconsiderate and stoutest of Clione's Suitors became more moderate , and learned at the expense of other men's sad fates to seek the enjoyment of her , without interessing themselves in the Vindication of her unjust passions . 

In short time she found no body would love her , nor that would harken to her when she offered herself , as the price and recompense of a murder . Wives purchased with blood are not usually beloved : It being a thing not ordinary to take a Wife purposely to put one's life in hazard , but rather to preserve it , for the generation of hopeful Successors . So that having lost all her hopes on that side , finding no body that to obtain her favour would cope with the Victorious Laurean , she fell into a profound melancholy , which made her take the most extravagant and furious resolution that could be imagined . She determines to execute her design with her own hand , but knowing how redoubtable Laurean's vigour was , and that natural weakness of her sex was incapable to resist the Violence of his invincible fury , she studies how to compass by subtlety that which she despaired by strength of arms to accomplish . After long raving and musing which way to effect her intention , she resolves to transvest herself , and getting into Laurean's Service , to watch her opportunity to murder him ; but she suddenly recanring that enterprise , considering how shrmefull a thing 't would be for a young Lady of her quality , to go alone disguised in that manner , and to how many ill censures she should expose her honour by so extravagant and unadvised an action ; besides she thought it almostimpossible to procure a Maid of confidence and courage enough to follow her , in so hazardous an attempt . Yet Heaven which had decreed the event , far different from her intention , suffered her not to remain long in this perplexity , by putting into her hands a bold Virago , who like another Sara offered herself to wait upon this courageous Judith in her perilous design , and to put in execution what commands soever she would lay upon her ; But then presently she found another difficulty of no less consequence than the former , which was , how they should get out of their house , and retire themselves awhile out of the sight of Fructule her Uncle & guardian , who watched her with no less Vigilancy than the restless Dragon that had in keeping the apples of the Hesperian garden . But 't is in vain to strive to prevent a woman that is wilfully resolved , the inventions they have to precipitate themselves into their own destruction , infinitely exceed any thought that can be imagined to preserve them . 

Clione feigns herself much troubled with those obstructions which alter the Complexion of so ful-blown roses in a Virgin's cheeks , and throw down the fresh colours of the maiden blush , placing in their stead the pale ensigns of the Lily : And having well greased her Doctors hand to prescribe in her Uncle's hearing the remedy which she desired , he ordered her to go to the Baths and drink the water of Baquieres , which are in Bigorre , a Province of Guyenne , at the foot of the Pyrenean mountains . Fructule condescends to the undertaking of this journey , which she so much desired , and the Physician affirmed was necessary for her health . amongst other lands and houses which she inherited by her Parent's decease , there was one in low Languedoc , just in her way where she intended to put in practice her Stratagem . She had to attend her two men and two maid Servants , whereof her faithful Melicerte was one . They were no sooner come to this house in low Languedoc , but Clione counterfeited herself so sick , and so stopped with these oppilations , that resolving to stay there till she could procure some remedy for this disease , ( which she so cunningly dissembled , that the most curious observours might have been deceived ) she sent back her Uncle's two men , reserving only her maids about her , which with the help of her farmer 's family she judged sufficient for her present Service . Now she is far enough out of Fructule's sight , Melicerte is only privy to her enterprise : as for the other maid , she easily found seeming pretexts enough to turn her away , and the good honest Farmer is satisfied with any thing she 's pleased to tell him . By this means she see 's herself in a full liberty of executing her extravagant purposes . She causeth to be bought her two horses with good weapons , two men's clothing for herself and Melicerte , and having cut their hair ( a strange resolution ) and fitted themselves to their minds , they road towards Laurean's house . 

Being lodged in a neighbouring Village , Clione , under the name of Florent , and Melicerte calling herself Nartal , they gave out that they were Languedochian youths that wanted service : since they have now taken the names and habits of men , we will speak of them whilst they continue thus , as of men , their enterprise being bloody and Martial . In short time they insinuate themselves into the acquaintance of some of Laurean's followers , ' amongst whom they learned that their Master was a great lover of music , finding it the only solace and Charm to divert the melancholy his generous mind was afflicted with , seeing himself the only object of the malicious practices of such implacable Enemies . Florent could Sing so tightly to the Lute , that his voice seemed to declare no less than an exact agreement betwixt the vocal and instrumental Music , thereby charming the rocks into such a posture , as if they had danced measures to that Harmony . Nartal had no such pleasing Voice , but he had so excellent a hand upon the Virginals , that joined in concert with the Lute , and Florents admirable Voice made so Harmonious a melody , that it sweetly stole out at the Ears the Souls of all the hearers . These pleasingly deceitful allurements , our Syrenes make the prologue of the detestable tragedy they intended against this innocent Ulysses . At last some of his Servants that had heard them presented them to Laurean , whose ears being infinitely ravished with their incomparable Harmony , and his eyes no less taken with their winning countenances and demeanour : he conjured them to make his house their lodging , assuring them to treat them like persons of noble Extraction , ( as he deemed them to be ) and that they should command all he had as freely as himself . The cunning Females perceiving with what impernosity their prey cast himself into the snares they had prepared for him , made many seeming excuses , & refusals of his Civility , although they desired nothing more than to remain there ; but that was merely to engage Laurean into deeper Conjurations , and to cover their staying with the colour of constraint . At last ( like Helen ) they were forced with their own consents . Laurean gives them honourable entertainment , Feasts them in the highest manner he can , knowing how fantastical Musicians naturally are ; and how hard it is to hold these Protheuses which change places and humours as often as they vary their tunes and notes . 

O the Admirable effect of Civility and courtesy ! which wrought so powerfully upon Florent's disposition , that presently it changed his resolution . His heart like Lead melts all at once , and love takes full possession of that breast , where a mortal and implacable hatred had so long kept his residence . Laurean is so ready in doing Florent all obliging and civil offices , that his heart must have been composed of Steel or Marble if it had not relented at such evident testimonies of affection : And Florent being of no rocky substance , nor composed of any other insensible matter , remarked so much grace and Comeliness in Laurean's person , such pleasing discourse and so winning behaviour , that by little and little his perfections made a most ardent impression in the heart of this Virago . Who can but admire this change ? she that came purposely to surprise , is herself surprised , and wounded to the heart ; she is become a friend , nay a passionate Lover , that went out a Capital Enemy , and with the most felonious and detestable intention , that the malice of the mortalest and most inveterate hatred ever could suggest . What various thoughts now agitate her disquiet mind ? What pleasure now she takes in the presence and Conversation with Laurean ? Now if she could persuade herself that Laurean would ever bear as much love to Clione , as he makes show of inclination to Florent , she should esteem her felicity a degree beyond infinite . 

Nartal observing his Companion very pensive and Melancholy , thought that the apprehension of the danger , and the difficulty of achieving their enterprise , had been the occasion of his discontent : But how much was he mistaken in his conjecture , since Florent now desire's as vehemently the preservation of Laurean's life , as formerly he had thirsted after his death . Nartal endeavoureth to encourage him to pursue their design , persuading him that those testimonies of affection which Laurean showed them , would be a means for them to accomplish with more facility their intention ; too much Confidence opening the gates to perfidious treachery , as much as mistrust is Mother of security . But how much did he find Florents Courage and resolution altered , and what amazement seized him when he heard expressions of affection proceed from the same mouth that had uttered so many menaces against Laurean , whilst the heart which gave her tongue its motion was fraught with so much gall and rancour . 

Having resolved with myself to abandon all that might breed tediousness in my histories , I cannot without countervening my resolution now relate the several discourses upon this occasion betwixt these two disguised damsels . In the upshot Clione that had not been ashamed to discover to Melicerte to what extremity her rage and malice against Laurean had transported her , thought it no dishonour to confess the new flame his merits had kindled in her breast . This Confession much satisfied Melicerte's curiosity , though she dissembled it as much as might be , and fed Clione with hopes of terminating their design with Joy and Contentment , notwithstanding so difficult and knotty a beginning . But a business of this intricacy could not be so easily disembroiled . The respects of honour retain Clione from making herself known to Laurean , but much more forbade her to discover the extreme passion wherewith her heart was inflamed for him . On th' other side , he , whether through a secret instinct of nature , more forcible than any artificial disguisements , or by the sweetness of Florents behaviour and Musical charms , or by any other private motive , he knew not what , he could not without great resentment absent himself from the company of these new guests , and when the night constrained him to retire into his Chamber , and called them to theirs , It was but to spin out the hours instead of sleeping in continual rave , which still began again when he did think to end them , losing himself in a Labyrinth of restless Imaginations . Who ever saw a blind Creature in Love with a thing he never saw , and passionately seeking after that he love's without knowing what it is : Such is the disquietness of Laurean's troubled mind , vehemently desiring he knows not what , and suffering strange effects , whose cause he was not able to for penetrate . Weak is the force of art against the instinct of Nature , Florent's perfections display their attractive power through the Shadows of all these artificial disguises . 

it 's true , 't was no small Alarm which Love gave to Clione's heart , where triumphing like a Victorious General , he put all other passions to the rout , and made a strange disorder in her breast . But Laurean's distemper is far greater , feeling sometimes much pleasure in his passion , then presently tormented with Dolours unexpressable , being inclined to love an object which he could not enjoy in the manner he did desire . How oft did he accuse Nature of mistaking , in placing in the body of a man ( as he thought Florent to be ) beauty and qualities that seemed much more Suitable to a Lady ; for the lineaments of his face were in his eye so exquisite , his complexion so delicate , his discourse so quaint , his Voice so feminine , his gestures so comely , and all his actions so little savouring of any Martial breeding , that he was much perplexed to find such rare perfections in a person whom the Divine laws , as well as those of Nature , forbade him to love with that horrible lust which so much defameth th' oriental climates , but never so much as entereth into the thoughts of the Septentrionalls . How much did it torment him to withdraw his eyes from an object which was so pleasing that he could never satisfy himself with looking upon it , and yet could not contemplate it without a Crime ? had he lived in the age of the Metamorphoses , how would he have importuned the Heavens to have made one according to his desire ? amongst many other particulars that passed whilst Florent and Nartal remained in Laurean's house : I will only relate two or three , which seem no less remarkable than delightful . 

One day , as they were discoursing of the Combats , which this Gentleman had fought against those , that through the instigations of Clione had challenged him ; there was one of the Company that fell into high Exclamations against the Cruelty and Malice of that Lady , reviling her with the terms of a Viper , a Fury , and a Fell-savage Beast ; wishing her out of the world , that Laurean's life might be secured from so many dangers , to which her irreconcilable hatred daily exposed him . For in effect , every moment he expected such kind of Messages ; and every time any one knocked at his Gates he fancied himself to be in one of those enchanted Castles of the Ancient Romans , where those that remained must always be ready armed , and in a posture to answer some new Challenge : But Laurean not suffering him to proceed in such Violent rail against a Lady that he esteemed full of Honor. You blame her ( says he ) for her hatred to me , and do not consider that it proceeds from the extreme love she bears to the memory of her Parents . Her Mother dying , made her swear my Ruin , as Asdrubal , made Hannibal and Amilcar , his Children , swear the destruction of the Romans , and make a solemn Vow upon the Altars never to be reconciled to them . And in this she doth an act both of Honour and Piety in so severely keeping her Oath and Promise . Besides , according to the Laws and Maxims of the world , who knows not that Revenge is held a point of Courage and Magnanimity ? If she be possessed with this Error , she doth but follow the stream of the general opinion , which transports oft times the most discreet , and considerate persons : Moreover , she takes me ( if not for her Father's murderer ) at least for the Son of him that killed him ; and in this respect how can she but abhor me ? and why should not she endeavour to deprive him of life whom she looks on as her Father's Homicide ? It is true , I could object many very lawful excuses , in regard the Battle was fought according to the Laws of Arms without Treachery ; and that my Father is since deceased of the wounds which he received from hers : that my hands were not otherwise dipped in her Father's blood , but in the just defence of my own Father's cause and quarrel ; and that I myself was brought off the Field with more probability of Death than Life . But a heart possessed with prejudice , and ulcerated with an incurable passion can admit of no reason , though never so just ; if the light of Truth and Equity could but once penetrate the breast of this fair Enemy , with its resplendent rays , and dissipate the misty clouds of this savage and inhuman Opinion which she hath conceived against me , I am confident it would abate her fury , and that she would acknowledge me to be more ready to honour , and serve Ladies of her quality and merits than she imagines . I have had the thought a hundred times to write her this resentment of my Soul , ( that being the only means I had to accost her ) for my sight I know is most odious to her : But a vain shadow of honour still retained me , fearing lest she should make trophies of my Letters ; and that some indiscreet readers might believe that the apprehension of Death had dictated them to me , seeing myself daily attacked with fresh Combatants ; and no sooner cured of my first wounds , but enforced to hazard the opening them again in a second Duel . Indeed had I but one Enemy to deal with , in a moment our difference would be ended by the death of one , or other , but I must Encounter as many as the Beauty of my dear Enemy ( which charms even those that have the least inclination to love ) produceth every day . I believe really , that nothing but death can release me from this misery ; It being impossible but that Hercules himself must at last fall under so many Adversaries . But besides the comfort I have from the goodness of my Cause , ( which is but a just defence ) so that I die honourably , without any stain to my reputation , I am satisfied . Happy beyond my deserts if this fair Enemy having sacrificed me to her Vengeance by the hand of some new Lover , may one day acknowldge her Error , and how she had shortened the days of a Gentleman of Honour , that ambitioned nothing more than to be her Servant . 

These last words pronounced so feelingly , and with such a grace , as was enough to have made the very rocks sensible of a relenting disposition , struck Florent's heart with such tenderness , that the blood started out of his eyes , and the tears trickling like Pearls of dew amongst the Roses of his cheeks , augmented much that beauty , which Laurean contemplated but with too much attention . Perceiving his tears , What , Florent , ( said he ) is it the default of my courage that breeds this effect of pity in you ? no ▪ no , do not think , though I am called every day to Death's door , that I will ever abate the least punctillio of Honour , which is so hereditary to my Family : Rather bewail the misfortune of those , that through Clione's means have fallen by my Victorious hand . So unworthy a diffidence ( replied Florent ) never entered into my thought , the proofs that you have given of your Valour in so many occasions are so public , that he must be a great stranger in this Province that is ignorant of them ; I am only sorry that such eminent virtues should be so unjustly exposed to the Cruelty of a barbarous Maid , who cannot deserve ( for so many unworthy actions ) that you should esteem so highly of her as you have expressed : And I believe if she knew your true worth , she would change her animosity into affection , whereby you might gather the roses of friendship in the same plot , that produced you the thorns of hatred . But that which forceth me to shed these tears , is the Sorrow that oppresseth me to see so generous and spotless a life exposed to so many deaths , and to such a Continued succession of tragical adventures . Would to God that I were able with the effusion of my blood to secure you from these troubles , or worthy to receive so much honour from you as to go a sharer with you in your dangers , for I shall never esteem my life better employed then when it is exposed to do you service . These compliments issued so gracefully out of that sweet mouth , that Laurean melting with such enchanting language , had much ado to refrain from tears , and express himself in terms suitable to his passion . 

It chanced at that same time that Laurean was visited in his house by a kinswoman ( whose name was Octaviane ) daughter to one of Poliecte's Sisters , and whose Father had been engaged in the long quarrel betwixt Silvin and Poliecte , whose cause ( for the mother's sake ) he striven to maintain and justify . This Lady hearing of her kinsman 's sad condition , being every day in danger of his life through the provocations of Clione's Champions , full of a Courage not ordinary in her Sex , and animated with a strange Rodomontado like disposition , came purposely to break to him the design she had to challenge Clione to fight with her , and so with each of them a dagger to revenge upon one another their Father's Deaths . An heroic resolution for a maid , had not despair been the principal motive to it . Laurean received her with the greatest testimonies of respect , friendship and Courtesy , that could be showed to so near a kinswoman , and so gallant a Lady . But when she discovered her design ( although he admired her Amazonian Courage ) he could not hold from laughing to see how vehement the desire of revenge was in a Sex of so much imbecility , like fire that flames with so much violence when it meets with any light and combustible material . Thence he took occasion to excuse within himself Clione's fury , who used all means possible to be revenged of him by her Lovers ; since Octaviane would expose her own life to so extreme , and almost inevitable danger to seek satisfaction for her Father's death . O could he have penetrated the secret of darkness , and discovered Florents disguise , he would easily have perceived that Clione's spirit was enraged with no less fury against Octaviane ! He absolutely disapproves of his kinswoman's proposition , telling her it was not only a furious rash enterprise , and contrary to all reason , but impossible to be effected ; and that coming to the knowledge of the world , it would make her the Table-talk of all France . 

Octaviane much distasted would not bate one Ace however of her resolution ; and what she had communicated to him in private , she spared not to speak openly , and in Florent's own hearing ( whom she did not take to be Clione ) which struck this disguised Damsel so to the heart , that her Face became like a Rainbow for diversity of Colours ; and you may well think her spirit was agitated with no less diversity of thoughts . Her heart working like the troubled Sea , one while she resolved to accept Octaviane's defiance , and engage , that Clione should meet her ; then the fear of discovering herself enforced her to bridle that impetuosity . But that which stretched the pin of Florent's patience to the uttermost , was , to hear Octaviane in a Raunting manner say , I have no less Noble blood in me , nor am I inferior in Estate to that inexorable murtheress ; and if my Lovers flatter me not , nor my own Glass deceive me , I think Nature hath been no less favourable to me than her : I have Suitors as well as she , who all make me the highest protestations that may be . Were I as cruelly minded as that barbarous Imp ; or had I as little pity upon those that make Love to me , I could impose the same Law upon them , and enjoin them to fight with those that she employs to revenge her Father's death upon a man that 's no way guilty of it . But rather than to be the cause of so much Bloodshed , I will Encounter her myself with a Poniard , and make a passage with my Blade for that Black Soul to sally out of her cankered Breast . Here Florent was fain to suppress his Choler with both hands , and strive to keep himself within the bounds of modesty ; partly out of respect of his own Honour , and partly out of hope to Chastise , by effects , the insolency of those outrageous words . And indeed , within a very little time , fortune gave him fit opportunity to accomplish that desire ; for Octaviane having heard him sing and join his voice to the ravishing accords of his Lute and Nartalls Virginals , she was so enchanted with that delicate voice issuing from a face all of flowers , a mouth of pearl and Coral , and a breath of amber , in an instant she lost the knowledge of herself , and giving way to this new flame , she became all ice to her old Servants . 

Florent not ignorant of the passions that her Sex was subject to , suddenly perceived by Octaviane's looks , sighs , and carriage , that the glances of his beautiful eyes had made no ordinary impression in her heart ; desirous to make this love an instrument of the hatred he bore her , for her invective language against Clione , he adds fuel to this new fire by feigned demonstrations of a reciprocal affection , and augments with high hopes of fruition the desires of this imprudent Damsel , like Falconers and Fishermen , that never present their baits to the unwary birds or fishes , but to take them and deprive them both of life and liberty . You may imagine whether Octaviane bit greedily at that bait , Nature inclining us to believe easily what we desire . It is not my intent to describe the particulars of this affection , no less sincere and ardent on Octaviane's part , then cunningly dissembled by Florent . In mean time do not you admire the several parts which Love doth act in human breasts , and are you not amazed at these strange intricacies ? Seeing at once two Enemies infinitely enamoured of each other , and two Lovers mortal Enemies : And each of the three principal Actors in this scene , ( Clione , Laurean and Octaviane ) were in love with what they hated , and hated what they loved . Who would not say that all this were enchantment , were it not apparent that Florent's attractive beauty and disguise were the origine and cause of these charms . Mean time while the Spirits of these three Lovers are thus encumbered and involved in this Labyrinth of confusions , arrives a new subject of disorder , which will produce many different effects of passion . 

Montdor a young Gentleman of the County Venaissin , having listed himself amongst the Suitors of our Penelope ( I mean Clione ) in her absence makes his addresses to Fructule her Uncle and guardian , demanding his consent . He ( knowing to what Fortunate dying had engaged his Niece , and the resolution she had taken to perform her Mother's injunction , which was to admit of no man to be her husband , but him that should bring her Laurean's head concealed not this condition from him , assuring him withal that he would deliver Clione into his hands , if he could but effect it . Love and the desire he had to advance himself ( two powerful goads to an ambitious youth ) soon made Montdor accept the terms , although he knew the injustice of the cause , and the sad success of diverse that had preceded him . To this effect furnished with very good Arms , and an excellent Horse , he comes to a Village within three leagues of Laurean's house , whence he sends a Challenge enclosed in a packet , which he pretended was sent from Court. Laurean who was acquainted with such kind of messages , read it without ever changing his Countenance , or giving the least suspicion of the Contents , resolving with himself to give the same satisfaction to this new Combatant as he had to the rest , only he was to beware lest under pretence of a single Duel , there might be some treachery intended , and so he might basely be deprived of that life , which he had exposed with such unparallelled gallantry . However he could not carry his business so secretly , but his design was discovered by the preparation of his Horse and Arms : It was presently noised through the whole Castle , and came to Octaviane's , Florent's and Nartal's ears . What diversity of thoughts ( think you ) were Laurean's and his Lady's minds then possessed with ? his only care was to preserve his honour and his life , and make his Enemy , feeling the sharpness of his Sword , repent too late the temerity of his resolution . Florent and Nartal Studied nothing so much , as by what means they might divert or compose this quarrel , Octaviane employed all her Rhetoric , but in vain , to dissuade her kinsman from answering the challenge : For ( besides that he was of himself too magnanimous to refuse that party by a Woman's persuasions only ) he stopped her mouth with her own reasons , representing to her the desperate design she was so inflexibly bend upon to fight herself with Clione , And the offer she made him of employing one of her Lovers to chastise the rashness of his Challenger , he rejected as a proposition highly injurious to his Valour and reputation . 

Here Florent took her at her word , to whom she had rendered many testimonies of affection , not only by her actions and demeanour , but also by her own confession , ( although accompanied with a bashfulness that becomes modest and chaste Virgins . ) Florent would ●ot let slip this opportunity , but made it serve as a specious pretence to cover the design he had already framed , either to fight himself with Montdor in Laurean's stead , or at least to be his second against him . But Laurean taking these offers as affronts , and as disadvantageous to his honour , imposing silence to his kinswoman , entreated Florent to excuse him if he could not commit so base an action as to suffer him to go in his place , since 't was a thing contrary to all the Laws of Honour and of Arms ; neither could he accept of him for his Second , since Montdor's Ticket mentioned that he would fight single , being unwilling to engage any other in that Duel . At least then ( replied Florent ) you shall permit me to go before , and view the place he assigns you , near the Village where he expects your Answer , that there may be as little Treachery on his part , as there is much generosity on yours . Laurean suspecting , and conjecturing aright the wile of this Cavalier , who desired that Commission for no other end , but to quarrel with Montdor , and prevent their Combat , would by no means be persuaded to consent to that employment . But not to discontent him altogether , he suffered , with much entreaties , Nartal to perform that Office , guessing , by his deportment , that he was not a man fit to contest with Montdor , who had the repute of the most expert and complete Horseman of that County . Florent was enforced to be satisfied with that , since no more could be obtained : Whereupon he dispatched a Letter by Nartal to Montdor ; wherein he forbade him expressly under pain of his perpetual disfavour to fight with Laurean , for reasons which he should know at their first meeting : This he wrote with his own hand , and subscribed Clione . 

Nartal with this Letter , and other private instructions from Clione , takes his way towards Montdor , where being arrived , he delivers the Letter , the Contents whereof distracted Montdor's mind with a thousand confused imaginations : for knowing very well the hand , and bearing a respectful awe to the absolute Command of that severe Mistress , who had no less authority to make her Lovers fear her , than Beauty to attract their Loves . Love solicits hard for Obedience to that Command ; representing often to him Clione's threats to deprive him of that which he sought for in that Duel with peril of his own life , since he had no other occasion to be Laurean's enemy . But to revoke the Challenge he had sent , he thought that would make too great a breach in his reputation ; and that exposing himself to the blame of Cowardice , would stain him with perpetual infamy : At last he concludes in favour of his Honour , and to the prejudice of his Love ; choosing rather to be deprived of Clione , than of that glory which such magnanimous Spirits aspire by virtue of their Arms . So to be rid of Nartal's importunity ( who pressed him extremely to acquiesse at Clione's entreaty ) he feigned to believe that the Letter Nartal had delivered him ( though he knew it to be of Clione's own penning ) was counterfeited by some other , but would by no means tax Laurean with it , lest that might give occasion of deferring the Enterprise which he then was too deeply engaged in to repeal with Honour . Hereupon Nartal prayed him to observe well his Physiognomy ; seeming to wonder that a man's Habit , and a Hat covered with plumes , should make him so much mis-kenne that Melicerte whom he had so often seen attending on Clione ; assuring him by many particulars , that 't was none but she ; and that her Mistress had put her into that disguise , having no body else about her that she could entrust with a Message of such consequence . 

Montdor at this was seized with such astonishment , that for a good while his tongue could not perform its office ; at length recovering his speech , he asked her divers questions concerning her Mistress , wherein she satisfied him with as many acquaint , and cunningly framed inventions , never confessing that Clione , under the name of Florent , was in Laurean's house . But neither her entreaties , conjurations , nor threats , could in the least divert Montdor from the resolution he had taken to maintain the Challenge he had sent to Laurean , deeming himself unworthy ever to wear a Sword , if he should be guilty of an act that resented of such notorious and eminent baseness . 

So that Nartal returning gave Laurean an exact account of the place appointed for the Combat , and that he perceived Montdor to be free from any base treachery ; But Florent was in the greatest perplexity imaginable to hear that his persuasions , nor commands , could not avail any thing with Montdor , nor divert his obstinate resolution to fight with Laurean , so making necessity a virtue , he swallowed that bitter pill , leaving th' event to fortune , since there was no remedy nor means to hinder nor defer that Duel . Laurean used all entreaties possible to persuade Florent to stay with Octaviane , ( but all in vain ) for he would needs bear him Company , and be at least a spectator of the Combat , hoping at last to apply that remedy which he more feared then desired . 

The two Combatants being come into the field , mounted upon goodly Steeds , and armed each with Sword and Pistol , at the first encounter Montdor did no execution , Laurean dexterously slipping aid : But he not losing the opportunity shot Montdor through the right arm , and making his Pistol fall immediately , he put him out of his fight posture : then presently drawing his Sword he gained the crupper of him , and had run him through the body , if Montdor's horse by a fortunate stumble had not cast his rider . Laurean however scorning to make use of this advantage , leapt from his horse , and coming to him ( that was neither able to draw his Sword , nor rise , being much bruised with the fall ) bid him ask his life , and deliver him his Sword. I cannot deliver the Sword which I cannot draw ( replied Montdor ) and which I never would deliver to any man if I were in a capacity to use it , much less will I beg my life of you , which I had rather lose a thousand times then make so foul a breach in my Honour . Fortune may make me miserable , but never base ; I am now in your power , you may deal with me as you please , and make what use of your victory you list . This high spirit which so imminent danger could notintimidate , and which looked so undauntedly upon so present and pressing a death , took infinitely with Laurean , who unwilling to soil the glory of his triumph with insolency , answered , You are much worthier of life , than if you had demanded it ; and I will assure you , that for your Generosity and Courage , you shall ever hereafter find me your Servant , not an Enemy ; and I 'll acknowledge that it was my good Fortune , not my Valour that hath given me this advantage over a man whose courage I find invincible . Hereupon Montdor replied , Now I acknowledge myself conquered since your Courtesy doth preserve what your Sword might justly have taken away : But if God permit me to recover of these hurts , I will not die ungrateful for this favour . Hearing this , Laurean flung away his Sword ; and having lifted him up , with the help of his Servants , he carried him back to the Village , lodged him in a friend's house , and sent presently for a Surgeon to dress his Wounds , offering him his own Castle at Command assoon as he should feel himself able to go thither . 

Florent and Nartal that stayed a loof off to watch the success of this Combat , with such anxieties and fears , as you may imagine , perplex a tender Lover's heart in like occurrences , seeing this incomparable Valour joined with so rare a Courtesy , quite ravished with such Heroic Virtues , road presently back to Laurean's Castle , under pretence to carry Octaviane the news of her Cousin's Victory , who remained Master of the Field without any hurt . Mean time , whilst they joyfully celebrate this Triumph ; and that Octaviane ( deceived with Florent's outside ) feeds her eyes with that pleasing object , and her ears with his accustomary Courtships : Laurean stays with Montdor , showing him as much respect , and friendly Offices as if h ehad been the most intimate and dearest Friend in the world , which so transported Montdor , that he almost forgot his pain . The shot being in his Shoulder , was not so dangerous as troublesome , being likely to be long a Curing ; but he was so bruised with the fall , that there was more fear of him for that , than for the Wound he had received . 

One day Montdor lying in his Bed , and Laurean sitting by him , ( whose Civility and Gallantry he could never satisfy himself with extolling ) they fell upon the discourse of the subject of their quarrel . Montdor confessed that he was justly punished for his temerity , having obstinately transgressed the express Commands of Clione in fight with him . How ? said Laurean , I thought she had enjoined you to it . Not she ( replied Montdor ) but her Uncle told me that I could never hope upon any other terms to enjoy his Niece , who at present is gone to certain waters near the Pyrenean mountains , for the recovery of her health , which of late hath been somewhat impaired : With that he showed Laurean the Letter she had sent him , and told him the particular message he had received from her , by a Gentlewoman disguised in man's apparel . Laurean could not imagine what might be her meaning to forbid Montdor that whereto she had engaged so many others formerly , unless that bearing him more affection than the rest , she would not expose him to so great danger . 

After some day's time Laurean took leave of Montdor , promising to see him often , and to bring with him two Languedochian youths that had been some time at his house ; and which , amongst other perfections , were rarely Skilled in music . Being come back to his Castle , he made a full relation to his kinswoman , and his two guests , of all the passages betwixt him and Montdor , and what he had told him of Clione's Letter , and of the Gentlewoman Cavalier that brought it him . At these words Nartal and Florent were almost out of Countenance , imagining that they were discovered . 

If Laurean had taken notice of the coming and going of the Colours in their faces , he might easily have guest at their inward disturbances , ( but how should the mind imagine what the eyes do not observe ? ) So these alterations passing without his reflecting on them , built a confidence in the two disguised Damsels , that they were not yet known to be what effectually they were . But when Laurean prayed them to bear him company the first time , he went to Visit Montdor again ( as he had promised they should ) they then believed absolutely that this was only a wile to draw them in , and that without doubt their plot had been discovered . Therefore Florent could never be at quiet , till he had found a handsome excuse to be gone away , having no desire to appear before Montdor in that habit . So feigning to have received news from an Uncle of his that was desperately Sick , ( whose estate after his decease he was to inherit ) he acquaints Laurean with it , and desire's his permission , who charmed with his winning carriage and Conversation could not resolve to part with him . 

What an Alarm did this news give to poor Octaviane's heart ? who placed all her felicity in the presence and company oft her beloved Florent , whom she had engaged herself to marry . How oft did she upbraid him with inconstancy and slight affection , but with reproaches of so amorous a Choler , that one fire augmented the other , and made a more full discovery of the excess of passion . Florent ( rejoicing at her pain , and to continue her in this agreeable error ) made a thousand protestations of fidelity and service , as if he had been capable of accepting the offer she had made him to marry him , he added many Vows and desperate Oaths , to answer her love with a reciprocal and most inviolable affection , beseeching her not to be a hindrance to his fortune , but give him respite only for some few days , that he might go gather the fruit of the Inheritance that fell to him by his Uncle's death . Octaviane deceived with his fair language , and holding the mouth she so dear loved as an oracle of infallible verity , consented at last to this separation , but with such dolorous resentments as cast her into a Swoon , an evident sign how near it touched her to be deprived of so beloved a presence . 

Being come again to herself , by the application of several remedies , her doleful and amorous complaints bred some pity in Florents heart , notwithstanding the occasion he had to hate her . At last , seeing no remedy , she was enforced to give way to his departure , which would have much more nearly touched Laurean , had he known that Clione was hidden under Florent's clothes . However , it troubled him very much to part with him , yet he was somewhat consolated with the hope he had that Florent would perform his promise , which was , shortly to return and stay longer with him . 

But than grew another contest about Nartal's going , for Laurean was very urgent to detain him , imagining all pleasure and contentment would presently fly from his heart if his ears were deprived both of his and Florents enchanting Harmony : Nartal is as earnest to accompany his cousin , ( for so he styled Florent ) and Florent could not be persuaded to leave him as a pledge . Laurean promised to furnish Florent with as many attendants to convoy him safe home , as he would desire , and to wait upon him himself . Florent was encumbered with so many extraordinary Civilities , that he knew not which way to shape an answer . Indeed it is more difficult to come fairly off in a Combat of Compliments and Courtese ( although there be no bloodshed ) them vulgar spirits can imagine . But in the end he found this expedient to satisfy all parties , promising to send back Nartal as soon as he should arrive at Bezieres ( which Florent feigned to be his Native soil ) to bring Octaviane and Laurean news of his proceedings , and stay with them as an hostage till he returned himself . 

Thus parting they carry with them 

( but in a different manner ) the hearts both of Laurean and his kinswoman . In what a cloud of discontent remained the desolate Octaviane , being deprived of an object that was the light and delight of her eyes , I give you leave to imagine . Laurean to divert his melancholy , went again to spend some time with Montdor , who began to recover of his hurts . 

Mean while the time of Nartal's coming back expires , and Octaviane dying with impatience to hear from Florent , thinks every day an age till she sees him . This impatience puts her in despair , and being not able to stay any longer in her kinsman's house , she took a sudden resolution to retire to her own , purposely to dispose herself for the execution of a folly , which cannot be excused , but in attributing it to the Violence of a passion which Reason could not moderate . So feigning herself very sick , she repairs homewards , where being arrived and fittted with man's apparel , a horse and one footman , she takes her Journey to Bezieres in hopes to find Florent there , but 't was in vain , no body there could tell any news of him , for the house where Clione had retired herself , was in another part of Languedoc not far from Nismes . What troubles was Octaviane's mind perplexed with , seeing herself deceived ? how did not she exclaim against Florent ? whose trace she could no more find out then that of Fantomes , which vanish as soon as they appear : Yet this pleasing illusion which had so sweetly carried away her senses , and distilled a delicious Venom through the eyes into her heart , made her resent a thousand several distractions . How shall she find out him that she knows not where to seek , and who is no more the same he seemed to be ? for Clione having reassumed her own name and habit , left nothing of Florent but the bare Idea . Nevertheless she being no less taken with Laurean's perfections , than Octaviane was with hers , failed not to send back Nartal in the same disguise with a Letter to Laurean , which contained nothing but Compliments , only in the Close she entreated him to give full credit to what the bearer thereof should tell him in her behalf . 

How did the blood rise in Nartals face when he was fain to take off the mask of their dissimulation , to make Laurean see the Visage of the truth ? Heavens ! how Laurean stood amazed at the recital of this History , which seems more like a fable or Romance then verity , yet I have it from an Authentic Author , that averreth it to be very true . 

I will not stand to recount the particulars of this discovery , having already much gone beyond the limits of brevity which I had prescribed myself in this work : I will only tell you that the Scales fell from Laurean's eyes , when Nartal showed him what remarkable tumours were in his breast , not ordinary to be found in man's : So comparing one thing with another , and calling to mind the many pleasing deceits which had deluded his senses in Florent's presence , he made no further question of what Nartal told him . I will omit the diverse Imaginations that then possessed his brain , without making reflection upon the wrongs Clione had done him , ( whose person he never hated , but the pretensions wherewith she disturbed his repose ) her beauty and good parts represented themselves to his fancy in a more advantageous form , then if she had been present , and adding moreover this unexpected change ; that had transformed her from a Tiger to a Dove , and from a mortal Enemy , into a passionate Lover , he thought one heart too little to reciprocate so entire an affection . In a word he was more ready to answer Clione's flame , than fire is to catch at any bituminous matter . 

Upon Nartal's word without any diffidence he goes alone with him , taking no attendant but one Lakey , and in short time he arrives at Clione's house . These two Souls felt themselves at the same instant kindled with a flame so equal in its extremity , that it had been hard to judge which had the better in that amorous War . t i's nothing to say they were perfectly reconciled to one another : I must say , they tied themselves so strictly with deep Oaths and promises of marriage , that nothing but Death could ever dissolve that band . 

These words and this faith being given and received in presence of a Priest , they passed to the Consummation of that which Lovers so ardently desire , being both so fully satisfied , that their life was but a continued ravishment of delight . But prickles still accompany Love's roses , and fire cannot be without some smoke . Laurean's being at Clione's house was soon noised all the Country over , and she , like the Queen of Carthage , cares not to hide their amorous stealths , since all was covered with the Cloak of Matrimony . 

Fame that hath no less tongues than wings , soon carries this report to her Uncle Fructule , which Stunned him as if he had been blasted with lightning , or rather thunderstriken . It seems to him a Paradox , esteeming that as impossible a thing as to join fire and water . A second report which commonly is truer than the first , assured him that what he feared was but too certain . Upon this he falls into a rage , exclaims , storms and threatens both his Niece , and Laurean , with more thunder then th' heavens heretofore darted against the Rebellious Giants . All the other friends of both the Families bless God for this happy alliance , which promising an assured peace betwixt them would stop the effusion of so much blood , and hinder any further quarrels . Only Fructule animated with a desperate rage , and fury , resolves to put all in disorder . 

Whilst he thus fret's and fume's with madness , studying the accomplishment of some premeditated revenge against them , let us consider th' amazement poor Octaviane was in , being already returned from her Knight Errantry , when she heard that her Cousin was married to his fair Adversary , and that this sweet Enemy was the same Florent whose Idea was so deeply engraven in her heart . How strange the History of this transfiguration seems to her ? for better satisfaction she goes to give Laurean a Visit , ( who was so overcome with the affection of his loving Enemy ; that he could not absent himself one moment out of her sight ) and if her own eyes had not been witnesses of all these passages ( that had been related to her , besides the assurance Laurean gave her of them by Letters ) she could ne'er have believed them . 

Cured both of her love and hatred , immediately she embraceth , as her chief friend and kinswoman , her in whose breast not many days before she would have stuck her poniard . O Love ! it's thou that tamest the savage beasts , and makest tractable the most fierce Lions and Tigers , what force is able to withstand thy powerful sweetness ! Mean while that Laurean , wholly taken up with the delights of his new spouse , seems to have forgotten both himself and his Family , Montdor recover's his perfect health , and hearing the good success 'twixt Laurean and Clione , he rejoiced exceedingly that he was prevented in the design , wherein he had intended to employ all his power and interest , for the reconciliation of those two Families divided by so many streams of blood . He was so far from being troubled with jealousy , seeing in Laurean's Arms her who was cause of that Duel : that quite contrary he looked upon him as the preserver of his life , as the mirror of Courtesy and valour , and as one for whom he would have resigned a Sceptre to have placed him in a throne . He went to wait upon this new married Couple , to congratulate their felicity , and assure them that there was nothing in the world to which his Soul so much aspired as to do them Service . 

There he found Octaviane , who disabused of her error , was a blank , free from all love and Passion : Montdor being thoroughly healed as well of the wounds which Laurean had made in his body , as also of those which Clione's beauty had made in his Soul , felt a private inclination to render himself to Octaviane's sweetly attractive graces : And she considering the comeliness of this Gentleman , ( who was one of the richest and stoutest Cavaliers of the County of Avignon ) had no less disposition to affect him . 

This was the first foundation of their reciprocal liking , which continuance of time increased through Montdor's faithful service and professions of real affection , until at last it was consummated by that honourable Bond which makes of two bodies one flesh . Now he bearing a great hand with Fructule , at whose instance he had engaged himself in that unadvised Duel against Laurean , took upon him to appease his anger , and procure his approvement of Clione's Marriage , which he seemed to be so discontented and enraged at . In this confidence he went to him , but having reck'ned without his host , no wonder if he found his expectation frustrated . Fructule gives him very ill language , and had like to have fallen foul on him . This was an ill beginning , yet he desisted not , but suffering all the injurious treatments th'other's fury transported him to , he endeavoured to win him with the fairest and most plausible language he could invent ; Yet this wrought nothing upon him , the Ulcers of his mind being like those of the body , which Honey doth more inflame , contrary to the holy text which saith , good words Mollify anger . Thence Montdor went to visit Clione's other kindred , and by persuasions prevailed so far with them that they all seemed very joyful of that alliance , as an extraordinary effect of the Divine Providence which only was able to procure that recconciliation . But all their consents were of no great importance , the chief was wanting , that was , Fructule's , ( he being Guardian & administratour of Clione his niece and ward's whole estate , ) and to obtain that seemed impossible . 

He talked of nothing but challenging Laurean himself , which Laurean might wave with two very lawful excuses , for one he might allege his late Marriage which made Fructule his Uncle , th' other that having once before worsted him in the Field , he was not obliged the second time to fight against him . Fructule fearing the latter objection , which would not have redounded to his honour , bethought him of some other means how to make Laurean away . To this effect he corrupts with money a Cook , that formerly had served him , Commanding to try how he might get into Laurean's service and poison him . This base fellow pretending that Fructule had misused him , came to proffer his Service to Laurean , who entertained him at Clione's entreaty , she having known him at her Uncle's house , assured him of his fidelity , in which she was much mistaken . Thus she contributed to her own mischief , in receiving within her husband's Castle ( whither he had carried her ) this threacherous Trojan horse . Had not Montdor given him warning to take heed of that Cook , questionless the Villain had executed his base design . Upon this advertisement Laurean apprehended him , and partly by entreaties , partly by promises , and partly by threatenings , he made him confess the truth , and show him the poison he was to mingle in his meat . Observe the extreme Courtesy of this Gentleman , who sent him back to Fructule , not suffering the least harm to be done him , to the end that he might inflict such punishment upon him as he should think fit himself for so unworthy a fact , desiring him not to use any ways to deprive him of his life , so ignoble and so misbecoming a Gentleman of his birth and honour . Fructule sorry that his powder had not taken fire , nor his treachery succeeded to his mind , and ashamed to own so dishonourable a design , disclaimed his Cook , swearing that he was ignorant of that disloyalty , and that it was a good while since he had turned him away . But not imagining how Laurean should be acquainted with this plot , out of Suspicion he manumitted diverse of his domestics , who blazed all abroad the truth of the business to his great infamy , yet this malicious Soul was not so Satisfied , seeing every body cried shame on him for his treachery and hard-hartednesse , and that he unjustly withheld his Ward from her estate , because she was married without his consent to his and her Enemy : He changed his note , and feigning to be better pleased , and to desire a fair reconciliation ( just as the cunning Fowlers use their calls to entrap the innocent birds ) Clione and Laurean who desired nothing more than to accomplish their felicity , greedily harkened to the propositions that were made by some persons whom Fructule had deceived , and who used as much sincerity and Candour in the mediation as he had baseness and dissimulation in his proposals . 

He pretends that his greatest desire was to see his Niece , that he could not forego his own blood , that he pardoned her with all his heart , and that he believed if he could but ser her at his House , and learn of herself what moved her to marry Laurean , perhaps he should be satisfied with her reasons , restore her to her Estate , and make a handsome agreement with her Husband . She ( like an innocent Dove , or an inconsiderate Partridge ) entrap's herself by casting her silly harmless eye upon the specious lustre of this Fowler's glass ; having begged leave of her Husband to go treat their peace with her Uncle . Although Laurean presaged that Journey would produce no good event , yet he let's his Wife go against his will , consenting to that separation induced by his Friends persuasions , who were very earnest with him , not to show himself irreconcilable , but yield as much as in honour he could to Fructule's humour , who by his marriage to Clione was then his Uncle . Clione of her good Nature mistrusting nothing fell into the Snares her Uncle had prepared for her . At first he treated her with more Civility than she expected , but this was only as a fair leaf to hide the Serpent in his treacherous design , and a Fig wherewith ( like the Egyptian Queen ) he covered his prernicious asp . How deceitful is the Spirit of man ! it 's a Labyrinth that 's full of false cunning passages and subtle evasions . A tempest is most to be feared when the Sea is calmest : All the feasting and expressions of joy which Fructule made his Niece , were but so many treacherous baits to inveigle her ; Apes kindnesses , who kill their young ones with hugging them . Being entered in discourse with her , by little and little he cunningly fell from contestation to reprehension , from reprehension to threats , thence to railing and such offensive terms , as drew very tart replies from Clione's mouth , then irritated with Choler and incited with a too great sense of Honour ; which gave Fructule occasion to colour his premeditated revenge under the notion of correction . Hereupon he makes her be locked up in a Chamber , and kept as a Prisoner with all the base usage that may be imagined , purposely to drive her into despair . And according to the proverb , one misfortune never comes alone : The news of Clione's captivity was soon brought to Laurean , who then lay sick in bed of a Fever , that Melancholy for his dear Spouses absence had been the occasion of . Heavens ! how it struck his heart , he is mad to rise up , being ready to burst with Choler and fury , he will precipitate himself into a thousand deaths , rather than suffer such indignities to be done , to a person that was so near and dear unto him , as one whom he affected with a more love than what he bore unto himself . But this excess of rage redoubles his paroxysm , and makes his Fever continual , from that his Violent burning grew to find no intermission , so that he fell into such extravagant rave , as bred astonishment and pity in all that were about him . Clione is always in his mouth , & her Image perpetually before his eyes , sometimes he fancy's her all bloody and deformed with blows , sometimes crying out to him for succour , sometimes pursued by her Uncle , he struggles and keeps a Coil , he asks for his Sword , he leaps out of his bed , & makes assays beyond any ordinary man's ability , ten men can hardly hold him , they are fain to bind him with cords , amongst all these Violences he neither would nor could take any remedy the Physicians did prescribe him , so that there were hardly any hopes either of life or his recovery . This being reported to Fructule , he believed that the Heavens in that affliction seemed to assist him , executing his revenge upon Laurean , whom he Styled the seducer and ravisher of his Niece ; and to augment her sorrows he presently carries her the news of her Husband's indisposition , but with such joyfulness , that it even broke her heart . For that confirmed her opinion that Laurean then was poisoned or bewitched , for ( besides what her Uncle told her ) she heard such strange reports of the excess and Violence of her Husband's sickness , that there was nothing of ill but she imagined was befallen him : And for accomplishment of her miseries she felt herself with Child , a condition so choice and tender , that the least affliction either corporal or spiritual , often casts into the grave those that seem the best disposed , and of the strongest constitutions . 

Fructule who hated both the tree and the Fruit , and wished no less destruction to the Mother and her Child , than he did to the Father , used her worse and worse , and striven by several subtleties how he might make Clione away , and destroy her Child , by a precipitated and untimely birth . But God ( who preserve's the innocent , to whom all hatred and malicious practices are unpleasing ) confounded the wicked designs of this incompassionate Guardian , who ( more like a ravenous wolf than a faithful Shepherd ) used all means possible to procure the destruction of the sheep , which the Laws both divine and Human obliged him to preserve and cherish . Indeed those that are under the protection of the Almighty , cannot be taken out of his hand , they are ( saith the Prophet ) delivered out of the snares of the hunters , and sheltered from all outrages and injuries , for the Lord doth hide them under the shadow of his wings , and is as a Buckler to them . 

It had been absolutely impossible but that Clione beaten with so many cruel storms , had fallen into some desperate sickness , which would have made a double murder in her , if God had not suscitated Montdor to rescue and deliver her . He was once in the mind to challenge Fructule , and by his death give both life and Liberty to that unfortunate Prisoner , but upon maturer consideration , he thought it more convenient to take a Foxes then a Lion's skin , and try what might be done by wit and industry rather than attempt any violent Course . The fable of Danae teacheth us this Verity , that Gold will make its passage through the strongest holds . He spared for nothing that might corrupt Clione's guards , procuring at length her enlargement , by the means of those that were encharged to keep her . Having freed her from this Slavery he carries her back to Laurean , who at the very first sight of her began to feel himself better , he left his raving fits and the ardour of his Fever grew more moderate , showing that the Cause of his disease being ceased , the effects could no longer have their being . Within a short time he recovered his health , and the lightsomenesse of his heart soon replanted fresh roses in his cheeks . As soon as he felt his strength perfectly come to him again , he resolved to employ it for the destruction of him who had so barbarously treated his Clione . But she never ceased weeping and entreating , until to satisfy her he altered his resolution , to which he more willingly condescended out of fear , that ( she being very big with Child ) that apprehension might cast her into despair and cause her to miscarry . Nevertheless though he was persuaded to omit the use of his Sword , he resolved to make good his Interest by force o' th' Pen , entering a suit in Law against Fructule to make him render account of his Wardship , and to restore to his Wife the estate he unjustly kept from her . During this process which was protracted by those that make it their trade and livelihood , to foment such contestations , Clione is brought to bed of a Daughter , and Montdor had so ingratiated himself with Octaviane , that he was become her Husband , and kinsman to Laurean . Thus were those two houses now united in the bonds of consanguinity , who before thirsted after nothing but the blood and destruction of each other . 

It is a general Maxim that Elements so contrary as fire , and water , can never be converted one into th' other , but to that Sovereign power which governs and gives essence to all things , nothing can seem difficult . Thus at the destruction of Jerusalem that Sacred fire of the Temple which was hidden in a well , by the industry of some Religious Priests , fearing lest it should be profaned by the Idolatrous Conquerors , was found at their return from the Captivity of Babylon changed into thick Water , which exposed to the hot Sun beams resumed its former colour and property of fire . I must confess according to th' ordinary course of this corrupt age , it is hard to see such effects of Love , proceed from such mortal hatred , but nothing is impossible to God's omnipotent Providence who daily worketh miracles . 

This consideration made the Wise man say , that men must hate as if one day they were to Love , implying that their hatred should not be irreconcilable . And another saith , that Enmities ought to be mortal , that is , that they should take end and die . And doubtless this is the meaning of the Evangelist , who teacheth us , that the Sun should not go down upon our wrath . 

By this Montdor through his incessant endeavours had wrought all Clione's other kindred to be friends with Laurean , & the Sense of the Court began to let Fructule see with shame the unjustnesse of his cause : But to prevent Conviction , he meditated another design so damnable , as could not enter into the thought of any man but one given over to all wickedness ; which to effect he gives out that he would willingly restore Clione her Estate , and approve of her Marriage , provided that her Husband and she , would give him an acquittance of his Gardianship upon such accounts as he should produce . Laurean's Friends and Clione herself ( who desired no better then to be at peace upon what terms soever ) advised him to take what he could get from so ill a Paymaster , and to quit th' administration for the time past , so that he would give them quiet possession of his Neece's estate . Friends on both sides at last concluded the matter , and the Articles were signed according to Fructule's own desire . 

That done they met , the Uncle embraced lovingly his Niece , and Laurean as his Nephew , pressing them extremely to go to his House , where he would feast them and the whole company , drowning in good cheer and wine all their former differences , and publish to the world an act of eternal oblivion . Laurean , who was of a generous free disposition , promised to be there with his Wife , and some other Friends , whereof Montdor was now become one of the most intimate : Who knowing Fructule's treacherous humour , endeavoured to cast some diffidence in Laurean's Spirit , but could by no means make him susceptible of it . So he resolved by virtue of the powder of Gold , to sound some of Fructule's domestic Servants , who discovered his damnable enterprise ; Which was to set fire to certain barrels of Powder , that he had placed directly under the Hall , where he intended to make this detestable banquet , having first made his own friends go out and secure themselves , by retiring into another part of the Castle . A desperate resolution , and such as could not proceed but from the suggestion of him that is a Homicide from the beginning . 

Montdor presently acquainted Laurean with this plot , who would hardly be persuaded to believe it . But Clione that had more experience of her Uncle's baseness and malicious humour , gave credit to it , and besought her Husband to send him some handsome excuse , that he could not perform his promise at that time , without taking notice however that he knew any thing of that bloody design . But Laurean's high Courage suggested him another resolution , the boldness and gallantry whereof proved of most avail to their entire reconciliation , by a means which in all probability was absolutely contrary . But as it happeneth that the excess of drinking ( so much forbidden those that are in Fevers ) sometimes cureth them , so Laureans free-hartednesse and Courage by an action full of heroic nobleness in one instant drew away all the malignity from Fructule's heart , imitating ( in that ) the lightning which falling upon a Serpent , takes away all his Venom without kill him . 

He assembles his kinsmen and most trusty Friends ( who being all well armed ) he desire's them to accompany him to Fructule's house , first informing them of the treachery Montdor had discovered . They all agreed , resolving to go so strong that they would master that Traitor , and make him suffer the same punishment that he had prepared for them . But Laurean prayed them to moderate their Choler , for he desired the conversion , not the death of his wicked Uncle : Thinking himself sufficiently revenged if he could cast the burning coals of shame and confusion in his face , by manifesting before his Friends the secret of his dark design . 

Being arrived there , Fructule entertained them with all kind of demonstrations of a most sincere friendship , so expert was this man in dissembling his unworthiness . As they were all come within the Hall that was prepared for the tragedy , he fell into a long discourse of the quarrels betwixt their two Families , reckoning up their Duels and Combats , and how much blood had been shed upon that occasion , protesting withal how joyful he was after so many bloody conflicts and murders , that all those debates were so near an end , hoping that thence forward they should live peaceably together , having smothered all their former enmities in good cheer and wine ; That he was more rejoiced to see them there then the best Friends he ever had in his life , and that he was most ready to resign them the place , and give them free possession both of that house and all the estate that belonged unto them . 

Thus he expressed himself , not thinking that his Powder plot was discovered . But 't is in vain , saith the holy writ , to lay nets for birds that Soar a loft . Laurean knowing that all this smooth language tended to nothing else , but only to prepare them for the Sacrifice , which he had destined to his fury . That Fructule might not have the leisure to put in execution his design , nor to mingle in their meats any other powders no less dangerous than that he had hiden under the Hall , without any further delay , said , Perchance some others less circumspect than he or his Friends might have been entraped by his Sirenical compliments , but the train having been discovered , if they perished he should perish with them himself , and the Friends he had invited thither also , ( which were but very few that would be complices of so damnable a project : ) then in the presence of all his Friends he laid in Fructule's dish all his former basenesses , and the present treachery he intended to execute , as things most unworthy of a man sprung of so noble & illustrious a Family as his , having so many ways besides to satisfy his revengeful mind many degrees more honourable : Showing him to what danger he had exposed himself , through his unlawful desire of Vengeance , seeing that he then had the strongest Pa●●● in the House , and could , if he plea●●● , inflict upon him the punishment his perfidiousness deserved : Yet he entreated his friends ( that came thither with him ) to pardon that offence , protesting for his own particular , that both that and all the former attempts he had so unworthily made upon his life , should absolutely be buried in oblivion ; to the end that this extraordinary goodness joined to the shame which Fructule ought to have resented for so ignoble an action might somewhat induce him to repentance , and to acknowledge the preservation of his life as an act of grace and favour from them , who had then the power to deprive him of it , and yet spared him . 

However Fructule's obdurate heart relented nothing at this incomparable Courtesy , the moment of his visitation being not yet come . But rather emboldened by the danger he saw himself then in , never offered to deny ●or excuse the design they ta●●●●● him with , quite contrary with a multitude of words as confusedly pronounced as his Countenance was unsettled , he set himself to justify the fact , alleging that he had reason to seek revenge for so much blood , as Laurean and his friends had drawn out of the Veins of those of his family , and that he could never enjoy any content or quietness of mind , until he had sacrificed unto his Ancestors Ghosts the author 's of their death 's ; yielding himself willingly into their hands to inflict upon him the same torments , which he would have made them suffer , had they been in his power , as he then acknowledged himself to be in theirs . 

This answer no less desperate than presumptuous astonished the whole Company , who seeing the obstinacy of his inflexible heart , began to consult amongst themselves what to do to him , 〈◊〉 how to make him feel a punishment suitable to such horrid treachery . But Clione who feared to be a spouse of blood , and Laurean who desired his marriage should have an end rather comical then tragical , ( to stop the course of their fury in the first breaking out , and to hinder the bloody effects such injurious language might produce ) she suddenly cast herself in midst of here's & her Husband's friends , and embracing her Uncle's knees with an exemplary humbleness , the tears trickling from her eyes , besought and conjured him by all that she could imagine might any way conduce to move so obstinate a Courage , that he would please to pardon her disobedience , and mitigate the malice and envy he bore her Husband . This she pronounceed so feelingly with so winning a comeliness & such dolorous accents as would have moved the savagests of beasts , so that ( not to detain you with any further ●●●●tion ) she bred Compassion where cruelty had formerly her dominion , and Love , where hatred had so long ruled as Empress . 

Fructule ( like a lump of lead which for a while resist's the Violence of the fire , but at length melts all at once ) became so changed on a sudden , that it was enough to have made those who knew him best suppose him Metamorphosed . Clione's tears having made their approach so near as to undermine and blow up that unmalleable rock which lay enveloped in his bosom , and no less seated on his heart , that this stone distilled its water through the Limbick of his eyes ; But being not yet a perfect Convertite , some reluctancy of his conversion reverberated the stream back again to his heart , till the heart surcharged with goodness and humility together , sent the purest Spirits of a relenting expression unto his tongue , that like an overflowing Viol , it gave such evident testimonies of a sudden Change and real ressentment , as therewith he fell upon his Niece's neck , still lying at his feet , and mingling his sighs and tears with here's , confessed that her goodness had overcome him , and quite eradicated all his hatred and obstinacy ; and since that by her means his life had been preserved , he would upon any occasion employ it and all he had to do her service , conjuring her to forget what formerly had passed , and reconcile him to her Husband whom he was not willing to embrace as his most dear Nephew , to whom thence forward he would be ready to render with most sincere affection all the devoirs of a good Uncle and faithful friend , and endeavour to give him as many testimonies of hearty good will , as he had formerly desired and attempted to do him mischief . 

What satisfaction was it to all the friends of both parties to see this cordial reconcileation so far beyond all their hopes or expectation ! But as we see the most delicate and best composed bodies , are susceptible of the greatest corruptions , the firmest friendships converted ofttimes into the deadliest hatreds , and the keenest Vinegar made of the strongest wines : So sometimes it happeneth that an inviolable friendship is framed amongst such as have been most inveterate Enemies . This is confirmed by the remarkable example of Fructule , who changed in an instant ( like Polemon in the Metamorphosis ) of a violent Enemy became so great a friend to Laurean that he could not live without him , loving him not as his Nephew , but as his own Son . This good affection continued to the end of his life ; which expired , he invested his Niece in the succession of his Estate , induced thereto by his own inclination , as well as by the obligation of Nature . Thus Clione's and Fructule's violent and implacable hatred ended in Love and amity ; Laurean's incomparable Courtesy and Valour , crowning his Memory with a never-dying fame . 

FINIS . 

