A panegyric to the king 's most excellent majesty . 

By Charles Cotton . 

mart. epigr.  

iam Caesar , vel nocte veni : sint astra licebit , 
non deerit populo , te veniente , dies . 


London , printed by tho. Newcomb , 1660.  

To the most high and sacred majesty of Charles by the grace of God , King of great Britain , France & Ireland , defender of the faith , &c.  

Most dread sovereign , 

It has been an ancient and a laudable custom , and even in latter times not altogether out of use , to celebrate the inaugurations , triumphs and virtues of Princes , upon every happy turn of state , memorable success , or glorious action ; and that by way of panegyric , or laudatory oration . Thus Isocrates to Philip , Mamertinus to Julian , Ausonius to Gratian , Nazarius to Constantine , and Pliny to Trajan . and it ought chiefly to continue , where the people's peace , liberty and safety become enfranchised and restored by so happy a revolution , as the divine providence has now wrought in restoring your sacred majesty to us , who have so long bowed and groaned under the yoke of tyranny and oppression . And although i your majesty's most loyal subject am far unfit for so great an undertaking , a work that requires the best and most assured pen to the due celebration of the virtues and greatness of so excellent and so mighty a Prince ; yet it May not be the greatest wonder that the happy influence of your royal beams have wrought , that a man how much soever a stranger to all the ornaments , and even the method of art , should nevertheless pour out his joy at the sacred feet of so gracious and so indulgent a King and sovereign . Now then is a time to imitate so beautiful examples , and after our hosannas and hallelujahs to almighty God for your many great and miraculous deliverances , to give your majesty a most loyal and hearty welcome to your just , and so long unjustly usurped inheritance , and to all that ( By your gracious indulgence ) we do or May call ours . 

It is not unknown to your majesty's faithful subjects , by what an unparalleled rebellion , what vile confederacies , and what unexampled cruelty your royal father ( Of blessed memory ) was deposed from his undoubted and hereditary empire ; nor by what an irreligious power your majesty has since been so long opposed and kept from the government of your faithful and affectionate persons : nor with what admirable patience , and absolute resignation of yourself and affairs to the will of the most mighty , you have embraced dangers , and sustained afflictions , that nothing but so heroic a spirit could oppose , or suffer . And certainly , the great mercy , and mighty power of God was never more manifested in any human affair , then in the miraculous preservation and most happy restauration of your royal person to your crowns and kingdoms . 

It were an unseasonable , and perhaps an inofficious work , to repeat a story your majesty in your own grace and goodness are willing to forget : it were otherwise not hard ( Chiefly to a mind not yet weaned from the sense of your past sufferings ) to trace you through the unhappy progress of your misfortunes ; and to let your majesty know , that although our hands were manacled from the service of your cause , and our feet fettered from the pursuit of your fortunes , yet our hearts went along , and were wounded with every impious stroke that was made to the danger of your sacred majesty's life , or to the prejudice of your royal interest . 

Thus far ( Sir ) we dare speak ourselves honest , even when we lay gripped in a tyrant's talons , and panting under his weight ; when upon every parasites suggestion , or his own perpetual jealousy ( His more frequent intelligence ) men's lives , which were his sport , only served to make way to their fortunes , which were his business . And although good and prudent subjects ought to measure their happiness or affliction by the rulers scale , yet since all men are not principled at that honest and knowing rate , it May not be impertinent to consider , that as your own particular sufferings ( If a Prince can be said to suffer alone ) have made your majesty's person most welcome to some , so i hope the common calamity they were involved in , and are now freed from , will endear it to all , even the most blind and violent , of your most seduced , or most wilfully offending enemies . Men now look back into their lives , and see so many deformities behind , that they run affrighted from themselves , and can find no refuge but in your princely arms , no safety but in your mercy , nor no peace of mind till your royal word hath assured them of your love , without which your pardon would only reproach them of their unnatural guilt . 

But ( mighty Sir ) we find you apt to forgive , and so sweetly inclined to mercy , that you prevent the offender , by obliterating the offence ; so that the most obnoxious find themselves absolved before they ask ; and become more ashamed of their misdemeanours , then afraid of their punishment . * verecundiam peccandi facit ipsa Clementia regentis ; and your majesty has made so admirable an improvement of this excellent maxim , that methinks the crimes could be no less , that could serve to manifest so Christian , and so heroic a virtue . 

By your gracious pardon to your persons , this nation that has been for some unhappy years , and that through the particular guilt of a few , a general scandal to all her neighbours , shall now become reconciled to the other obedient parts of the world , and wipe off a blemish , that such as were strangers to the true English nature , unjustly laid upon the whole . * magnum quidem illud seculo dedecus , magnum reipublicae vulnus impressum est ; imperator & parens generis humani obsessus , captus , inclusus , ablata mitissimo seni servandorum hominum potestas , ereptumque principi illud in principatu beatissimum , quod nihil cogitur . a reproach too fitly applied to the condition of this unfortunate kingdom , and perhaps not unbeseeming this occasion ; should we not , whilst we celebrate your mercy , seem to awake your majesty's reposing justice . 

Let us therefore now celebrate our country's redemption , joy and dignity , and forget her old bondage , wounds , and afflictions . A nation rescued from the barbarity and insolence of straws and tilers , and restored to a flourishing kingdom under the blessed government of an heroic , and a lawful King . A King so gloriously eminent in his piety , magnanimity , fortitude , wisdom , and mercy . A King like Saul , in the stature of his virtues , more conspicuous than all the potent Princes of the earth , endowed with all the true real ornaments and graces , that May render a monarch feared , and adored of his own persons , or make him an illustrious and unimitable precedent to all the future rulers of mankind . A Prince nourished and bred up in all the extremes of adverse fortune , who by the great favour and assistance of a miraculous providence , has victoriously run through all the threatening accidents of treacherous designs , bloody arms , deaf and tumultuous seas , unnatural sickness , and what ever else May in the greatest malignity of force , or fortune , threaten or attempt the life of man . 

Ista virtus est quando usuest qui malum fert fortiter . 
Fortiter malum qui patitur , idem post patiter bonum . 


A Prince who has not only , and that fearless , opposed his magnanimous breast to all these ; but which is more , and still more shining , even in the midst and fury of mischance , and in the lowest ebb of his greatest necessities , through the purety of his innocence , and the constancy of his virtue , has defended himself from the snares of insinuating policy , when dressed in all the gaudy ornaments of temptation , and disguised in all the subtlety of distorted reason . A Prince whom no allurements , no securety of his own endangered person , no reflections upon his immediate and clamorous wants , could ever draw from his firm piety towards God , or from the dignity and majesty of his own honour . 

These trials ( royal Sir ) have made you thus superlatively eminent , and acquired not only the consent of all , even the worst of men , but have added also one jewel more to the crown , and given you a general and undisputed choice , to your undoubted and hereditary succession . And these are those trials that have approved you to be that good King , that other persons pray their Kings May be , and have taught you to prize a lasting and immarcessible virtue , before all the unstable and fading glories of crowns and sceptres . * ab hoc cardine praecipue pendet orbis faelicitas , si principibus maxime cordi fuerint , quae sunt optima . and it is from this natural and constant love to virtue , that we expect a reformation of times and manners , and steadfastly hope ( Through a continue providence ) that we and ours shall see your majesty's happy throne established to all posterity . And doubtless that great and unerring council , that has still had the conduct of all your majesty's affairs , saw this the fittest time to restore you to your desolate persons ; for never yet was so great necessity of a good Prince , nor ever so good a Prince to supply so great a necessity . Never so distracted a face of men , and business , such confusions of arms and counsels , such fears and jealousies , whisperings and expectations , every one ignorant of his distinct office , and few resolved upon their common duty : nothing but clouds , and murmuring noise and fluctuation , shifting and unsettledness , while the actors themselves were amazed at all they did , neither knowing how nor why . But when the forerunning phosphor of your majesty's bright , and so long miss day , the thrice noble and ever to be recorded general appeared , and that the face of affairs began to unveil itself , than the glorious and majestic light even of your dawning , so cheered the hearts of some , and illuminated the minds of others , that they all returned into the natural channel of their duty , and run with a smooth and untroubled current , to kiss and court those noble feet , which the violence of their giddy and intestine storms had once tripped up , and hurried the sacred frame as a prey to the insensible ocean . 

Neither was this an ordinary conflux of men either in respect of their number , or quality , but such an one as Might rather seem to oppose , then secure your way ; and in a better sense serve to inform your eye of the strength , and your princely heart of the joy and loyalty of this your majesties now most happy kingdom . * videres reserta tecta , ac laborantia , ac ne eum quidem vacantem locum , qui non nisi suspensum , & instabile vestigium caperet . Oppletas undiabque ; vias , angustúmabque ; tramitem relictum tibi . Alacrem hinc , atque inde populum ubiabque ; par gaudium parémabque ; clamorem , tam aequaliter ab omnibus ex adventu tuo laetitia percepta est , quàm omnibus venisti , quae tamen ipsa cum ingressu tuo crevit , ac prope in fingulos gradus adaucta est . so hearty and so general was the joy they met you with , that they scarce left you a path to your lawful possession : and it May be worthy your majesty's princely consideration , and best thanks to almighty God , that your way was laid open by your people's love , and not forced by your own just vengeance , that your throne is established in the judgements , and supported by the voluntary and united strength of your persons , fixed and riveted to the centre of your laws , not floating in blood , nor raised upon heaps of ruin , but built upon its true and ancient foundation : not one wound to blemish your triumph ; not one opposer to dispute your title , nothing but praise and acclamation for your safe return , everyone doting of the majesty of your person , admiring the lustre of your virtues , and crying as it were with one mouth , God save the King ! never was so great an harmony of mind , in so prodigious and so mixed a number of men ; never so wonderful and so sudden a change in men's persons , minds and manners : old men forgetting their infirmities , and young men their wildness ; good men their injuries , and ill men their vices ; all offences and animosities laid aside and forgot , as if they had never been : the worst men secured by your pardon , and the best rewarded by your presence ; not only concurring in their allegiance to their Prince , but mutually reconciled to one another . No man now regards his danger , or suspects his safety ; every man's loyal love to his Prince , has overcome the fears he had of himself . We look upon ourselves now as under protection , and the protection of a King that can , and will protect us ; a King that has vanquished danger , and fettered mischance ; a King that with his own victorious sword has cut through thousands of prevailing enemies , and even in the miscarriage and treachery of an unfortunate day , remained a conqueror , and won the hearts of those men , whose ill taught hands were exercised to an unnatural war against their own lawful head . 

It were ( Without flattery , most gracious sovereign ! ) an endless work in itself , however unacceptable to your majesty , to repeat the number , much less to celebrate the value of your approved virtues , which have shone forth with dazzling splendour , through the clouds and horror of those impious times we have too lately seen : and though their natural lustre need no foil to set them off to the world's eye , yet they must appear more excellently beautiful , when immediately confronted to the bestial , and most odious qualities of the late usurping tyrant : Aman ( If he ought to be called by that name ) made up of all the vicious inclinations , Machiavilian counsels , bloody designs , and execrable executions that ever yet blotted the face of history ; and in his unbridled and inhuman will , appinged by the numerous and successful arms of a corrupted and a rebellious power , a crew of veteran vilains , whose pay was their god and cause , and whose admirable design was no less than the subversion of what has ever been most dear to all good men in this life , to wit , religion , Prince , laws , and country ; disciplined to nothing but blood and rapine , plunder and insolence ; till he ( Who is indeed the glory of military commanders ) taught a new army a new lesson , appeased their fury , moderated their ambition , and reform their riots . * corrupta erat disciplina castrorum , ut ille corrector emendatorque contingeret . 't was his conduct that has made up an honourable body out of the most infamous army in the world ; an army formidable to all , but beloved of none ; an army employed to destroy them they pretended to defend , and to subject a nation , not to be subjected by other than the spurious issue of her own bowels : but now by the prudence and integrity of their leader , become an army faithful to their Prince , such an one as May be useful and necessary to the most important affairs of all Christendom . 

What things , with your own courage , your kingdom's wealth , and your people's fidelity , May your majesty not do ? Secure your subjects at home , and enlarge your dominions abroad ; repay injuries , reward friendships , and shake foreign sceptres , as well as defend your own : your clemency May nourish us , whilst your arms chastise your enemies ; and when your royal pleasure shall summon your subjects to the test , they who have smiled at your misfortunes , May see that you can command , and that you govern men who dare and will obey . 

A Prince that grasps three sceptres in one hand , May conquer all he will , with both . Neither is there any thing so impossible to do , or so hard to suffer , that you have not already suffered , or done ; and although your majesty cannot outdo yourself in the quality , yet you May increase the number of your glorious actions , at your own generous choice . 

We have found your majesty a King throughout , in all your trials and misfortunes : nothing in all your dangers , and calamities , unworthy your birth , and greatness ; no low addresses to your flourishing neighbours , no unprincely offers or unmanly apprehensions ; no more abated with your mishaps , than we find you elated with your success , but constant and unshaken in all the storms and violences of fortune . * nihilabque ; magis à te subjecti animi factum est , quàm quod imperare coepisti . 

These virtues of your sacred majesty , as they have made you the best Prince , so they must consequently make us the happiest persons ; a persons that are to be governed by a Prince , that has begun his empire in himself , and made himself absolute sovereign over his own passions ; a Prince that has made all the world to admire , but left none to dispute the prerogative of his virtues ; a Prince that in the youth , beauty , and carriage of his own person , without any addition of his more lasting graces , speaks himself truly and magnanimously what he is . * jam firmitas , jam proceritas corporis , jam honor capitis , & dignitas oris , ad hoc aetatis indeflexa maturitas ; nec sine quodam munere deûm , festinantis senectutis insignibus ad augendam majestatem ornata caesaries : nonne longè latéabque ; principem ostentant ? in fine , Sir , there is nothing we could desire either in the majesty of your person , the experience and stability of your mind , or the sweetness of your royal disposition , that God and nature have not prevented our prayers in , and blessed us withal , even ( If it be possible ) beyond the weak aim of our own wishes : and we were certainly the most stupidly ignorant , and impiously ungrateful of all that ever wore the characters of men , if we should not acknowledge it in our devotions to God , our loyalties to your majesty , and endeavours by all the obedient affection , and industrious services of a good and loyal persons , to deserve it in ourselves . 

Live then , great King , the true defender of the Catholic faith , the sacred and uncorrupted fountain of the law , and the gracious and tender father of your persons ! May your majesty prosper by sea , and land ; at home , and abroad , in all you design and enterprise ; and the merciful , omnipotent and only-wise God fortify your arm in war , and direct your justice in peace ! May your majesty live long , and fortunate , full of peace , honour and happy days , ever secured ( By the same waking providence ) from the malevolence of wicked men ! May your crown and dignity shine brighter to the distant world by the addition of a hopeful and numerous posterity , a posterity to inherit their father's virtue , and the great name of their illustrious ancestors ! Lastly May there never want a Prince of your royal line to govern these kingdoms , from race to race , in the same justice and reputation , while there are men to obey , or a man to rule upon the face of the earth ! and May that disloyal subject perish in his ingratitude to God and you , that will not sincerely , joyfully and heartily say , 

Amen . 

Finis . 





* Seneca de clem. lib. 1  * plin. pan. tra. * erasm : ep. 17. lib , 3.  * plin. Pan : tra. * plin. Pan : tra. * plin. pan. tra. * plin. pan. tra. 



