CUTTER OF COLEMAN-STREET . A COMEDY . 

The Scene LONDON , in the year 1658.  

Written by ABRAHAM COWLEY . 

LONDON , Printed for Henry Herringman at the Sign of the Anchor in the Lower walk in the New-exchange . Anno Dom. 1663.  

PREFACE . 

A Comedy , called the Guardian , and made by me when I was very Young , was Acted formerly at Camebridge , and several times after privately during the troubles , as I am told , with good approbation , as it has been lately too at Dublin There being many things in it which I disliked , and finding myself for some days idle , and alone in the Country , I fell upon the changing of it almost wholly , as now it is , and as it was played since at his Royal Highness' Theatre under this New name . It met at the first representation with no favourable reception , and I think there was something of Faction against it , by the early appearance of some men's disapprobation before they had seen enough of it to build their dislike upon their judgement . Afterwards it got some ground , and found Friends as well as Adversaries . In which condition I should willingly let it die , if the main imputations under which it suffered , had been shot only against my Wit or Art in these matters , and not directed against the tenderest parts of human reputation , good Nature , good Manners , and Piety itself . The first clamour which some malicious persons raised , and made a great noise with , was , That it was a piece intended for abuse and Satire against the King's party . Good God Against the King's party ? After having served it twenty years during all the time of their misfortunes and afflictions , I must be a very rash and imprudent person if I choose out that of their Restitution to begin a Quarrel with them . I must be too much a Madman to be trusted with such an Edged Tool as Comedy . But first , why should either the whole party ( as it was once distinguished by that name , which I hope is abolished now by Universal Loyalty ) or any man of virtue or honour in it , believe themselves injured or at all concerned , by the representation of the faults and follies of a few who in the General division of the Nation had crowded in among them ? In all mixed numbers ( which is the case of Parties ) nay , in the most entire and continued Bodies there are often some degenerate and corrupted parts , which may be cast away from that , and even cut off from this Unity , without any infection of scandal to the remaining Body . The Church of Rome with all her arrogance , and her wide pretences of certainty in all truths , and exemption from all Errors , does not clap on this enchanted Armour of Infallibility upon all her particular Subjects , nor is offended at the reproof even of her greatest Doctors . We are not , I hope , become such Puritans ourselves as to assume the Name of the Congregation of the Spotless . It is hard for any Party to be so Ill as that no Good , Impossible to be so Good as that no Ill should be found among them . And it has been the perpetual privilege of Satire and Comedy to pluck their vices and follies though not their persons out of the Sanctuary of any Title . A Cowardly ranting Soldier , an Ignorant Charlatanical Doctor , a foolish Cheating Lawyer , a silly Pedantical Scholar , have , always been , and still are the Principal Subjects of all Comedy without any scandal given to those Honourable Professions , or ever taken by their severest Professors ; And , if any good Physician or Divine should be offended with me here for inveighing against a Quack , or for finding Deacon Soaker too often in the Butteryes , my respect and reverence to their callings would make me troubled at their displeasure , but I could not abstain from taking them for very Choleric and Quarrelsome persons . What does this therefore amount to , if it were true which is objected ? But it is far from being so ; for the representation of two Sharks about the Town ( fellows merry and Ingenious enough , and therefore admitted into better companies than they deserve , yet withal too very scoundrels , which is no unfrequent Character at London ) the representation I say of these as Pretended Officers of the Royal Army , was made for no other purpose but to show the World , that the vices and extravagancies imputed vulgarly to the Cavaliers , were really committed by Aliens who only usurped that name , and endeavoured to cover the reproach of their Indigency or Infamy of their Actions with so honourable a Title . So that the business was not here to correct or cut off any natural branches , though never so corrupted or Luxuriant , but to separate and cast away that vermin which by sticking so close to them had done great and considerable prejudice both to the Beauty and Fertility of the Tree ; And this is as plainly said , and as often inculcated as if one should write round about a Sign , This is a Dog , this is a Dog , out of overmuch caution lest some might happen to mistake it for a Lion , Therefore when this Calumny could not hold ( for the case is clear , and will take no colour ) Some others sought out a subtler hint to traduce me upon the same score , and were angry that the person whom I made a true Gentleman , and one both of considerable Quality and Sufferings in the Royal party , should not have a fair and noble Character throughout , but should submit in his great extremities to wrong his Niece for his own Relief . This is a refined exception , such as I little foresaw , nor should with the dulness of my usual Charity , have found out against another man in twenty years . The truth is , I did not intend the Character of a Hero , one of exemplary virtue , and as Homer often terms such men , Unblameable , but an ordinary jovial Gentleman , commonly called a Good Fellow , one not so conscientious as to starve rather than do the least Injury , and yet endowed with so much sense of Honour as to refuse when that necessity was removed , the gain of five thousand pounds which he might have taken from his Niece by the rigour of a Forfeiture ; And let the frankness of this latter generosity so expiate for the former frailty , as may make us not ashamed of his Company , for if his true Metal be but equal to his Alloy , it will not indeed render him one of the Finest sorts of men , but it will make him Current , for aught I know , in any party that ever yet was in the World. If you be to choose parts for a Comedy out of any noble or elevated rank of persons , the most proper for that work are the worst of that kind . Comedy is humble of her Nature , and has always been bred low , so that she knows not how to behave herself with the great or the accomplished . She does not pretend to the brisk and bold Qualities of Wine , but to the Stomachal Acidity of Vinegar , and therefore is best placed among that sort of people which the Romans call The lees of Romulus . If I had designed here the celebration of the Virtues of our Friends , I would have made the Scene nobler where I intended to erect their Statues . They should have stood in Odes , and Tragedies , and Epique Poems , ( neither have I totally omitted those greater testimonies of my esteem of them ) Sed nunc non erat his Locus , etc.  And so much for this little spiny objection which a man cannot see without a Magnifying Glass . The next is enough to knock a man down , and accuses me of no lesle than Profaneness . Profane , to deride the Hypocrisy of those men whose skulls are not yet bare upon the Gates since the public and just punishment of it ? But there is some imitation of Scripture Phrases ; God forbid ; There is no representation of the true face of Scripture , but only of that Vizard which these Hypocrites ( that is , by interpretation Actors with a Vizard ) draw upon it . It is Profane to speak of Harrisons return to Life again , when some of his friends really professed their belief of it , and he himself had been said to promise it ? A man may be so imprudently scrupulous as to find profaneness in any thing either said or written by applying it under some similitude or other to some expressions in Scripture . This nicety is both vain and endless . But I call God to witness , that rather than one tittle should remain among all my writings which according to my severest judgement should be found guilty of the crime objected , I would myself burn and extinguish them all together . Nothing is so detestably lewd and rechless as the derision of things sacred , and would be in me more unpardonable than any man else , who have endeavoured to root out the ordinary weeds of Poetry , and to plant it almost wholly with Divinity . I am so far from allowing any loose or irreverent expressions in matters of that Religion which I believe , that I am very tender in this point even for the grossest errors of Conscientious persons , They are the properest object ( me thinks ) both of our ●itty and Charity too ; They are the innocent and white Sectaries , in comparison of another kind who engraft Pride upon Ignorance , Tyranny upon Liberty , and upon all their Heresies , Treason and Rebellion . These are Principles so destructive to the Peace and Society of Mankind that they deserve to be pursued by our serious Hatred , and the putting a Mask of Sanctity upon such Devils is do Ridiculous , that it ought to be exposed to contempt and laughter . They are indeed Profane , who sergeant the softness of the voice of Holiness to disguise the roughness of the hands of Impiety , and not they who with reverence to the thing which the others dissemble , deride nothing but their Dissimulation . If some piece of an admirable Artist should be ill Copied even to ridiculousness by an ignorant hand , and another Painter should undertake to draw that Copy , and make it yet more ridiculous , to show apparently the difference of the two works , and deformity of the latter , will not every man see plainly that the abuse is intended to the foolish Imitation , and not to the Excellent Original ? I might say much more to confute and confound this very false and malicious accusation , but this is enough I hope to clear the matter , and is I am afraid too much for a Preface to a work of so little consideration . As for all other objections which have been or may be made against the Invention or Elocution , or any thing else which comes under the Critical jurisdiction , let it stand or fall as it can answer for itself , for I do not lay the great stress of my Reputation upon a Structure of this Nature , much lesle upon the slight Reparations only of an Old and unfashionable Building . There is no Writer but may fail sometimes in point of Wit , and it is no lesle frequent for the Auditors to fail in point of judgement . I perceive plainly by daily experience that Fortune is Mistress of the Theatre , as Tully says it is of all popular Assemblies . no man can tell sometimes from whence the Invisible winds arise that move them . There are a multitude of people who are truly and only Spectators at a play , without any use of their Understanding , and these carry it sometimes by the strength of their Number . There are others who use their Understanding too much , who think it a sign of weakness or stupidity to let any thing pass by them unattaqued , and that the Honour of their judgement ( as some Brutals imagine of their Courage ) consists in Quarrelling with every thing . We are therefore wonderful wise men , and have a fine business of it , we who spend our time in Poetry , I do sometimes laugh , and am often angry with myself when I think on it , and if I had a Son inclined by Nature to the same folly , I believe I should bind him from it , by the strictest conjurations of a paternal Blessing . For what can be more ridiculous than to labour to give men delight , whilst they labour on their part more earnestly to take offence ? to expose one's self voluntarily and frankly to all the dangers of that narrow passage to unprofitable Fame , which is defended by rude multitudes of the Ignorant , and by armed Troops of the Malicious ? If we do ill many discover it and all despise us , if we do well but few men find it out , and fewer entertain it kindly . If we commit errors there is no parson , if we could do wonders there would be but little thanks , and that too extorted from unwilling Givers . But some perhaps may say , Was it not always thus ? Do you expect a particular privilege that was never yet enjoyed by any Poet ? were the ancient Grecian , or noble Roman Authors , was Virgil himself exempt from this Passibility , Qui melior multis quam tu fuit , Improbe , rebus , Who was in many things thy better far , thou impudent Pretender ? As was said by Lucretius to a person who took it ill that he was to Die , though he had seen so many do it before him who better deserved Immortality ; and this is to repine at the natural condition of a Living Poet , as he did at that of a Living Mortal . I do not only acknowledge the Preeminence of Virgil ( whose Footsteps I adore ) but submit to many of his Roman brethren , and I confess that even they in their own times were not secure from the assaults of Detraction ( though Horace brags at last , Jam dente minùs mordeor invido ) but then the Barkings of a few were drowned in the Applause of all the rest of the World , and the Poison of their bitings extiguisht by the Antidote of great rewards , and great encouragements , which is a way of curing now out of use , and I really profess that I neither expect , nor think I deserve it . Indolency would serve my turn instead of Pleasure ; But the case is not so well ; for though I comfort myself with some assurance of the favour and affection of very many candid and good natured ( and yet too judicious and even Critical ) persons , yet this I do affirm , that from all which I have written I never received the least benefit , or the least advantage , but on the contrary have felt sometimes the effects of Malice and Misfortune . 

The Prologue . 

AS when the Midland Sea is no where clear 
From dreadful Fleets of Tunis and Argier , 
Which coast about , to all they meet with Foes , 
And upon which naught can be got but Blows , 
The Merchand Ships so much their passage doubt , 
That , though full-freighted , none dares venture out , 
And Trade dacayes , and Scarcity ensues ; 
Just so the timorous Wits of late refuse , 
Though jaded , to put forth upon the Stage , 
Affrighted by the Critics of this age . 
It is a Party numerous , watchful , bold ; 
They can from naught , which sails in sight , withhold . 
Nor do their cheap , though mortal , Thunder spare ; 
They shoot , alas , with Wind-gunns , charged with Air. 
But yet , Gentlemen Critics of Argier , 
For your own interest I 'd advice ye here 
To let this little Forlorn Hope go by 
Safe and untouched ; That must not be ( you 'll cry ) 
If ye be wise , it must ; I 'll tell ye why . 
There are Seven , Eight , Nine , — stay — there are behind 
Ten Plays at least , which wait but for a Wind , 
And the glad News that we the Enemy miss , 
And those are all your own , if you spare This. 
Some are but new trimmed up , others quite New , 
Some by known Shipwrights built , and others too 
By that great Author made , who ere he be , 
That styles himself Person of Quality . 
All these , if we miscarry here to day . 
Will rather till they Rot in th' Harbour stay , 
Nay they will back again , though they were come , 
Even to their last safe Rode , to Tiring room . 
Therefore again I say , if you be wise , 
Let this for once pass free ; let it suffice 
That we your Soveraing power here to avow , 
Thus humbly ere we pass , strike sail to You.  
Added at Court.  

Stay Gentlemen ; what I have said , was all 
But forced submission , which I now recall . 
ye 're all but Pirates now again ; for here 
Does the true Sovereign of the Seas appear . 
The Sovereign of these Narrow Seas of wit ; 
't is his own Thames ; He knows and Governs it . 
't is his Dominion , and Domain ; as He 
Pleases , 't is either Shut to us or Free. 
Not only , if his Passport we obtain , 
We fear no little Rovers of the Main , 
But if our Neptune his calm visage show , 
no Wave shall dare to Rise or Wind to Blow . 
The persons . 

Colonel Jolly A Gentleman whose Estate was confiscated in the late troubles . 
Mistress Aurelia His Daughter . 
Mistress Lucia His Niece , left to his Tuition . 
Cutter A merry sharking fellow about the Town , pretending to have been a Colonel in the King's Army . 
Worm His Companion , and such another fellow , pretending to have been a Captain . 
Mr. Puny A young , rich , brisk Fop , pretending to extraordinary wit , Suitor to Mistress Lucia . 
Mr. Truman Senior . An old , testy , Covetous Gentleman . 
Mr. Truman Junior His Son , in love with Mistress Lucia . 
Mistress Barebottle A Sopeboylers widow , who had bought Jollys Estate , A pretended Saint . 
Mistress Tabytha Her Daughter . 
Mistress Jane Mistress Lucias Maid , a little laughing Fop.  
Mr. Soaker A little Fuddling Deacon . 
Several Servants 
CUTTER OF COLEMAN-STREET . 

Act 1.  

Scene 1.  

Truman junior .  HOW hard , alas , is that young Lover's fate , 
Who has a father Covetous and Choleric ! 
What has he made me swear ? — 
I dare not think upon the Oath , lest I should keep it — 
Never to see my Mistress more , or hear her speak 
Without his leave ; And farewel then the use 
Of Eyes and Ears ; — 
And all this Wickedness I submitted to , 
For fear of being Disinherited ; 
For fear of losing Dirt and Dross , I loose 
My Mistress — there 's a Lover ! Fitter much 
For Hell than thousand perjuries could make him , 
Fit to be made th' example which all Women 
Should reproach Men with , when themselves grow false ; 
Yet she , the good and charitable Lucia , 
With such a bounty as has only been 
Practised by Heaven , and Kings inspired from thence , 
Forgives still , and still love's her perjured Rebel , 
I 'll to my father straight , and swear to him 
Ten thousand Oaths ne'er to observe that wicked one 
Which he ' has extorted from me — Here he comes ; 
And my weak heart , already used to falsehood , 
begins to waver . 


Scene 2.  

Truman Senior , Truman junior . Trum. Sen.   Well , Dick , you know what you swore to me yesterday , 
And solemnly . 
I have been considering , and considering all Night , Dick , for your good , and methinks , supposing I were a young man again , and the case my own ( for I love to be just in all things ) methinks 'tis hard for a young man , I say , who has been a Lover so long as you have been , to break off on a sudden . am I in the right or no , Dick ? Do you mark me ? 



Trum. jun.   Hard , Sir , 't is harder much than any death 
Prolonged by Tortures . 


Trum. Sen.   Why so I thought ; and therefore out o my care for your ease , I have hit upon an Expedient that I think will salve the matter ! 



Trum. jun.   And I will thank you for it more , Sir , 
Than for the life you gave me . 


Trum. sen.   Why ! well said , Dick , and I 'm glad with all my Heart , I thought upon 't ; in brief , 't is this , Dick ; I have found out another Mistress for you . 



Trum. jun.   Another ? Heaven forbid , Sir ! 


Trum. sen.   I ; Another , Goodman Jack Sauce ; marry come up ; 
Won't one o my choosing serve your turn , as well 
As one o your own ; sure I 'm the older man , 
Jack Sauce , and should be the Wiser ! 


Trum. jun.   But Nature , Sir , that 's wiser than all Mankind , 
Is Mistress in the choice of our affections , 
Affections are not raised from outward Reasons , 
But inward Sympathies . 


Trum. sen.   Very well , Dick , if you be a dutiful son to me , you shall have a good Estate , and so has she ; 

there 's Sympathy for you now ; but I perceive 
you 're hankering still after Mistress Lucy , 
Do , do ! forswear yourself ; do , damn yourself , and be a beggar too ; sure I would never undo myself , by perjury ; if I had a mind to go to hell , Cromwell should make me a Lord for 't ! ay , and one of his Council too , I 'd never be damned for nothing , for a Whim-wham in a Coif . But to be short , The person I design for you is Mistress Tabith Baarebottle , our neighbour the Widow's daughter . What do you start at , Sirrah ? ay , Sirrah , Jack an-apes , if you start when your father speaks to you . 



Trum. jun.   You did not think her father once I 'm sure A person fit for your Alliance , when he plundered your House in Hartfordshire , and took away the very Hop-poles , pretending they were Arms too . 



Trum. sen.   He was a very Rogue , that 's the Truth on 't , as to the business between man and man , but as to Godward he was always counted an Upright man , and very devout . But that 's all one , I 'm sure h 'as raised a fine Estate out o nothing by his Industry in these Times : An I had not been a Beast too — but Heaven's will be done , I could not have don 't with a good conscience . Well , Dick , I 'll go talk with her mother about this matter , and examine fully what her Estate is , for unless it prove a good one , I tell you true , Dick , I 'm o your Opinion , not to marry such a Rogues daughter . 



Trum. jun.   I beseech you , Sir — Exit Trum : sen.  
It is in vain to speak to him — 
Though I to save this Dunghill an Estate 
Have done a Crime like theirs , 
Who have abjured their King for the same cause , 
I will not yet , like them , pursue the guilt , 
And in thy place , Lucia my lawful Sovereign , 
Set up a low and scandalous Usurper ! 


Enter Servant . Seru.   't is well the old man's just gone . there 's a Gentlewoman without , Sir , desire's to speak one word with you . 



Trum. jun.   With me ? who is 't ? 



Seru.   It should be Mistress Lucia by her voice , Sir , but she 's veiled all over . Will you please to see her , Sir ? 



Trum.   Will I see her , Blockhead ? yes ; go out and kneel to her And pray her to come in . ( Exit Seru. ) 



Scene 3  

Lucia ( veiled ) Truman . Trum.   This is a favour , Madam ! 
That I as little hoped , as I am able 
To thank you for it — But why all this muffling ? 
Why a disguise , my Dearest , between us ? 
Unless to increase , my desire first , and then my joy to see thee 
thou cast this subtle night before thy beauty . 
And now like one scorched with some raging Fever , 
Upon whose flames no dew of sleep has fallen , 
I do begin to quarrel with the Darkness , 
And blame the slothful rising of the Morn , 
And with more joy shall welcome it , than they 
Whose Icy dwellings the cold Bear o'erlooks , 
When after half the years Winter and Night , 
Day and the Spring at once salutes their sight ! 
Thus it appears , thus like thy matchless beauty , offers to pull off the Veil . 
When this black Cloud is vanished . 
Why d' ye you shrink back , my Dearest ? 
I prithee let me look a little on thee : 
't is all the pleasure Love has yet allowed me , 
And more than Nature does in all things else . 
At least speak to me ; well may I call it Night 
When Silence too thus joins itself with Darkness . 
Ha! I had quite forgot the cursed Oath I made — 
Pish ! what 's an Oath forced from a Lover's Tongue ? 
't is not recorded in Heaven's dreadful book , 
But scattered loosely by the breath that made it , 
Away with it ; to make it was but a Rashness , 
To keep it were a Sin — Dear Madam — Offers again , but she refuses , & gives him a Note 
Ha! let 's see this then first ! 
You know I have forgiven your unkind Oath to your He reads . 
Father , and shall never suffer you to be perjured . 
I come only to let you know , that the Physician and the ' Apothecary will do this morning what we proposed , be ready at hand , if there should be occasion for your presence , I dare not stay one minute . Farewell . 

Now thousand Angels wait upon thee , Lucia , 
And thousand Blessings upon all thou dost . 
Let me but kiss your hand , And I 'll dismiss you . 
Ah cruel father , when thou mad'st the Oath , 
thou little thought'st that thou hadst left 
Such blessings for me out of it . Exeunt . 


Scene 4.  

Colonel jolly , Will ( his Man ) Col. jolly in an Indian Gown and Nightcap . joll.   Give me the Pills ; what said the Doctor , Will ? 



William   He said a great deal , Sir , but I was not Doctor enough to understand half of it . 



joll.   A man may drink , he says , for all these Baubles ? 



William   he 's ill advised if he give your Worship drinking Pills , for when you were drinking last together , a Fit took you to beaten the Doctor , which your Worship told him was a new Disease . 



joll.   He was drunk then himself first , and spoke False Latin , which becomes a Doctor worse than a beating . But he does not remember that , I hope , now ? 



William   I think he does , Sir , for he says the Pills 
Are to purge Black Choler ! 


joll.   ay , Melancholy ; I shall have need of them then , for my old Purger of Melancholy , Canary , will grow too dear for me shortly ; my own Estate was sold for being with the King at Oxford . A Curse upon an old Dunce that needs must be going to Oxford at my years ! My good Neighbour , I thank him , Colonel Fear-the Lord-barebottle , a Saint and a Soap-boiler , bought it ; But he 's dead , and boiling now himself , that 's the best of 't ; there 's a Cavalier's comfort ! If his damnable Wife now would marry me , it would return again , as I hope all things will at last ; and even that too were as hard a Composition for ones own , as ever was made at Habber-dashers-hall ; but hang her , she 'll have none o me , unless I were True Rich and Counterfeit Godly ; let her go to her husband ; ( so much for that — It does not go down takes a Pill . so glib as an Egg in Muskadine ) Now when my Niece's Portion too goes out o my hands , which I can keep but till a handsome Wench of eighteen pleases to marry ( a pitiful slender Tenure that 's the truth on 't ) I have nothing to do but to live by Plots for the King , or at least to be hanged by ' 'em . ( So , go thou too ) well , something must be takes the two other Pills . done , unless a man could get true Gems by drinking , or like a Mouse in a Cheese , make himself a house by eating . 

Will , did you send for Colonel Cutter and Captain Worm , to come and keep me company this morning that I take Physic ? they 'll be loath to come to day , there 's so little hope o drinking here . 



William   They said they would be here , Sir , before this time ; 
Some Morning's draught , I believe , has intercepted ' 'em . 


joll.   I could Repent now heartily , but that 't would look as if I were compelled to 't , and besides if it should draw me to Amendment , 't would undo me now , till I have gotten something . 't is a hard case to wrong my pretty Niece ; but unless I get this wicked Widow , I and my daughter must starve else ; and that 's harder yet ; Necessity is , as I take it , Fatality , and that will excuse all things , O! Here they are ! 



Scene 5.  

Colonel jolly , Colonel Cutter , Captain Worm . joll.   Welcome ! Men o war , what news abroad in Town ? 



Cut.   Brave news I faith , it arrived but yesterday by an Irish Priest , that came over in the habit of a Fishwife , a cunning fellow , and a man o business , he 's to lie Leaguer here for a whole Irish College beyond-sea , and do all their Affairs of State. The Captain spoken with him last night at the Blue Anchor ! 



joll.   Well , and what is 't ? 



Worm .  Why , Business is afloat again ; the King has mustered five and twenty thousand men in Flanders , as tall Fellows as any are in Christendom . 



joll.   A pox upon you for a couple of gross Cheats ! 

I wonder from what fools in what blind corners you get a dinner for this stuff . 



Cut.   Nay , there 's another News that 's stranger ye , but for that let the Captain Answer . 



Wor.   I confess I should have thought it very ridiculous , but that I saw it from a good hand beyond Sea , under Black and White , and all in Cypher . 



joll.   O it can't miss then ; what may it be , pray ? 



Wor.   Why , that the Emperor of Muscovy has promised 
To land ten thousand Bears in England to 
Overrun the Country . 


joll.   Oh! that 's in revenge of the late barbarous Murder of their brethren here I warrant you ! 



Cut.   Why , Colonel , things will come about again ! 
We shall have another about fort ! 


joll.   Why all this to a friend that knows you ? where were thy former Bouts , I prithee Cutter ? where didst thou ever serve the King , or when ? 



Cut.   Why every where ; and the last time at Worcester 

If I never served him since , the faults not mine ; an there had been any Action — 



joll.   At Worcester , Cutter ? prithee how gots thou thither ? 



Cut.   Why as you and all other Gentlemen should have done ; I carried him in a Troop of Reformado Officers ; most of them had been under my command before ! 



joll.   I 'll be sworn they were Reformado Tapsters then ; but prithee how gets thou off ? 



Cut.   Why as the King himself , and all the rest of the great ones ; in a disguise ; if you 'll needs know 't . 



Wor.   he 's very cautious , Colonel , h 'as kept it ever since . 



joll.   that 's too long i'faith , Cutter , prithee take one disguise now more at last , and put thyself into the habit of a Gentleman . 



Cut.   I 'll answer no more Prethees ; Is this the Mornings-draught you sent for me to ? 



joll.   no , I have better news for ye both , than ever ye had from a good Irish hand ; the truth is I have a Plot for ye , which if it take , ye Shall no more make monstrous Tales from Bruges to revive your sinking Credits in Loyal Alehouses , nor inveigle into Taverns young Foremen of the Shop , or little beardless Blades of the Inns of Court , to drink to the Royal Family Parabolically , and with bouncing Oaths like Cannon at every Health ; nor upon unlucky failing afternoons take melancholy turns in the Temple Walks , and when you meet acquaintance , cry , You wonder why your Lawyer stays so long with a pox to him . 



Wor.   This Physic has stirred ill humours in the Colonel , would they were once well purged , and we a Drinking again lovingly together as we were wont to do . 



joll.   Nor make headless quarrels about the Reckoning time , and leave the house in confusion ; nor when you go to bed produce ten several snuffs to make up one poor Pipe o Tobacco ! 



Cut.   Would I had one here now ; I have ned had my morning Smoak yet , by this day ! 



joll.   Nor change your names and lodgings as often as a Whore : for as yet if ye lived like Tartars in a Cart ( as I fear ye must die in one ) your home could not be more uncertain . To day at Wapping , and to morrow you appear again upon Mill-bank ( like a Duck that Dives at this end of the Pond , and rises unexpectedly at the other ) I do not think Pythagoras his Soul ever changed so many dwellings as you have done within these two years . 



Cut.   Why , what then , Colonel ? Soldiers must remove their Tents sometimes , Alexander the Great did it a thousand times . 



Worm .  Nine hundred , Cutter , you 're but a Dunce in Story ; 
But what 's all this to th' matter , Noble Colonel ? 
You run a Woolgathering like a zealous Teacher ; 
where 's the use of Consolation that you promised us ? 


joll.   Why thou shalt have it , little Worm , for these Damned Pills begin to make me horrible sick , and are not like to allow of long Digressions ; Thus briefly then , as befits a man in my case ! 

When my brother the Merchant went into Africa , to follow his great Trade there — 



Wor.   How o Devil could he follow it ? why he had quite lost his memory ; I knew him when he was fain to carry his own Name in Writing about him for fear lest he should forget it . 



joll.   O his man john , you know , did all , yet still he would go about with old john , and thought if he did Go , he did his business himself ; well , when he went he left his Daughter with a Portion o five thousand pounds to my Tuition , and if she married without my consent , she was to have but a thousand of it . When he was gone two years he died — 



Wor.   He did a little forget himself methinks , when he left the Estate in your hands , Colonel . 



joll.   Hold your tongue , Captain Coxcomb ; now the case is this ; ye shall give me a thousand pounds for my interest and favour in this business , settle the rest upon her , and her children , or me and mine , if she have none ( d' ye mark me ? for I will not have one penny of the Principal pass through such glewy Fingers ) upon these terms I 'll marry her to one of you ; Always provided though , that he whom she shall choose ( for she shall have as fair a choice as can be between two such fellows ) shall give me good assurances of living afterwards like a Gentleman , as befits her husband , and cast off the tother's company ! 



Cut.   The Conditions may be admitted of , though if I have her , she 'll have no ill bargain on 't when the King comes home ; but how , Colonel , if she should prove a foolish fantastical Wench , and refuse to marry either of us ? 



joll.   Why ! then she shall never have my consent to marry any body ; and she 'll be hanged , I think , first in the Friar's Rope , ere she turn Nun.  



Wor.   I 'll be a Carthusian an she do ! 



joll.   if 't were not for Chastity and Obedience thou mightest be so ; their tother Vow of never carrying any money about them , thou hast kept from thy youth upwards . 



Wor.   I 'll have her ; I 'm the better Scholar ; and we 're both equal Soldiers , I 'm sure . 



Cut.   thou , Captain Bobadil ? what with that Ember-week face o thine ? that Razor o thy Nose ? thou look'st as if thou hadst never been fed since thou suckest thy mother's milk . Thy cheeks begin to fall into thy mouth , that thou mightest eat them . Why thou very Lath , with a thing cut like a face at Top , and a slit at bottom . I am a man have served my King and Country , a person of Honour , Dogbolt , and a Colonel . 



Wor.   Yes , as Priests are made now a days , a Colonel made by thine own self . I must confess thus much o thy good parts , thou 'rt beholding to no body but thyself for what thou art . thou a Soldier ? Did not I see thee once in a quarrel at Ninepins behind Sodom-lane disarmed with one o the pins ? Alas , good Cutter ! there 's difference , as I take it , betwixt the clattering o Swords and Quart-pots , the effusion of Blood and Claret-wine — 



Cut.   ( What a Barking little Curr's this ? ) 



Wor.   The smoke o Guns and Tobacco — nor can you , Cutter , fight the better , because you have beaten an old Bawd or a Drawer ; besides , what parts hast thou ? Hast thou Scholarship enough to make a Brewer's Clerk ? Canst thou read the Bible ? I 'm sure thou hast not ; canst thou write more than thine own name , and that in such vile Characters , that most men take 'em for Arabian Pot-hooks ! Dost thou not live , Cutter , in the Chymaerian darkness of Ignorance ? 



joll.   Cymmerian , Captain , prithee let it be Cymmerian ! 



Wor.   I ; I know some will have it so ; but by this light I always call 't Chymaerian ! 



Cut.   OH brave Scholar ! has the Colonel caught you in false Latin , you dunce you ? you 'd even as good stick to your Captainship ; and that you may thank me for , you ingrateful Pimp you , was not I the first that ever called you so ? and said you had served stoutly in my Regiment at Newberry ? 



joll.   Thy Regiment ? — well ! leave your quarrelling , Baboons , and try your fortunes fairly ; I begin to be very very sick , I 'll leave you , and send in my Niece to entertain you , upon my life , if you quarrel any more , As great Soldiers as you are , I 'll have you Cashiered for ever out o this Garrison o' mine , look to 't . Exit Col. joll.  



Wor.   Come Cutter , we 'd even better play fair play with one another , than loose all to a third . Let 's draw Cuts who shall accost her first when she comes in , and the tother void the room for a little while . 



Cutt.   Agreed ! you may thank the Colonel for coming off so easily ; you know well enough I dare not offend him at such a time as this ! 



Wor.   The longest first — Draw Lots . 



Cut.   Mine ! Od's my life ! here she is already ! 



Scene 6.  

Lucia , Cutter , Worm . Luc.   Not choose amiss ? indeed I must do , Uncle , To herself at her Entrance . 
If I should choose again ; especially , 
If I should do 't out of your drinking company ; 
Though I have seen these fellows here , I think 
A hundred times , yet I so much despise 'em , 
I never asked their names : But I must speak to 'em now . My Uncle , Gentlemen , will wait upon you presently again , and sent me hither to desire your patience ! 



Cut.   Patience , Madam , will be no Virtue requisite for us , whilst you are pleased to stay here ; ha , ha ! Cutter ! that lit pretty pat i'faith for a beginning , Worm goes out . 



Luc.   Is your friend going , Sir ? 



Cut.   Friend , Madam ? — ( I hope I shall be even with him presently ) he 's a merry fellow that your Uncle and I divert ourselves withal . 



Luc.   What is he ? pray Sir.  



Cut.   that 's something difficult to tell you , Madam ; But he has been all things . He was a Scholar once , and since a Merchant , but broke the first half year ; after that he served a Justice o Peace , and from thence turned a kind o Solicitor at Goldsmiths-hall ; h 'as a pretty Smattering too in Poetry , and would have been my Lady Protectres' Poet ; He written once a Copy in praise of her Beauty , but her Highness gave him for it but an old Half-crown piece in Gold , which she had hoarded up before these troubles , and that discouraged him from any further Applications to the Court. Since that , h 'as been a little Agitator for the Cavalier party , and drew in one of the Prentices that were hanged lately ; he 's a good ingenious fellow , that 's the truth on 't , and a pleasant Droll when h 'as got a cup o Wine in his pate , which your Uncle and I supply him with ; but for matters that concern the King neither of us trust him . Not that I can say h 'as betrayed any body , but he 's so indigent a Varlet , that I 'm afraid he would sell his Soul to Oliver for a Noble . But Madam , what a pox should we talk any more o that Mole-catcher ? ( Now I 'm out again — I am so used only to ranting Whores , that an honest Gentlewoman puts me to a Nonplus ! ) 



Luc.   Why , my Uncle recommended him to me , Sir , as a Person of Quality , and of the same Condition with yourself , only that you had been a Colonel o Foot , and he a Captain of Horse in his Majesty's Service . 



Cut.   You know your Uncle's Drolling humour , Madam ; he thought there was no danger in the Raillery , and that you 'd quickly find out what he was ; Here he comes again , Enter Worm . I 'll leave him with you , Madam , for a Minute , and wait upon you immediately , ( I am at a loss , and must recover myself ) Captain , I have dealt better by you than you deserved , and given you a high Character to her ; see you do me right too , if there be occasion — I 'll make bold though to harken whether you do or no.  



Exit Cutter , and stands at the door . Wor.   Madam , my Noble friend your Uncle has been pleased to honour me so far with his good Opinion , as to allow me the liberty to kiss your hands . 



Luc.   you 're welcome , Sir , but pray , Sir , give me leave 
Before you enter into farther Compliment 
To ask one question of you . 


Wor.   I shall resolve you , Madam , with that truth 
Which may , I hope , invite you to believe me 
In what I 'm to say afterwards . 


Luc.   't is to tell me your friends Name , Sir , and his Quality , which , though i  seen him oft , I am yet ignorant of : I suppose him to be some honourable person , who has eminently served the King in the late Wars . 



Cut.   't is a shrewd discerning Wench , she has hit me at the door . right already ! 



Wor.   They call him Colonel Cutter , but to deal faithfully with you , Madam , he 's no more a Colonel than you 're a Mayor General . 



Cut.   Ha! sure I mistake the Rogue ! 



Wor.   He never served his King , not he , no more than he does his Maker ; 't is true , h 'as drunk his Health as often as any man , upon other men's charges , and he was for a little while , I think , a kind of Hector , till he was sound beaten one day , and dragged about the room , like old Hector o Troy about the Town . 



Cut.   What does this Dog mean , trow ? 



Wor.   Once indeed he was very low for almost a twelvemonth , and had neither money enough to hire a Barber , nor buy Sizars , and then he wore a Beard ( he said ) for King Charles ; he 's now in pretty good clothes , but would you saw the furniture of his Chamber ! marry half a Chair , an Earthen Chamberpot without an Ear , and the bottom of an Ink-horn for a Candlestiks , the rest is broken foul Tobacco-pipes , and a dozen o Galley-pots with Sawfe in ' 'em . 



Cut.   Was there ever such a cursed Villain ! 



Wor.   H 'as been a known Cheat about the Town these twenty years . 



Luc.   What does my Uncle mean to keep him company , if he be such a one ? 



Wor.   Why he 's infatuated , I think ! I have warned him on 't a thousand times ; he has some wit ( to give the devil his due ) and that 't is makes us endure him , but however I 'd advice your Uncle to be a a little more cautious how he talks before him o State matters , for he 's shrewdly wronged if he be ned Cromwel's Agent for all the Taverns between Kings-street and the Devil at Temple-bar , indeed he 's a kind o Resident in ' 'em . 



Cut.   Flesh and blood can bear no longer — Worm , you 're a stinking , lying , perjured , damned Villain ; and if I do not bring you , Madam , his Nose and both his Ears , and lay 'em at your feet here before night , may the Pillory and the Pox take mine ▪ till then , suspend your judgement . Exit Cutter . 



Luc.   Nay , you 're both even ; just such an excellent Character did he bestow on you ; Why , thou vile Wretch , 

Go to the Stews , the Gaol , and there make love , 
thou 'lt find none there but such as will scorn thee ! 


Wor.   Why here 's brave work i'faith ! I have carried it swimmingly , I 'll even go steal away and drink a dozen before I venture to think one thought o the business . Exit . 



Luc.   Go cursed race , which stick your loathsome crimes 
Upon the Honourable Cause and Patty ; 
And to the Noble Loyal Sufferers , 
A worse suffering add of Hate and Infamy . 
Go to the Robbers and the Parricides , 
And fix your Spots upon their Painted Vizards , 
Not on the Native face of Innocence , 
't is you retard that Industry by which 
Our Country would recover from this sickness ; 
Which , whilst it fears th' eruption of such Ulcers , 
Keeps a Disease tormenting it within , 
But if kind Heaven please to restore our Health , 
When once the great Physician shall return , 
He quickly will I hope restore our Beauty . Exit . 


Act. 2.  

Scene 1.  

Aurelia .  I See 't is no small part of policy 
To keep some little Spies in an Enemy's quarters : 
The Parliament had reason — 
I would not for five hundred pounds but have corrupted my Cousin Lucia's Maid ; and yet it costs me nothing but Sack-possets , and Wine , and Sugar when her Mistress is a bed , and tawd'ry Ribbons , or fine Trimmed Gloves sometimes , and once I think a pair of Counterfeit Ruby Pendants That cost me half a Crown . The poor Wench love's Died Glass like any Indian , for a Diamond Bob I 'd have her Maden-head if I were a Man and she a Maid . If her Mistress did but talk in her sleep sometimes o my conscience she 'd sit up all night and watch her , only to tell me in the morning what she said ; 't is the prettiest diligent Wretch in her Calling , now she has undertakened . 

Her intelligence just now was very good , and 
May be o consequence ; That young Truman is 
Stolen up the back way into my Cousin's Chamber . 
These are your grave Maids that study Romances , and will be all Mandanas and Cassandra's , and never spit but by the Rules of Honour ; O , here she comes , I hope , with fresh intelligence from the Foes Rendezvouz . 



Scene 2.  

Aurelia , jane.  jane.   ha , ha , ha ! for the love of goodness hold me , or I shall fall down with laughing , ha , ha , ha ! 't is the best humour — no — I can't tell it you for laughing — ha , ha , ha ! the prettiest sport , ha , ha , ha ! 



Aur.   Why , thou hast not seen him lie with her , hast thou ? 
The Wench is mad ; prithee what is 't ? 


jane.   Why ( he , hei , ha ! ) My Mistress sits by her Servant in a long Veil that covers her from Top to Toe , and says not one word to him , because of the Oath you know that the old man forced his son to take after your Father had forbid him the house , and he talks half an hour , like an Ass as he is , all alone , and looks upon her hand all the while , and kisses it , But that which makes me die with laughing at the conceit ( ha , ha , ha ! ) is , that when he asks her any thing , she goes to the Table , and writes her answer , you never saw such an innocent Puppet-play ! 



Aur.   Dear jane ( kiss me , jane , ) how shall I do to see ' 'em ? 



jan.   Why , Madam , I 'll go look the key of my Mistress Closet above , that looks into her Chamber , where you may see all , and not be seen . 



Aur.   Why that 's as good as the trick o the Veil ; do , dear jane , quickly , 't will make us excellent sport at night , and we 'll fuddle our Noses together , shall we , dear jane ? 



jane.   ay , dear Madam ! I 'll go seek out the key . Exit jane.  



Aur.   't is strange , if this trick o my Cousins should beget no trick o mine , That would be pitiful dull doings . 



Scene 3  

Aurelia , Mr. Puny . Aur.   Here comes another of her Servants ; a young , rich , fantastical Fop , that would be a Wit , and has got a new way of being so ; he scorns to speak any thing that 's common , and finds out some impertinent similitude for every thing , The Devil I think can't find out one for him . This Coxcomb has so little Brains too , as to make me the Confident of his Amours , I 'll thank him for his Confidence ere I have done with him . 



Pun :  Whofe here ? OH Madam ! is your father out of his Metaphorical Grave yet ? you understand my meaning , my dear Confident ? you 're a Wit ! 



Aur.   Like what , Mr. Puny ? 



Pun.   Why — like — me ! 



Aur.   that 's right your way , Mr. Puny , it 's an odd similitude . 



Pun.   But where 's your father little Queen o Diamonds ? is he extant ? I long like a Woman big with Twins to speak with him ! 



Aur.   You can't now possibly , There was never any Creature so sick with a disease as he is with Physic , to day , the Doctor and the ' Apothecary's with him ; and will let no body come in . But , Mr. Puny , I have words o comfort for you ! 



Pun.   What , my dear Quenn o Sheba ! and I have Ophir for thee if thou hast . 



Aur.   Why your Rival is forbid our house , and has sworn to his father never to see or hear your Mistress more . 



Pun.   I knew that yesterday as well as I knew my Credo , but I 'm the very Jew of Malta if she did not use me since that , worse than I 'd use a rotten Apple . 



Aur.   Why that can't be , Brother Wit , why that were uncivilly done of her ! 



Pun.   OH hang her , Queen of Fairy's , ( I'm all for Queens to day I think ) she cares much for that ; no , that Assyrian Crocodile Truman is still swimming in her praecordiums , but I 'll so ferret him out , I 'll beaten him as a Bloomsbury Whore beats Hemp ; I 'll spoil his Grave Dominical Postures ; I 'll make him sneak , and look like a door off the hinges . 



Aur.   that 's hard ! but he deserves it truly , if he strive to Annihilate . 



Pun.   Why well said , Sister Wit , now thou speakest oddly too ! 



Aur.   Well , without wit or foolery , Mr. Puny , what will you give me , if this night , this very improbable night , I make you Mary my Cousin Lucia ? 



Pun.   thou talk'st like Medusa's head , thou astonishest me . 



Aur.   Well , in plain language as befits a Bargain ; there 's Pen and Ink in the next Chamber , give but a Bill under your hand to pay me five hundred pounds in Gold ( upon forfeiture of a thousand if you fail ) within an hour after the business is done , and I 'll be bound Body for Body my Cousin Lucia shall be your Wife this night ; if I deceive you , your Bond will do you no hurt , if , I do not , consider a little beforehand , whether the Work deserves the Reward , and do as you think fit . 



Pun.   There shall be no more considering than in a Hasty Pudding ; I 'll write it an you will , in Shorthand , to dispatch immediately , and presently go put five hundred Mari-golds in a purse for you , Come away like an Arrow out of a Scythian Bow.  



Aur.   I 'll do your business for you , I 'll warrant you ; Allons Mon-cher . Exeunt . 



Scene 4.  

Cutter , Worm . Cut.   Now I have thee at the place , where thou affronted'st me , here will I cut thy throat . 



Wor.   you 'll be hanged first . 



Cut.   no by this light . 



Wor.   you 'll be hanged after then . 



Cut.   Not so neither ; for I 'll hew thee into so many morsels , that the Crowner shall not be able to give his Verdict whether 't was the Body of a Man or of a Beast , as thou art . thou shalt be mincemeat , Worm , within this hour . 



Wor.   He was a Coward once , nor have I ever heard one syllable since of his Reformation , he shall not daunt me . 



Cut.   Come on ; I 'll send thee presently to Erebus Draws . without either Bail or Mainprise . 



Wor.   Have at you , Cutter , an thou hadst as many lives as are in Plutarch , I 'd make an end of 'em all . 



Cut.   Come on , Miscreant . 



Wor.   Do , do ! strike an thou dar'st . 



Cut.   Coward , I 'll give thee the advantage of the first push , Coward . 



Wor.   I scorn to take any thing o thee , Jew . 



Cut.   If thou dar'st not strike first , thou submitt'ft , and I give thee thy life . 



Wor.   Remember , Cutter , you were treacherous first to me , and therefore must begin . Come , pox upon 't , this quarrel will cost us quarts o Wine a piece before the Treaty o Peace be ended . 



Cut.   here 's company coming in ; I 'll hear o no Treaties , Worm , we 'll fight it out . 



Scene 5.  

Aurelia , Puny , Cutter , Worm . Aur.   Five hundred neat Gentlemen-like twenty-shilling Reading . pieces , though never washed nor barbed — A curse upon him , can't he write a Bond without these sotteries ? 



Pun.   Why how now Panims ? fight like two Sea-fish in the Map ? Why how now my little Gallimaufry , my Oleopodrido of Arts and Arms ; Hold the fierce Gudging ! 



Aur.   ' Odds my life , Puny , let 's go in again ; that 's the only way to part ' 'em . 



Pun.   Do , do ! kill one another and be hanged like Ropes of Onions . 



Cut.   At your command ? no , Puny ! I 'll be forced by no man ; put up , Worm ; we 'll fight for no man's pleasure but our own . 



Wor.   Agreed ! I won't make sport with murdering any man , an he were a Turk . 



Pun.   Why now ye speak like the Pacifique Sea ; we 'll to the King's Poleanon , and drink all into Pylados again ; we 'll drink up a whole Vessel there to Redintegration , and that so big , that the Tun of Heidelberg shall seem but a Barrel of Pickled Oysters to 't ; mean time , thou pretty little Smith o my good fortune , beaten hard upon the Anvil of your Plot , I 'll go and provide the Spankers . Exit Puny . 



Cut.   Your Cousin , Mistress Aurelia , has abused us most irreverently . 



Aur.   Why what 's the matter ? 



Cut.   Your father recommended us two as Suitors to her . 



Aur.   And she 'd have none of you ? What a foolish Girl 't is , to stand in her own light so ? 



Wor.   Nay , that 's not all , but she used us worse than if we 'd been the veriest Rogues upon the face of the whole Earth . 



Aur.   that 's a little thought too much , but 't was safer erring o that hand . 



Cut.   ay , we 're like to get much , I see , by complaining to you . 



Enter jane.  jan.   ha , ha , ha ! here 's the key o the Closet , go up softly , Madam , ha , ha , ha ! and make no noise , dear Madam , I must be gone . 



Exit . Aur.   Why does this little Foppitee laugh always ? 't is such a Ninny that she betrays her Mistress , and thinks she does no hurt at all , no , not she ; well , wretched Lovers , come along with me now , ( but softly upon your lives , as you would steal to a Mistress through her Mother's Chamber ) and I 'll show you this severe Penelope , locked up alone in a Chamber with your Rival . 



Cut.   As softly as Snow falls . 



Wor.   Or Vapours rise . 



Aur.   What are you Punish too with your Similitudes ? Mum — not a word — pull off your shoes at bottom of the stairs , and follow me . 



Scene 6.  

Enter Truman junior . And presently Aurelia , Cutter , and Worm appear at a little Window . Trum.   Why should her cruel Uncle seek to oppose 
A Love in all respects so good and equal ? 
He has some wicked end in 't , and deserves 
To be deceived ! 


Cut.   Deceived ? pray mark that Madam . 


Trum.   She is gone in to see if things be ripe yet 
To make our last attempt upon her Uncle ; 
If our Plot fail — 


Aur.   A Plot i'faith , and I shall Counterplot ye . 


Trum.   In spite of our worst Enemies , our kindred , 
And a rash Oath that 's cancelled in the making , 
We will pursue our Loves to the last point , 
And buy that Paradise though 't be with Martyrdom ! 


Scene 7.  

Enter Lucia . She goes to the Table and Writes whilst he Speaks , and gives him the Paper . Trum.   she 's come , methinks I see her through her Veil ; 
she 's naked in my heart with all her Beauties . 


Wor.   thou hast a Bawdy heart I 'll warrant thee . 



Cut.   Hold your peace , Coxcomb . 



Trum.   That has , I think , taken an Oath 
Quite contrary to mine , never to see 
Any thing else ! 
he 's extreme sick , and thinks he shall die , Reads a paper given him by Lucia . the Doctor and ' Apothecary have acted very well ; I 'll be with him presently , go into my little Oratory , and pray for the A cry within , Mistress Aurelia . success — I 'll pray with as much zeal as any sinner , converted just upon the point of death , prays his short time out . Exeunt Truman & Lucia . 



Aur.   What can this mean ? and They cry within . the cry within there ? pray let 's go down and see what 's the matter . 



Enter Will and Ralph crying . William   Ah , Lord ! my poor Master ! Mistress Aurelia , Mistress Aurelia . 



Aur.   Here , what 's the business ? 



Ralph .  O Lord ! the saddest accident . 



Aur.   For the love of Heaven speak quickly . 



William   I cannot speak for weeping ; my poor Master's poisoned . 



Aur.   Poisoned ? how prithee , and by whom ? 



William   Why by the strangest Accident , Mistress . 

The Doctor prescribed one what d' ye call it with a hard name , and that careless Rogue the Pothecaries' man ( mistaking one Glass for another that stood by it ) put in another what d' ye call it , that is a mortal poison . 



Aur.   O then 't is plain , this was the Plot they talked of ; ye heard , Gentlemen , what they said ; pray follow me and bear witness . Exit Aurelia . 



Cut.   Undoubtedly they had a hand in 't ; we shall be brought to swear against them , Worm . 



Worm .  I 'll swear what I heard , and what I heard not but I 'll hang hang 'em . I see I shall be revenged o that proud Tit ; but it grieves me for the Colonel . 



Scene 8.  

Colonel Jolly ( brought in a Chair ) Aurelia , Cutter , Worm , Will , Ralph , other Servants . joll.   Oh! I have vomited out all my guts , and all my entrails — 



Aur.   O my dear Father ! 



joll.   I 'm going , daughter — have ye sent the pocky Doctor and the plaguy ' Apothecary to a Justice o Peace to be examined ? 



William   Yes , Sir , your Worship's Steward and the Constable are gone with 'em ; does your Worship think they did it out o malice , and not by a mistake ? if I had thought they did , I 'd a hanged 'em presently , that you might have seen it done before you died . 



joll.   Huh , huh , huh ! I think that Rogue the Doctor did it , because I beaten him tother day in our drinking ! huh , huh , huh ! 



Aur.   no , Sir , ( OH my dear father ) no , Sir , you little think who were the Contrivers of your murder , even my Cousin Luce and her Gallant — O Lord — 't is discovered by a miraculous providence — they 're both together in her Chamber now , and there we overheard 'em as it pleased — these two Gentlemen heard 'em as well as I — 



joll.   Can they be such Monsters ? Oh! I 'm as hot as Lucifer — O — O — ! what did you hear 'em say ? — O my stomach ! 



Cut.   Why that they had a Plot — 



Aur.   And that the Doctor and ' Apothecary had done it very well . 



Wor.   I and your Niece asked if he thought the Poison were strong enough . 



Aur.   There never was such an Impudence ! 



William   How murder will out ! I always thought , fellow Ralph , your Mistress Lucia was naught with that young smooth-faced Varlet ; do you remember , Ralph , what I told you in the Butteries once ? 



Aur.   Here she comes ! OH Impudence ! Enter Lucia . 



joll.   Oh! Oh! Oh! — go all aside a little , and let me speak with her alone . Come hither , Niece — Oh! O — ! you see by what accident 'thas pleased — huh — huh — huh — to take away your loving Uncle , Niece ! huh : — 



Luc.   I see 't , Sir , with that grief which your misfortune and mine in the loss of you does require . 



Cut.   there 's a devil for you ; but , Captain , Joll. and Luc : talk together . did you hear her speak o poison , and whether it were strong enough ? 



Wor.   no , but I love to strike home when , I do a business , I 'm for through-stich ; I 'm through paced , what a pox should a man stand mincing ? 



Luc.   I hope , Sir , and have faith , that you 'll recover ! 
But , Sir , because the danger 's too apparent , 
And who ( alas ) knows how ` Heaven may dispose of you ? before it grow too late ( after your blessing ) I humbly beg one Boon upon my knees . 



joll.   What is 't ( rise up Niece ) O — I can deny you nothing at this time sure ! 



Luc.   It is ( I wi' not rise , Sir , till you grant it ) 
That since the love betwixt Truman and myself 
Has been so sixth , and like our fortunes equal , 
ye would be pleased to sign before your death , 
The confirmation of that Love , our Contract , 
And when your Soul shall meet above , my fathers , 
As soon as he has bid you welcome thither , 
he 'll thank you for this goodness to his daughter ; 
I do conjure you , Sir , by his memory ! 
By all your hopes of happiness hereafter ! 
In a better world ! and all your dearest wishes of happiness for those whom ye love most , and leave behind you here ! 



joll.   You have deserved so well o me Niece , that 't is impossible to deny you any thing ; where 's gentle Mr. Truman ? 



Luc.   In the next room , Sir , waiting on your will 
As on the Sentence of his life and death too . 


joll.   O — I 'm very sick — pray bring him in . 



Luc.   A thousand Angels guard your life , Sir ! 
Or if you die , carry you up to heaven . Exit . 


Wor.   Was there ever such a young dissembling Witch ? 



Cut.   here 's Woman in perfection ! 
The devil 's in their tails and in their tongues ! 
Their possessed both ways ! 


joll.   Will ▪ Ralph , is jeremy there too ? be ready when I speak to you . 



Enter Truman , Lucia , ( veiled . ) Trum.   Our prayers are heard , 't is as we wished , dear Lucia , O this blessed hour ! 



joll.   Take him and carry him up to the Green Chamber — O my belly — lock him in sure there , till you see what becomes of me ; if I do die , he and his Mistress shall have but an ill Match of it at Tyburn . O my Guts — lock up Luce too in her Chamber . 



Trum.   What do ye mean , Gentlemen ? are ye mad ? 



William   We mean to lock you up safe , Sir , for a great Jewel as you are ! 



Luc.   Pray hear me all . 



joll.   Away with ' 'em . Exit all the Servants , with Truman and Lucia several ways . 



Aur.   How do you , Sir ? I hope you may overcome it , your Nature's strong , Sir.  



joll.   no , 't is impossible ; and yet I find a little ease , but 't is but a flash — Aurelia — O there it wrings me again — fetch me the Cordial-glass in the Cabinet window , and the little Prayer-book ; I would fain repent , but it comes so hardly — I am very unfit to die , if it would please Heaven — so , set down the Glass — there — give me — 



Aur.   The Prayer-book , Sir , is all mouldy , I must wipe it first . 



joll.   Lay it down too — so — it begins t' assuage a little — there lay down the Book ; 't will but trouble my Brains now I 'm a dying . 



Enter William  William   here 's the Widow , Sir , without , and Mistress Tabytha her daughter , they have heard o your misfortune , and have brought Mr. Knock-down to comfort you . 



joll.   How ? everlasting Knock-down ! will they trouble a Man thus when he 's a dying ? Sirrah ! Blockhead ! let in joseph Knock-down , and I 'll send thee to Heaven afore me ; I have but an hour or two to live perhaps , and that 's not enough for him I 'm sure to preach in ! 



William   Shall Mistress Barebottle come in , Sir ? 



joll.   that 's a She Knock-down too ; well , let her come in — huh ! huh ! huh ! I must bear all things patiently now ; but Sirrah , Rogue ! take heed o joseph Knock-down , thou shalt not live with ears if joseph Knock-down enter . 



Enter Widow , Tabytha . Wid.   How d' ye you Neighbour Colonel ? how is 't ? take comfort . 



joll.   Cut off in the flower o my age , Widow . 



Wid.   Why , Man's life is but a Flower , Mr. jolly , and the Flower withers , and Man withers , as Mr. Knock-down observed last Sabbath-day at Evening Exercise ; But , Neighbour , you 're passed the Flower , you 're grown old as well as I — 



joll.   I' the very flower ; that damned Quack-salver — 



Tabith.   Methoughts he was the ugliest fellow , Mother , 
And they say he 's a Papish too , forsooth . 


Wid.   I never liked a Doctor with a red Nose ; my Husband was wont to say — how do you , Mistress Aurelia ? comfort yourself , we must all die sooner or later ; to day here , to morrow gone . 



joll.   O the torture of such a tongue ! would I were dead already , and this my Funeral Sermon . 



Wid.   Alas poor man ! his tongue I warrant ye is hot as passes ; you have a better memory than I , Tabytha , tell him what Mr. Knock-down said was a Saint's duty in tormenting sicknesses , now poison 's a great tormentor . 



joll.   Oh! Oh! — this additional Poison will certainly make an end of me ! 



Wid.   Why seek for spiritual Incomes , Mr. Colonel ; I 'll tell you what my Husband Barebottle was wont to observe ( and he was a Colonel too ) he never sought for Incomes but he had some Blessing followed immediately ; once he sought forem in Hartfordshire , and the next day he took as many Horses and Arms in the Country as served to raise three Troops ; another time he sought for 'em in Bucklersbury , and three days after a friend of his , that he owed five hundred pounds too , was hanged for a Malignant , and the Debt forgiven him by the Parliament ; a third time he sought for 'em in Hartfordshire — 



Tabith.   no , Mother , 't was in Worcester-shire , forsooth . 



Wid.   ay , Child , it was indeed in Worcester-shire ; and within two months after the Dean of Vvorcester's Estate fell to him . 



joll.   He sought for 'em once out o my Estate too , I thank him ; O my head ! 



Wid.   Why truly , Neighbour Colonel , he had that but for his Penny , and would have had but a hard Bargain of it , if he had not by a friends means of the Council hooked in two thousand pounds of his Arrears . 



Cut.   For shame let 's relieve him ; Colonel , you said you had a mind to settle some affairs of your Estate with me , and Captain Worm here . 



Wid.   I 'll leave you then for a while , pray send for me , Neighbor , when you have a mind to 't Heaven strengthen you ; come , Tabytha . 



joll.   Aurelia , go out with them , and leave us three together for half an hour . Exit Wid. Tab. Aur.  Stay you , Will , and reach me the Cordial ; I begin to hope that my extreme violent fit of Vomiting and Purging has wrought out all the Poison , and saved my life — my pain 's almost quite gone , but I 'm so sore and faint — give me the Glass . 



Wor.   What do you mean , Colonel ? you will not dote , I hope , now you 're dying ? drink I know not what there , made by a Doctor and a ' Apothecary ? Drink a cup o Sack , Man ; healing Sack ; you 'll find your old Antidote best . 



Cut.   H 'as reason , Colonel , it agrees best with your nature ; 't is good to recover your strength — as for the danger , that 's past , I 'm confident , already . 



jol.   Dost thou think so , honest Cutter ? fetch him a Bottle o Sack , Will , for that news ; I 'll drink a little myself , one little Beer-glass . 



Cut.   Poor creature ! he would try all ways to live ! 



joll.   Why if I do die , Cutter , a Glass o Sack will do me no hurt I hope ; I do not intend to die the Whining way , like a Girl that 's afraid to lead Apes in Hell — So , Enter Will , with a Bottle & great Glass give it me ; a little fuller , — yet — it warms exceedingly — and is very Cordial — So , — fill to the Gentlemen . 



Wor.   Let 's drink , let 's drink , whilst breath we have ; Sings . 
you 'll find but cold , but cold drinking in the Grave . 


Cut.   A Catch ' i'faith ! Boy , go down , Boy , go down , 
And fill us tother quart , 
That we may drink the Colonel's health 


Wor.   That we may drink the Colonel's health 


Both.   Before that we do part . 


Wor.   Why dost thou frown , thou arrant Clown ? 
Hey boys — Tope — 


joll.   Why this is very cheerly ! pray let 's have the Catch that we made to other night against the Doctor . 



Wor.   Away with 't , Cutter ; hum — 
Come fill us the Glass o Sack.  


Cut.   What Health do we lack ? 


Wor.   Confusion to the Quack . 


Both.   confound him , confound him , 
Diseases all around him . 


Cut.   And fill again the Sack , 


Wor.   That no man may Lackwit , 


Cut.   Confusion to the Quack , 


Both.   Confusion to the Quack , 
confound him , confound him , 
Diseases all Around him . 


Wor.   he 's a kind of Grave-maker , 


Cut.   A Urinal Shaker , 


Wor.   A wretched Groat-taker , 


Cut.   A stinking close-stool raker , 


Wor.   he 's a Quack that 's worse than a Quaker . 


Both.   he 's a Quack , etc.  


Wor.   Hey , Boys — Gingo — 


joll.   Give me the Glass , 


William   I 'll venture once more what ever come on 't , here 's a Health to the Royal Traveller , and so Finis Coronat . 



Wor.   Come on Boys , Vivat ; have at you again then . 
Now a Pox on the Poll , of old Politic Noll . 


Both.   we 'll drink till we bring , 
In Triumph back the King.  


Wor.   May he Live till he see , 
Old Noll upon a Tree . 


Wor.   And many such as he . 


Both.   May he Live till , etc.  


joll.   I 'm very Sick again ; 


William   help me into my Bed ; rest you merry , Gentlemen . 



Cut.   Nay , we 'll go in with him , Captain , he shall not die this bout . 



Wor.   it 's pity but he should , he dost so bravely ; come along then , kiss me , Cutter ; is not this better than quarrelling ? 



Both.   May he live till he see , etc.  
Hey for Fiddlers now ! Exeunt . 


Act 3.  

Scene 1.  

jolly , Aurelia . joll.   't is true , Aurelia , the Story they all agree in ; 't was nothing but a simple Plot o the two Lovers to put me in fear o death , in hope to work then upon my good Nature , or my Conscience , and Quack conspired with them out o revenge ; 'T was a cursed Rogue though to give me such an unmerciful Dose of Scammony ! It might have proved but an ill jest ; but however , I will not be a loser by the business , ere I have done with 't . 



Aur.   Methinks there might be something extracted out of it . 



joll.   Why so there shall ; I 'll pretend , Aurelia , to be still desperately sick , and that I was really poisoned , no man will blame me after that , for whatsoever I do with my Niece . But that 's not all , I will be mightily troubled in Conscience , send for the Widow , and be converted by her , that will win her heart , joined with the hopes of my swallowing Lucia's portion . 



Aur.   For that point I 'll assist you , Sir , Assure her that my Cousin Lucia is married privately this afternoon to Mr. Puny . 



joll.   I would she were , Wench , ( for thine and my sake ) her Portion would be forfeited then indeed , and she would have no great need of 't , for that Fop's very rich . 



Aur.   Well , Sir , I 'll bring sufficient proofs of that , to satisfy the Widow , and that 's all you require ; be pleased to let the secret of the business rest with me yet a while , to morrow you shall know 't . But for my own part , Sir , if I were in your place , I 'd rather patiently lose my Estate for ever , than take 't again with her . 



joll.   Oh! hold yourself contented , good frank-hearted Aurelia ; would I were to marry such a one every week these two years : see how we differ now ? 



Aur.   Bless us ! what humming and hawing will be i this house ! what preaching , and howling , and fasting , and eating among the Saints ! Their first pious work will be to banish Fletcher and Ben johnson out o' the Parlour , and bring in their rooms Martin Mar-prelate , and Posies of Holy Honeysuckles , and a Sawf-box for a Wounded Conscience , and a Bundle of Grapes from Canaan . I can't abide 'em ; but I 'll break my sister Tabitha's heart within a month one way or other . But , Sir , suppose the King should come in again , ( as I hope he will for all these Villains ) and you have your own again o course , you 'd be very proud of a Soap-boilers Widow then in Hyde-park , Sir.  



joll.   Oh! than the Bishops will come in too , and she 'll away to New-england ; well , this does not do my business ; I 'll about it , and send for her . Exit . 



Enter Ralph . Aur.   And I 'll about mine ; Ralph , did you speak to Mr. Puny to meet me an hour hence at the backdoor in the Garden ? he must not know the estate the house is in yet . 



Ralph .  Yes , forsooth , he bade me tell you , he 'd no more fail you than the Sun fails Barnaby-day , I know not what he means by 't , but he charged me to tell you so , and he would bring ( forsooth ) his Regiment of five hundred . he 's a mad man , I think . 



Aurel.   Well , did you speak to Mr. Soaker to stay within too , the little Deacon that uses to drink with Will and you ? 



Ral.   Yes , forsooth , he 's in the Buttery . 



Aur.   Pray Heaven he don't forget my Instructions there ! But first I have a little trick for my Lovers to begin withal , they shall have twenty more before I have done with ' 'em . Exit : 



Scene 2.  

Enter Truman junior . Trum.   The Veil of this mistake will soon be cast away , I would I could remove Lucia's as easily , and see her face again , as fair , as shortly our Innocence will appear . 

But if my angry father come to know our late Intelligence in this unlucky business , though we have fulfilled the Letter of his Will , that which can satisfy a Lover's Conscience , will hardly do so to an old man's Passion ; ye Heavenly Powers , or take away my life , or give me quickly that for which I only am content to keep it . 



Scene 3  

Enter Aurelia , ( veiled . ) Ha! I did but speak just now of Heavenly powers , 
And my blessed Angel enters , sure they have 
Herd me , and promise what I prayed for . 
My dear Lucia , I thought you 'd been a kind of prisoner too . 
She gives him a Paper and embraces him . she 's kinder too than she was wont to be ; 
My prayers are heard and granted , I 'm confirmed in 't . 
By my Maid's means I have gotten Keys both of my Reads . own Chamber and yours ; we may escape if you please ; but that I fear would ruin you ; We lie both now in the same house , a good fortune that is not like to continue ; since I have the engagement of your faith , I accounted myself your Wife already , and shall put my honour into your hands ; about Midnight I shall steal to you ; If I were to speak this I should blush , but I know whom I trust . 

Yours , Lucia . 

Trum.   thou dost not know me , Lucia , aside . 
And hast forgot thyself : I am amazed . 
Stay , here 's a Postscript . 
( Burn this Paper as soon as you have read it . ) 
Burn it ? yes , would I had don 't before , Burns it at the Candle . 
May all remembrance of thee perish with thee , 
Unhappy paper ! 
Thy very ashes sure will not be innocent , 
But fly about and hurt some chaste man's eyes , 
As they do mine . weeps . 
O , Lucia , this I thought of all misfortunes 
Would never have befallen me , to see thee 
Forget the ways of Virtue and of Honor. 
I little thought to see upon our love , 
That flourished with so sweet and fresh a Beauty , 
The slimy traces of that Serpent , Lust. 
What Devil has poisoned her ? I know not what to say to her . 
Go , Lucia , retire , prithee , to thy Chamber , 
And call thy wand'ring Virtue home again , 
It is not yet far gone , but call it quickly , 
't is in a dangerous way ; I will forget thy error , 
And spend this night in prayers that Heaven may do so . 
Exit Aur.  Would she have had me been mine own Adulterer ? 
Before my Marriage ? — O lust — O frailty — 
Where in all human nature shall we miss 
The ulcerous fermentations of thy heat , 
When thus ( alas ) we find thee breaking out 
Upon the comli'st Visage of perfection ? Exit . 


Scene 4.  

Aurelia . Aur.   Pray Heaven , I ha'nt made my foolish Wit stay for me ; if he talk with others of the house before me , I 'm undone . Stay , have I my Paper ready ? Oh! that 's Pulls out a Paeper . well ! my Hand I 'm sure 's as like hers as the Left is to the Right , we were taught by the same Master , pure Italian , there 's her A's and her Gs I 'll swear — Oh! are you come ? that 's well . 



Scene 5.  

Enter Puny . 't is almost four o clock and that 's the precious hour . 

Pun.   My little Heliogabalus , here I am , Praesto ! 



Aur.   you 're always calling me names , Mr. Puny , that 's unkindly done to one that 's labouring for you , as I am . 



Pun.   I have made more haste hither than a Parson does to a Living o three hundred and fifty pounds a year . 



Aur.   Puny , you 're not a man o business I see , that 's not the style o business ; Well , I have done , I think , the work for you , 't is as odd a Plot as ever you heard . 



Pun.   I like it better , I love odd things . 



Aur.   Why thus then , you know Mr. Truman took an Oath to his father never to see my Cousin more without his leave . 



Pun.   Pish , do I know that a Lawyer love's to take money in Michaelmas Term ? 



Aur.   A pies upon you : well , my father has made Lucy swear too never to see Truman without his consent . 



Pun.   Good , there will be a good Bopeep love . 



Aur.   For all this , thy'r resolved to marry this afternoon , ( nay don't interrupt me with your Fopperies , or I 'll be gone ) and to save their Oaths ( like cunning Caluists , as all Lovers are ) they 'll be married in a dark room ( do you mark me ? ) the Minister , Mr. Soaker , is to marry them without Book ; and because they 're bound not to speak to one another ( for that I forgot to tell you ) they 're to signify their consent , when he asks 'em , Will you such a one — by reverences , and giving their hands ; you never heard of such a humour , but their both mad — 



Pun.   Ha! ha ! ha ! Rare , as Fantastical as a Whirl-gig — but how come you to know all this , my little pretty Witch of Lancashire ? 



Aur.   Why that I 'm coming to ; her Maid you must know is my Pensioner , and betrays all Counsels ; And to confirm all this to you , here 's her last Letter to Truman about the business , which my Intelligencer has Delivered to me instead of him , you know her hand , Read it all over to yourself . 



Pun.   I 'll swear by her Foot , this is her Hand , — hum — my Uncle's sick , and no Body will be at this [ Reads . ] side o the House , — the matted Chamber — hum — In at the Back door which shall be left only put to — ( ha , ha , ha ! ) Mr. Soaker with you — just at four — you must not stay long with me — ( ha , ha , ha ! ) when 't is done and passed recovery they 'll release us of our Oaths — hum — I shall not fail — yours L. ( ha , ha , ha . ) 



Aur.   Now he knows nothing o the time , for that he should have known by this Letter ; and you conceive my design , I hope ? you 're not a Wit for nothing . 



Pun.   My dear Pythagorean , that I should go in and Mary her instead of him ? 



Aur.   Right ! thou 'st a shrewd reach . 



Pun.   But where 's old Soaker all this while ? 



Aur.   Why , I have told all this to him , only naming you in all things instead of Truman ; and that 't was my Contrivance all for my Cousins and your Sake ; he 's within at a Call , I 'll send for him ; whose there ? Marry ? call hither Mr. Soaker ; I have given him five Pounds , and for so much more he 'll Mary you to another to morrow , if you william  



Pun.   I adore thee Queen Solomon ; I had rather be Married by such a Plot as this , than be Nephew to Prester john — I 'll make 't a thousand Spankers . 



Enter Mr. Soaker . Aur.   O come 't is time Mr. Soaker ; as soon as you have done leave the Married couple together , I 'll lock this Door upon you , go out at the tother , where she 'll come in to you . 



Pun.   't is as dark as the Devil's conscience ; but the best is , the Parson has a good Fieri Fancies , like a Holiday , that will give some Light.  



Aur.   No! there 's Light enough to keep you from Stumbling within . Oh! I forgot to tell you , break a piece of Gold , and give her half , for a proof of the — do you understand me ? 



Pun.   't is well thought on ; but Domine Doctoribus , can you say the Service without Book are you sure ? 



Soaker .  I warrant you Sir ; can you Lie with her without Book afterwards ? 



Pun.   he 's a Wit too by juno ; all are Wits that have a finger in this Venison pasty . 



Aur.   she 'll come , immediately , go in ; do not stay above half an hour , Mr. Puny , my Cousin will be missed else , and all spoiled . 



Pun.   I 'll warrant you , let 's in ; dear Learning lead the way . They go in , and Aurelia locks the Door o the outside . 



Aur.   So , all 's sure this way ; I 'll be with you strait . 



Exit . Scene 6.  

Enter Jolly , Cutter . joll.   So , now the widow 's gone , I may breathe a little ; I believe really that true Devotion is a great Pleasure , but 't is a damned constraint and drudgery methinks , this Dissimulation of it . I wonder how the new Saints can endure it , to be always at the work , Day and Night Acting ; But great Gain makes every thing seem easy ; And they have , I suppose , good Lusty Recreations in private . she 's gone , the Little Holy thing , as proud as Lucifer , with the Imagination of having been the chosen Instrument of my Conversion from Popery , Prelacy , and Cavalerism , she 's gone to brag of 't to joseph Knock-down , and bring him to Confirm me . But Cutter , thine was the best Humour that ever was begot in a Rogue's Noddle , to be Converted in an instant , the Inspiration way , by my example ! It may hap to get thee Tabytha . 



Cut.   Nay , and I hit just pat upon her way , for though the Mother be a kind of Brownist , ( I know not what the Devil she is indeed ) yet Tabytha is o the Fifth Monarchy Faith , and was wont to go every Sunday afoot over the Bridge to hear Mr. Feak , when he was Prisoner in Lambeth house , she has had a Vision too herself of Horns , and strange things . 



joll.   Pish ! Cutter , for the way that 's not material , so there be but enough of Nonsense and Hypocrisy ; But Cutter , you must reform your Habit too , a little ; off with that Sword and Buff and greasy Plume o Ribbons in your Hat. they 'll be back here presently , do 't quickly . 



Cut.   I 'll be changed in an instant , like a Scene , and then I 'll fetch 'em to you . Exit . 



Scene 7.  

Enter Truman Senior . Sen. Trum.   ay , there goes one of his Swaggerers ; I could have Swaggered with him once — Oh! Colonel , you 're finely Poisoned , are you not ? would I had the Poisoning o you — where 's my Son Dick ? what have you done with him ? 



joll.   Mr. Truman . — 



Trum.   True me no more than I true you — come — Colonel you 're but a Swaggering — I 'll have the Law to Swagger with you , that I william  



joll.   First leave your Raging ; though you should rage like Tamerlain at the Bull , 't would do no good here . 



Trum.   Do you call me names too ? I 'll have an Action o Scandalum . Well Colonel , since you provoke me , the Protector shall know what you are , and what you would have had me done for the King in the time of the last rising . 



joll.   Mr. Truman , I took you for a Person of Honour , and a Friend to his Majesty ; I little thought to hear you speak of betraying a Gentleman to the Protector . 



Trum. s.   Betraying ? no Sir , I scorn it as much as you , but I 'll let him know what you are , and so forth , an you keep my Son from me . 



joll.   Mr. Truman , if you 'll but hear me patiently , I shall propose a thing that will , I hope , be good and acceptable both to your Son and you . 



Trum.   Say you so Sir ? well ; but I won't be called Tamerlain . 



joll.   My Niece , not only by her wicked design to Poison me , but by Marrying herself without my consent this day to Puny , has ( as you know very well , for you were a witness Sir to my Brother's will ) lost all the right she had to a plentiful Portion . Aurelia shall have that and my Estate , ( which now within few days I shall recover ) after my Death ; she 's not I think Unhandsome , and all that know her will confess she wants no Wit ; with these Qualities , and this Fortune , if your Son like her , ( for though h 'as injured me , Sir , I forget that , and attribute it only to the Enchantments of my Niece ) I do so well approve both of his Birth and Parts , and of that Fortune , which you I think will please to make him , that I should be extremely glad of the Alliance . 



Trum. s.   Good Colonel , you were always a kind Neighbour and loving Friend to our Family , and so were we to you , and had respects for you ; you know I would have had Dick marry your Niece , till you declared he should have no Portion with her . 



joll.   For that I had a particular reason , Sir ; your son 's above in my House , shall I call him , Sir , that we may know his mind ? I would not have him forced . 



Trum. s.   Pray send for him good Colonel ; forced ? no , I 'll make him do 't , I 'll warrant you . Boys must not be their own choosers , Colonel , they must not i'faith , they have their Sympathies and Fiddle-come-saddles in their Brain , and know not what they would have themselves . 



Scene 8.  

Enter Lucia . joll.   Why how now Lucia ? how come you from your Chamber ? 



Luc.   I hope you did not mean me a Prisoner , Sir , since now you 're satisfied sufficiently that you 're not Poisoned ? 



joll.   I am not Dead , that 's true . But I may thank Heaven , and a strong Constitution for 't ; you did your weak endeavours ; however , for the honour of our Family , and for your Father's sake , I 'll speak no more o that , but I could wish , for the security of my Life hereafter , that you would go home to your Husband , for they say you 're married Niece this day without my knowledge — Nay , — I 'm content , — go home to him when you please , you shall have your thousand Pounds . 



Trum. s.   Hark you , Colonel , she should not have a groat of e'em , not a groat ; she can't recover 't by Law , I know the William  



Luc.   I married Sir ? 't is the first news i  heard of 't . 



Scene 9  

Enter Trum. Jun.  Lucia goes to put on her Veil . joll.   Nay , leave your pretty Jesuitical Love-tricks to salve an Oath ; Mr. Truman , you may let your Son see her now . 



Trum. s.   I Dick you may see her as much as you please ; she 's married . 



Trum. i.   Married ? 



Trum. s.   I married , so I say , Married this afternoon to Mr. Puny . 



Luc.   What do they mean ? 



Trum. s.   And Dick I have got a Wife too for you , you shall have pretty Mistress Aurelia . 



Trum. i.   Lucia married ? 



Trum. s.   Her Father and I are agreed of all things ; Hark you Dick , she has a brave Fortune now . 



Trum. i.   Married to Puny ? 



Trum. s.   You shall have her presently . 



Trum. i.   This afternoon ? 



Trum. s.   Come Dick ; there 's a Wife for you Dick.  



Trum. i.   I won't marry , Sir.  



Trum. s.   What do you say Sir ? 



Trum. i.   I wi' not marry Sir.  



Trum. s.   Get you out o my sight you Rebel . 



joll.   Nay , good Mr. Truman . 



Trum. s.   I 'll never acknowledge him for my Son again ; I tell you Colonel , he 's always thus with his wo'nots and his Cannots . 



Scene 10.  

Enter Puny . Pun.   We have made short work on 't ; 't was a brave quick Parsonides ; The little Skittish Philly got away from me I know not how , like an Eel out of a Basket.  



joll.   Give him a little time Mr. Truman , he 's troubled yet at my Niece's marriage , 't will over quickly . 



Tru. s.   Give my Son time , Mr. jolly ? marry come up — 



Scene 11.  

Enter Aurelia , ( after Puny . ) Aur.   What have you done already ? you 're a sweet Husband indeed . 



Pun.   Oh! my little Pimp of honour ! here , here 's the five hundred Marigolds ; hold thy hand Dido — yonder 's my Wife , by Satan ; how a Devil did that little Mephistophilus get hither before me ? 



Aur.   To her Puny ; never conceal the mystery any longer , 't is too good a Jest to be kept close . 



Trum. s.   For your sake I will then , Colonel ; Come prithee , Dick , be cheerful . — 



Trum. i.   I beseech you , — Sir — 



Trum. s.   Look you there Colonel , now he should do what I would have him , now he 's a beseeching — 't is the proudest stubbornest Coxcomb — 



Pun.   And now my noble Uncle — nay , never to jolly . be angry at a Marriage i' the way of wit — My fair Egyptian Queen , come to thine Antony . 



Luc.   What would this rude fellow have ? 



Trum. i.   I am drowned in wonder ! 



Pun.   'T was I , my dear Philoclea , that married thee even row in the dark room , like an amorous Cat ; you may remember the Damask Bed by a better Token of Two than a bowed Philip and Mary . 



Luc.   I call Heaven to witness , 
Which will protect and justify the Innocent , 
I understand not the least word he utters , 
But as I took him always for a Fool , 
I now do for a Madman . 


Aur.   she 's angry yet to have mistake her Man 't is true , Sir , all that Mr. Puny says , I mean for to jolly the Marriage , for the rest , she 's best able to answer for herself . 



Luc.   True , Cousin , than I see 't is some conspiracy t' ensnare my Honour and my Innocence . 



Aur.   The Parson , Mr. Soaker , that married 'em is still within . 



William   he 's i' th' Buttery , shall I call him , Sir ? 



joll.   ay , quickly . 



Trum. i.   't is the sight of me , no doubt , confounds her with a shame to confess any thing ; It seems that sudden fit of raging lust , that brought her to my Chamber , could not rest till it was satisfied , it seems I know not what . 



Enter Mr. Soaker . joll.   Mr. Soaker , did you marry my Niece this afternoon to Mr. Puny in the Matted Chamber ? 



Soak .  Yes , Sir , I hope your Worship won't be angry , Marriage , your Worship knows , is honourable . 



Luc.   Hast thou no conscience neither ? 



Scene 12.  

Enter Widow , Tabytha , Cutter in a Puritanical habit . joll.   Niece , go in a little , I 'll come to you presently and examine this matter further ; Mr. Puny , lead in your wife for shame . 



Luc.   Villain , come not near me , 
I 'll sooner touch a Scorpion or a Viper . Exit . 


Pun.   she 's as humorous as a Bel-rope ; she need not be so choleric , I 'm sure I behaved myself like Propria quae maribus . 



Aur.   Come in with me , Mr. Puny , I 'll teach you how you shall handle her . Exeunt Aur. Pun.  



joll.   Mr. Truman , pray take your son home , and see how you can work upon him there ; speak fairly to him . 



Trum. s.   Speak fairly to my son ? I 'll see him buried first . 



joll.   I mean persuade him — 



Trum. s.   Oh! that 's another matter ; I will persuade him , Colonel , but if ever I speak fair to him till he mends his manners — Come along with me , Jack-sawce , come home . Exeunt Trum. sen. Trum. jun.  



Trum. i.   I Sir , any whither . 



Wid.   what 's the matter , brother Colonel , are there any broils here ? 



joll.   Why , Sister , my Niece has married without my consent , and so it pleases , it even pleases Heaven to bestow her Estate upon me . 



Wid.   Why , brother , there 's a Blessing now already ; If you had been a wicked Cavalier still she 'd have done her duty , I warrant you , and defrauded you of the whole Estate ; my brother Cutter here is grown the Heavenliest man o' the sudden , 't is his work . 



Cut.   Sister Barebottle , I must not be called Cutter any more , that is a name of Cavalero darkness , the Devil was a Cutter from the beginning , my name is now Abednego , I had a Vision which whispered to me through a Keyhole , Go call thyself Abednego . 



Tab.   The wonderful Vocation of some Vessels ! 



Cut.   It is a name that signifies Fiery Furnaces , and Tribulation , and Martyrdom , I know I am to suffer for the Truth . 



Tab.   Not as to death , Brother , if it be his william  



Cut.   As to death , Sister , but I shall gloriously return . 



joll.   What , Brother , after death ? that were miraculous . 



Cut.   Why the wonder of it is , that it is to be miraculous . 



joll.   But Miracles are ceased , Brother , in this wicked Age of Cavalerism . 



Cut.   They are not ceased , Brother , nor shall they cease till the Monarchy be established . 

I say again I am to return , and to return upon a Purple Dromedary , which signifies Magistracy , with an Axe in my hand that is called Reformation , and I am to strike with that Axe upon the Gate of Westminster-hall , and cry , Down Babylon , and the Building called Westminster-hall is to run away and cast itself into the River , and then Mayor General Harrison is to come in Green sleeves from the North upon a Sky-coloured Mule , which signifies heavenly Instruction . 



Tab.   O the Father ! he 's as full of Mysteries as an Egg is full of meat . 



Cut.   And he is to have a Trumpet in his mouth as big as a Steeple , and at the sounding of that Trumpet all the Churches in London are to fall down . 



Wid.   OH strange , what times shall we see here in poor England ! 



Cut.   And then Venner shall march up to us from the West in the figure of a Wave of the Sea , holding in his hand a Ship that shall be called the Ark of the Reformed . 



joll.   But when must this be , Brother Abednego ? 



Cut.   Why all these things are to be when the Cat of the North has overcome the Lion of the South , and when the Mouse of the West has slain the Elephant of the East . I do hear a silent Voice within me , that bids me rise up presently and declare these things to the Congregation of the Lovely in Coleman-street . Tabytha , Tabytha , Tabytha , I call thee thrice , come along with me , Tabytha . 



Exit . Tab.   There was something of this , as I remember , in my last Vision of Horns the other day . Holy man ! I follow thee ; farewell , forsooth , Mother , till anon . 



joll.   Come , let 's go in too , Sister . Exeunt . 



Act 4.  

Scene 1.  

Truman junior .  What shall I think henceforth of Womankind ? 
When I know Lucia was the best of it , 
And see her what she is ? What are they made of ? 
Their Love , their Faith , their Souls enslaved to passion ! 
Nothing at their Command beside their Tears , 
And we , vain men , whom such Heat-drops deceive ! 
Hereafter I will set myself at Liberty , 
And if I sigh or grieve , it shall not be 
For Love of One , but Pity of all the Sex.  


Scene 2.  

Enter Lucia . Ha! she will not let me see her sure ; 
If ever , Lucia , a Veil befitted thee , 
't is now , that thou mayst hide thy guilty blushes . 
Luc.   If all their malice yet 
Have not prevailed on Truman's Constancy , 
they 'll miss their wicked end , and I shall live still . 
I 'll go and speak to him . 


Trum.   Forbear , Lucia , for I have made a second Oath , which I shall keep , I hope , with lesser trouble , never to see thy face more . 



Luc.   You were wont , Sir , 
To say , you could not live without the sight of 't . 


Trum.   I ; 't was a good one then . 



Luc.   Has one day spoiled it ? 



Trum.   OH yes , more than a hundred years of time , made as much more by sorrow , and by sickness , could ever have done . 



Luc.   Pray hear me , Truman : 
For never innocent Maid was wronged as I am ; 
Believe what I shall say to you , and confirm 
By all the holiest Vows that can bind Souls . 


Trum.   I have believed those Female tricks too long ; 
I know thou canst speak winningly , but thy Words 
Are not what Nature meant them , thy Minds Picture ; 
I 'll believe now what represents it better , 
thine own Hand , and the proof of mine own Eyes . 


Luc.   I know not what you mean ; believe my Tears . 


Trum.   they 're idle empty Bubbles . 
Raised by the Agitation of thy Passions , 
And hollow as thy heart ; there is no weight in ' 'em . 
Go thou once , Lucia ; Farewell , 
thou that were't dearer to me once , than all 
The outward things of all the World beside , 
Or my own Soul within me , farewel for ever ; 
Go to thine Husband , and love him better than 
thou didst thy Lover . 
I never will see the more , nor shall , I fear , 
E'er see myself again . 


Luc.   Here me but once . knelt . 


Trum.   no , 't is enough ; Heaven hear thee when thou kneelest to it . Exit . 


Luc.   Will he ? he 's gone ; now all the world has left me , rises . 
And I am desolately miserable ; 
't is done unkindly , most unkindly , Truman . 
Had a blessed Angel come to me and said 
That thou wert false , I should have sworn it lied , 
And thought that rather fallen than thee . 
Go , dear , false man , go seek out a new Mistress ; 
But when you have talked , and loved , and vowed , and sworn 
A little while , take heed of using her 
As you do me ; no , may your love to her 
Be such as mine to you , which all thy injuries 
Shall never change , nor death itself abolish . 
May she be worthier of your bed than I , 
And when the happy course of many years 
Shall make you appear old to all but her , 
May you in the fair Glass of your fresh Issue 
See your own youth again ; but I would have 'em 
True in their Loves , and kill no innocent Maids ; 
For me it is no matter ; when I 'm dead , 
My busy soul shall flutter still about him , 
'T will not be else in Heaven ; it shall watch 
Over his sleeps , and drive away all dreams 
That come not with a soft and downy wing ; 
If any dangers threaten , it shall beckon 
And call his spirit away , till they be passed , 
And be more diligent than his Guardian Angel ; 
And when just Heaven , as I 'm assured it will , 
Shall clear my Honour and my Innocence , 
he 'll sigh , I know , and pity my misfortunes , 
And blame himself , and curse my false Accusers , 
And weep upon my Grave 
For my wronged Virtue , and mistaken Truth , 
And unjust Death , I ask no more . Exit . 


Scene 3  

Enter Truman junior . 'T was barbarously done to leave her so ; 
Kneeling and weeping to me ; 't was inhuman ; 
I 'll back and take my leave more civilly , 
So as befits one who was once her Worshipper . Goes over the Stage , and comes back . 
she 's gone ; why let her go ; I feel her still ; 
I feel the root of her , labouring within 
To sprout afresh , but I will pluck it up , 
Or tear my heart with 't . 
Scene 4.  

Enter Jolly , Truman Senior . joll.   he 's there , Sir , pray let him now resolve you positively what he means to do . 



Trum. s.   What he means to do , Colonel ? that were fine 
I'faith ; if he be my son he shall mean nothing ; 
Boys must not have their meanings , Colonel : 
Let him mean what I mean with a Wennion . 


Trum. i.   I shall be pressed , I see , by 'em , upon the hateful Subject of a Marriage ; 
And to fill up the measure of Affliction , 
Now I have lost that which I loved , compelled 
To take that which I hate . 


Trum. s.   I will not be troubled , Colonel , with his meanings , if he do not marry her this very evening ( for I 'll have none of his Flim-flams and his May-be's ) I 'll send for my son Tom from St. John's College ( he 's a pretty Scholar I can tell you , Colonel , I have heard him syllogise it with Mr. Soaker in Mood and Figure ) and settle my Estate upon him with her ; if he have his Meanings too ▪ and his Sympathies , I 'll disinherit 'em both , and marry the Maid myself , if she can like me , I have one Tooth yet left , Colonel , and that 's a Colt's one . 



Trum. i.   Did I submit to lose the sight of Lucia 
Only to save my unfortunate Inheritance , 
And can there be imposed a harder Article 
For me to boggle at ? 
Would I had been born some wretched Peasant's son , 
And never known what Love or riches were . 
ha — I 'll marry her — why should I not ? if I 
Must marry some body , 
And hold my Estate by such a slavish Tenure , 
Why not her as well as any else ? 
All Women are alike I see by Lucia , 
't is but resolving to be miserable , 
And that is resolved for me by my Destiny . 


joll.   Well , try him pray , but do it kindly , Sir , 
And artificially . 


Trum. s.   I warrant you ; Dick , I 'll have you marry Mistress Aurelia to night . 



Trum. i.   To night ? the warning's short , Sir , and it may be — 



Trum. s.   Why look you , Colonel , he 's at 's old look , he 's at 's May-bees again . 



Trum. i.   I know not , Sir — 



Trum. s.   ay , and his Know-nots , you shall have him at his Wi' notes presently ; Sirra — I will have you know , Sir — 



joll.   Nay , good Mr. Truman — you know not yet what answer he intends to make you . 



Trum. i.   Be pleased , Sir , to consider — 



Trum. s.   Look you , Sir , I must consider now , he upbraids his father with the want of consideration , like a Varlet as he is . 



Trum. i.   What shall I do ? why should not I do any thing , 
Since all things are indifferent ? 


joll.   I beseech you , Mr. Truman , have but a little patience — Your father , Sir , desire's to know — 



Trum. s.   I do not desire him , Colonel , nor never will desire him , I command him upon the duty of a Child — 



joll.   Whether you can dispose yourself to love and marry my daughter Aurelia , and if you can , for several reasons we desire it may be presently consummated . 



Trum. i.   Out with it , stubborn Tongue ; 
I shall obey my father , Sir , in all things . 


Trum. s.   Ha! what d' ye you say , Sir ? 



joll.   This old testy Fool is angry , I think , to have no more occasion given him of being so . 



Trum. i.   I shall obey you , Sir.  



joll.   You speak , Sir , like a virtuous Gentleman , the same obedience and resignation , to a father's will , I found in my Aurelia , and where two such persons meet , the issue cannot choose but be successful . 



Trum. s.   Ah Dick , my son Dick , he was always the best natured Boy — he was like his father in that — he makes me weep with tenderness , like an old fool as I am — thou shalt have all my Estate , Dick , I 'll put myself to a pension rather than thou shalt want — go spruce up thyself a little presently , thou art not merry I'faith , Dick , prithee be merry , Dick , and fetch fine Mistress Aurelia presently to the little Church behind the Colonel's Garden , Mr. Soaker shall be there immediately and wait for you at the Porch ( we 'll have it instantly , Colonel , done , lest the young fool should relapse ) come , dear Dick , let 's go cheerily on with the business . 



Trum. i.   What have I said ? what am I doing ? the best is , it is no matter what I say or do . 



joll.   I 'll see Aurelia shall be ready , and all things on my part within this half hour . 



Trum. s.   Good , honest , noble Colonel , let me shake you by the hand . Come , dear Dick , we loose time . Exeunt . 



Scene 5.  Enter Cutter , Tabytha , a Boy . 

Cut.   And the Vision told me , sister Tabytha , that this same day , the first of the seventh month , in the year of Grace 1658. and of Revelation , and Confusion of Carnal Monarchies the tenth , that we two , who are both holy Vessels , should by an holy Man be joined together in the holy Bond of sanctified Matrimony . 



Tab :  I brother Abednego , but our friends consents — 



Cut.   Heaven is our friend , and , Sister , Heaven puts this into our thoughts ; it is , no doubt , for propagation of the great Mystery ; there shall arise from our two bodies , a great Confounder of Gogmagog , who shall be called the Pestle of Antichrist , and his children shall inherit the Grapes of Canaan . 



Tab.   My mother will be angry , I 'm afraid . 



Cut.   Your Mother will rejoice , the Vision says so , sister , the Vision says your Mother will rejoice ; how will it rejoice her righteous heart to see you , Tabytha , riding behind me upon the Purple Dromedary ? I would not for the world that you should do it , but that we are commanded from above ; for to do things without the aforesaid Command is like unto the building of a Fire without the Bottom-cake . 



Tab.   I I , that it is , he knows . 



Cut.   Now to confirm to you the truth of this Vision , there is to meet us at a zealous shoemaker 's habitation hard by here , by the command of a Vision too , our Brother Zephaniah fat 's , an Opener of Revelations to the Worthy in Mary White-chapel , and he is the chosen Vessel to join our hands . 



Tab.   I would my Mother knew 't ; but if that holy man come too by a Vision , I shall have grace , I hope , not to resist . 



Cut.   Sister , let me speak one word of Instruction to yonder Babe . 



Tab.   O how my bowels yern ! 



Cut.   Sirrah , is my little Doctor already staying for me at Tom Underleather my shoemaker 's house ? 



Boy .  Yes , Sir , but he 's in so strange a Habit , that Mr. Underleather's Boy Frank and I were ready to die with laughing at him . 



Cut.   O so much the better ; go you little piece of a Rogue and get every thing ready against I come back . Exit Boy . Sister , that Babe you saw me speaking to is predestinated to Spiritual Mightiness , and is to be restorer of the Mystical Tribe of Gad — 



Tab.   O the Wondrous — but , Brother Abednego , will you not pronounce this Evening tie before the Congregation of the Spotless in Coleman-street ? 



Cut.   The will of the latter Vision is to be fulfilled first , as a Preparatory Vision ; let us not make the Messenger of Mystery , who is sent by a Vision so far as from Mary White-chapel for our sakes , to stay too long from his lawful Vocation of Basket-making . Come , Sister Tabytha . 



Tab.   Hei , ho ! but I will not resist . Exeunt . 



Scene 6.  

Enter Jolly , Puny , Worm . joll.   Mr. Puny , since you threaten me , I tell you plainly I think my Niece has undone herself by marrying thee , for though thou hast a fair Estate at present , I 'm heinously mistaken if thou be'st not cheated of it all within these three years by such Rabbit-suckers as these , that keep thee company , and like lying sons o the Devil as they are , cry thee up for a Wit , when there 's nothing so unlike , no not any of thy own Similitudes , thy odious Comparisons . 



Pun.   The Colonel's raging mad , like a Baker in the Suburbs , when his Oven's overheated . 



Wor.   Good , very good i'faith . 



joll.   ay , that was one of 'em ; as for her Portion , I thought to have given her a thousand pounds , but — 



Pun.   OH magnanimous Colonel ! what a Portion for a Toothpick-maker's daughter ! 



Wor.   Good , shoot him thick with similes like Hailshot . 



joll.   But now thou shalt not have a groat with her . 



Pun.   What not a poor old Harry-groat that looks as thin as a Poet's Cloak ? But however , my noble Mountain hearted Uncle , I have made her Maidenhead a Cracked Groat already , and if I have nothing more from her , she shall have nothing more from me ; no , she shall foot Stokins in a Stall for me , or make children's Caps in a Garret fifteen stories high . 



joll.   For that matter ( for though thou speakest no sense I guests thy brutish meaning ) the Law will allow her honourable Alimony out o your Foolship's Fortune . 



Pun.   And the Law will allow me her Portion too , good Colonel Uncle , you 're not too big to be brought into Westminster-hall ; nay , Captain , his Niece uses me worse too , she will not let me touch the Nail of her little finger , and rails at me like a Flounder-mouthed Fishwoman with a face like Billingsgate . 



joll.   What flesh can support such an affected Widgen , who has not a design to cheat him of something as that Vermin has ? well , I shall be able to Live now I hope as befits a Gentleman , and therefore I 'll endure the company of Fops and Knaves no longer . 



Wor.   Come Colonel , let 's go in , and dispute the difference conscientiously over a Bottle o Sack.  



joll.   I keep no Tavern , Worm ; or if I did , thy whole Estate would hardly reach to a Gill.  



Wor.   Colonel , thou art grown Unkind , and art Drunk this afternoon without me . 



joll.   Without thee , Buffoon ? why I tell thee , thou shall never show that Odd , Pimping , Cheating face o thine within my Doors again , I 'll turn away any man o mine that shall disparage himself to drink with such a fellow as thou art . 



Wor.   As I ? why what am I ? pray ? Mighty Colonel ! 



joll.   thou art or hast been every thing that 's ill , there is no Scandalous way of Living , no Vocation of the Devil , that thou hast not set up in at one time or other ; Fortune has Whipped thee about through all her streets ; thou 'rt one that Life's like a Raven , by Providence and Rapine ; now thou 'rt feeding upon that raw young fellow , and dost Devour and Kaw him ; thou 'rt one that if thou shouldst by chance go to Bed sober , wouldst write it down in thy Almanac , for an Unlucky day ; sleep is not the Image of Death to thee , unless thou be'st Dead drunk ; thou art — I know not what — thou 'rt any thing , and shall be to me hereafter nothing . 



Pun.   This Colonel pisses Vinegar to day . 



Wor.   This is uncivil Language Colonel to an old Comrade , and one of your own party . 



joll.   My Comrade ? o my party thou ? or any but the party of the Pick-purses ! 



Pun.   This bouncing Bear of a Colonel will break the back o my little Whelp of a Captain , unless I take him off ; come away Captain , I 'll firk his back with two Bum-baylies , till he spew up every Stiver of her Portion . 



joll.   Fare-ye-well , Gentlemen , come not near these Doors if you love your own Leather , I 'll have my Scullions batter you with Bones and Turnips , and the Maids drown you with Piss-pots , if you do but approach the Windows ; these are saucy Knaves indeed , to come to me for Pounds and Portions . Exit . 



Wor.   Poverty , the Pox , an ill Wife , and the Devil go with thee , Colonel . 



Pun.   I vexed him to the Gillss , Worm , when I put that bitter Bob o the Baker upon him . 



Wor.   I ? is (null) e'en so ? not come to your House ? by jove I 'll turn him out of it himself by a trick that I have . 



Pun.   Pish ! thou talk'st as Ravingly as a Costermonger in a Fever . 



Wor.   I 'll do 't by jove . 



Pun.   How , prithee , Captain ? what does thy Pericranium mean ? 



Wor.   Why here I have 't , by jove ; I 'm ravished with the fancy of it ; let me see — let me see — his Brother went seven years ago to Guiny . — 



Pun.   ay , but the Merchants say he 's Dead long since , and gone to the Blackamoors below . 



Wor.   The more Knaves they ; he Life's , and I 'm the man  



Pun.   Ha! ha ! ha ! thou talk'st like a Sowced Hoggs-face . 



Wor.   I knew him very well , and am pretty like him , liker than any of your Similitudes , Puny ; by long Conversation with him , and the Colonel , I know all passages betwixt 'em ; and what his Humour and his Estate was , much better than he himself , when he was Alive ; he was a Stranger thing than any Monster in Africa where he Traded . 



Pun.   How ! prithee Captain ? I love these Odd fantastical things as an Alderman love's Lobsters . 



Wor.   Why , you must know , he had quite lost his memory , totally , and yet thought himself an able man for business , and that he did himself all that was done by his man john , who went always along with him ; like a Dog with a Blind man  



Pun.   Ha! ha ! ha ! Sublimely fantastical 



Wor.   He carried a Scroll about him of Memorandums , even of his Daughters and his Brother's names , and where his House stood ; for as I told you , he remembered nothing ; and where his Scroll failed , john was his remembrancer , we were wont to call him Remembrancer john . 



Pun.   ha , ha , ha ! Rarely exotique ! I 'll Act that apple john , never was such a john as I ; not john o Gant , or john o Nokes , I will turn Remembrancer john , as round as a Wedding Ring , ha , ha , ha ! 



Wor.   Well said ! but you must lay aside conceits for a while , and remote fancies . I 'll teach you his humour instantly ; now will I and my man john swarthy our faces over as if that Country's heat had made 'em so , ( which will Disguise us sufficiently ) and attire ourselves in some strange Habits o those Parts , ( I know not how yet , but we shall see it in Speed's Maps ) and come and take Possession of our House and Estate . 



Pun.   Dear Ovid , let 's about thy Metamorphosis . 



Wor.   'T will be discovered perhaps at last , but however , for the present 't will break off his match with the Widow , ( which makes him so Proud now ) and therefore it must be done in the twinkling of an Eye , for they say he 's to marry her this Night ; if all fail , 't will be at least a merry about for an hour , and a mask to the Wedding . 



Pun.   Quick , dear Rogue ! quick as Precipitation . 



Wor.   I know where we can have Clotheses , hard by here ; give me ten Pounds to hire 'em , and come away , but of all things , man john , take heed of being witty . 



Pun.   ay , that 's the Devil on 't ; well , go ; I 'll follow you behind like a long Rapier . Exeunt . 



Scene 7.  

Aurelia . Aur.   If they would allow me but a little time , I could play such a trick with Mr. Truman , as should smart sorely for the rest of his Life , and be revenged abundantly on my Cousin , for getting of him from me , when I was such a foolish Girl three year ago as to be in Love with him . 

But they would have us married instantly , The Parson stays for us at Church . I know not what to do — all must out — Odds my life he 's coming to fetch me here to Church already . 



Scene 8.  

Enter Truman junior . Trum. i.   I must go through with it now ; I 'll marry her , 
And live with her according to the forms , 
But I will never touch her as a Woman . 
She stays for me — Madam — 


Aur.   Sir.  


Trum. i.   I cannot out with it — Madam . 


Aur.   Sir — 


Trum. i.   Must we go marry , Madam ? 


Aur.   Our friends will have it so , it seems . 


Trum.   Why will you marry me ? what is there in me 
That can deserve your liking ? I shall be 
The most untoward and ill-favoured Husband 
That ever took a melting Maid to his Bed ; 
The faculties of my Soul are all untuned , 
And every Glory of my Springing youth 
Is fallen into a strange and sudden Winter , 
You cannot Love me sure . 


Aur.   Not to Distraction , Sir.  


Trum.   no , nor I you ; why should we marry then ? 
It were a folly , were it not , Aurelia ? 


Aur.   Why they say , 't is the best marriage , when like is Joined to like ; now we shall make a very even match , for neither you Love me , nor I Love you , and 't is to be hoped we may get Children that will Love neither of us . 



Trum.   Nay , by my soul I love you , but alas , 
Not in that way that Husbands should their Wives ; 
I cannot Toy , nor Kiss , nor do I know not what , 
And yet I was a Lover , as true a Lover — 


Aur.   Alack a day ! 


Trum.   'T was then , ( methoughts ) the only happiness 
To sit and talk , and look upon my Mistress , 
Or if she was not by , to think upon her ; 
then every Morning , next to my Devotion , 
Nay often too ( forgive me Heaven ) before it , 
She slipped into my fancy , and I took it 
As a good Omen for the following day ; 
It was a pretty foolish kind of Life , 
An honest , harmless Vanity ; but now 
The fairest Face moves me no more , than Snow 
Or Lilies when I see 'em , and pass by ; 
And I as soon should deeply fall in Love 
With the fresh Scarlet of an Eastern Cloud , 
As the red Lips and Cheeks of any Woman ; 
I do confess , Aurelia , thou art Fair , 
And very Witty , and ( I think ) Well-natured , 
But thou 'rt a Woman still . 


Aur.   The sight of you Sir , 
Makes me not repent at all my being so . 


Trum.   And prithee now , Aurelia , tell me truly , 
Are any Women constant in their Vows ? 
Can they continue a whole Month , a Week , 
And never change their faith ? Oh! if they could , 
They would be excellent things ; nay never dissemble ; 
Are not their Lust's unruly , and to them 
Such Tyrants as their Beauties are to us ? 
Are their tears true , and solid when they weep ? 


Aur.   Sure Mr. Truman you ha'nt slept of late , 
If we should be married to Night , what would you do for Sleep ? 


Trum.   Why ? do not married people sleep o Nights ? 


Aur.   Yes ! yes ! alas good innocence . 


Trum.   They have a scurvy Life on 't if they don't ; 
But we 'll not Live as other people do , 
we 'll find out some new handsome way of Love , 
Some way of Love that few shall imitate , 
Yet all admire ; for 't is a sordid thing , 
That Lust should dare to insinuate itself 
Into the Marriagebed ; we 'll get no Children , 
The worst of Men and Women can do that ; 
Besides too , if our Issue should be Female , 
They would all Learn to flatter and dissemble , 
They would deceive with Promises and Vows 
Some simple men , and then prove False and Kill 'em , 
Would they not do 't , Aurelia ? 


Aur.   ay , any thing Mr. Truman ; but what shall we do Sir , when we are married , pray ? 



Trum.   Why ! we 'll live very Lovingly together , 
Sometimes we 'll sit and talk of excellent things , 
And laugh at all the Nonsense of the world ; 
Sometimes we 'll walk together , 
Sometimes we 'll read , and sometimes eat , and sometimes sleep ; 
And sometimes pray , and then at last , we 'll die , 
And go to Heaven together ; 't will be rare ! 


Aur.   We may do all this ( methinks ) and never marry for the matter . 



Trum.   't is true , we may so ! 
But since our Parents are resolved upon it , 
In such a Circumstance let 'em have their humour . 
My father sent me in to Compliment , 
And keep a Prating here , and play the Fool ; 
I cannot do 't , what should I say , Aurelia ? 
What do they use to say ? 


Aur.   I believe you knew Sir , when you Wooed my Cozen.  


Trum.   ay , but those Days are past ; they 're go for ever , 
And nothing else , but Nights are to succeed 'em ; 
gone like the faith and truth of Women kind , 
And never to be seen again ! OH Lucia ! 
thou wast a wondrous Angel in those days of thy blessed state of Innocence . 
There was a Cheek ! a Forehead ! and an Eye ! — 
Did you observe her Eye , Aurelia ? 


Aur.   OH yes Sir ! there were very pretty Babies in 't . 


Trum.   It was as glorious as the Eye of Heaven ; 
Like the souls Eye it pierced through every thing ; 
And than her Hands — her Hands of Liquid Ivory ! 
Did she but touch her Lute ( the pleasing'st Harmony than upon Earth when she herself was silent ) 
The subtle motion of her Flying fingers 
Taught Music a New art , to take the Sight , as well as Ear.  


Aur.   ay , Sir , I ! you 'd best go look her out , and marry her , she has but one Husband yet . 



Trum.   Nay , prithee , good Aurelia be not angry , 
For I will never Love or See her more . 
I do not say she was more Fair than thou art , 
Yet if I did ? no , but I won't say so ! 
Only allow me this one short last remembrance of one I loved so long . And now I think on 't , I 'll beg a favour of you , you will Laugh at me I know , when you have heard it , but prithee grant it ; 't is that you would be Veiled , as Lucia was of late , for this one day ; I would fain marry thee so ; 't is an odd foolish fancy , I confess , But Love and Grief may be allowed sometimes A little Innocent folly . 



Aur.   Good ! this Fool will help me I see to cheat himself ; 
At a dead lift , a little hint will serve me . 
I 'll do 't for him to the Life . 


Trum.   Will you Aurelia ? 


Aur.   that 's but a small Compliance ; you 'll have power anon to Command me greater things . 



Trum.   We shall be married very privately ; 
None but ourselves ; and that 's even best , Aurelia . 
Why do I stick here at a Fatal step 
That must be made ? Aurelia , are you ready ? 
The Minister stays for us . 


Aur.   I 'll but go in and take my Veil , as you Command me Sir ; Walk but a few turns in the Garden , in lesle than half an hour I 'll come to you , ha , ha , ha ! Exit . 



Trum.   I go , I am Condemned , and must Obey ; 
The Executioner stays for me at Church . 


Exit . Act 5.  

Scene 1.  

Colonel Jolly , William  joll.   So , I have her at last , and honest joseph Knock-down married us , methinks , with convenient brevity ; I have some hold now upon my Estate again ( though she , I confess , be a clog upon it worse than a Mort-gage ) that , my good Neighbour Barebottle left wholly to his wife ; almost all the rest of the Incomes upon his seeking , go to his daughter Tabytha , whom Cutter has got by this time , and promises me to live like an honest Gentleman hereafter ; now he may do so comfortably and merrily . She married me thus suddenly , like a good Housewife , purely to save charges ; however though , we 'll have a good Supper for her , and her eating Tribe ; Will , is the Cook a doing according to my directions ? 



William   Yes , Sir , he 's very hard at his business ; he 's swearing and cursing in the Kitchen , that your Worship may hear him hither , he 'll fright my new old Mistress out of the house . 



joll.   't is such an over-roasted coxcomb — bid him be sure to season well the Venison that came in luckily to day . 



William   Troth , Sir , I dare not speak to him now , unless I should put on your Worship's Armour that lies hid in the Barrel below ; he 'd like to have spitted me just now , like a Goose as I was , for telling him he looked like the Ox that 's roasted whole in St. James' Fair. who 's there ? 



joll.   See who 's at door . I shall have some plundered Plate , I hope , to entertain my friends with , when we come to visit the Trunks with Iron hoops ; who is 't ? 



William   Nay , Heaven knows , Sir ; two Fiends , I think , to take away the Cook for swearing . They have thrust in after me . 



Scene 2.  

Enter Worm and Puny disguised like the Merchant and John.  Wor.   they 'll hardly know us at first in these foreign habits . 



Pun.   I Sir , and as the Sun has used us in those hot Countries . 



Wor.   Why , this is my old house here , john ; ha , ha ! little thought I to see my old house upon Tower-hill again . where 's my brother jolly ? 



joll.   They call me Colonel jolly . 



Wor.   Ha! let me see , A burly man of a Looks on his Note . moderate stature — a beard a little greyish — ha ! a quick Eye , and a Nose inclining to red — 



Pun.   Nay , 't is my Master's Worship , Sir , would we were no more altered since our Travels . 



Wor.   It agrees very well — Save you good brother , you little thought to see me here again , though I dare say you wished it ; stay , let me see , how many years , john , is 't since we went from hence ? 



Pun.   't is now seven years , Sir.  



Wor.   Seven ? methinks I was here but yesterday , how the what deye-call-it-runs ? how do you call it ? 



Pun.   The Time , Sir.  



Wor.   ay , I , the time , john ; what was I saying ? I was telling you , brother , that I had quite forgot you ; was I not telling him so , john ? 



joll.   Faith we 're both quits then ; I 'll swear I have forgot you ; why you were dead five years ago . 



Wor.   Was I ? I have quite forgot it ; john , was I dead five years ago ? my memory fails me very much of late . 



Pun.   We were worse than dead , Sir , we were taken by a barbarous Nation , and there made slaves ; john , quoth he ? I was poor john I 'm sure ; they kept us three whole years with nothing but Water and Acorns , till we looked like Wicker bottles . 



Wor.   What , Sirrah , did your Master look like ? I 'll teach you to say your Master looked like what de-ye-call ' ums . 



joll.   Where did they take you prisoners ? 



Wor.   Nay , ask john , he can tell you I warrant you ; 't was in — tell him , john , where it was . 



Pun.   In Guiny . 



joll.   By what Countrymen were you taken ? 



Wor.   Why they were called — I have forgot what they call 'em , 't was an odd kind o name , but john can tell you . 



Pun.   Who I , Sir ? do you think I can remember all things ? 



Wor.   't is i my Book here I remember well . Name any Nation under the Sun.  



Pun.   I know the name , Sir , well enough ; but I only tried my Master's memory , 'T was the Tartarians . 



Wor.   ay , I , those were the men . 



joll.   How , john ? why all the world man lies betwixt 'em , they live up in the North.  



Pun.   The North ? 



joll.   I the very North , john . 



Pun.   that 's true indeed , but these were another Nation of Tartarians that lived in the South , they came anciently from the others . 



joll.   How got you from 'em , john , at last ? 



Pun.   Why faith , Sir , by a Lady's means , who , to tell you the truth , fell in love with me ; my Master has it all in his Book , 't is a brave story . 



joll.   In what Ship came you back ? 



Pun.   A plague of 't , that question will be our ruin . 



Wor.   What Ship ? 't was called a thing that swims , what d' ye you call 't ? 



joll.   The Mermaid ? 



Wor.   no , no , let me see . 



joll.   The Triton ? 



Wor.   no , no , a thing that in the water does — it swims in the water — 



joll.   What is 't ? the Dolphin ? 



Wor.   no , no , I have quite forgot the name on 't , but 't is no matter , it swims — 



joll.   What say you , john ? 



Pun.   ay , Sir , my Master knows well enough ; you can't conceive the misery we endured , Sir.  



joll.   Well , Brother , I 'll but ask you one question more , where did you leave your Will ? 



Pun.   ' Life , now he 's posed again — we shall never carry 't through . 



Wor.   I 'll tell you presently , Brother — let me see , Reads in his Scroll . Memorandums about my Will ; left to my Brother the whole charge of my Estate — hum — hum — five thousand pounds — hum — What did you ask me , brother ? 



joll.   In what place you left your Will ? 



Wor.   I that was it indeed — , that was the very thing you asked me ; what a treacherous memory have I ? my memory is so short — 



joll.   This is no Answer to my Question yet . 



Wor.   't is true indeed ; what was your Question , brother ? 



joll.   Where you left your Will ? 



Wor.   Good Lord , that I should forget you asked me that ! I had forgot it , i'faith law that I had , you 'll pardon , I hope , my Infirmity , for I alas — alas — I have forgot what I was going to say to you , but I was saying something , that I was . 



joll.   Well , Gentlemen , I 'm now in haste , walk but a while into the Parlour there , I 'll come to you presently . 



Wor.   But where 's my daughter — 



Pun.   Lucia , Sir ? 



Wor.   ay , Lucia — put me in mind to ask for her ( a plague o your Tartarians . ) 



Pun.   And o' your What dee-ye-call-'ems . 



Wor.   ' Life , Tartarians ! 



Exeunt Worm , Puny . joll.   If these be Rogues , ( as Rogues they seem to be ) I will so exercise my Rogues , the tyranny of a new Beadle over a Beggar shall be nothing to 't ; what think'st thou of 'em , Will ? 



William   Faith , Sir , I know not — he's just my Master's Nose and Upper-lip ; but if you think it be not he , Sir , I 'll beaten 'em worse than the Tartarians did . 



joll.   no , let 's try 'em first — trick for trick — thou were wont to be a precious Knave , and a great Actor too , a very Roscius ; didst not thou play once the Clown in Musidorus ? 



William   no , but I played the Bear , Sir.  



joll.   The Bear ! why that 's as good a Part ; thou 'rt an Actor then I 'll warrant thee , the bears a well-penned Part , and you remember my Brother's humour , don't you ? They have almost hit it . 



William   ay , Sir , I knew the shortness of his memory , he would always forget to pay me my Wages , till he was put in mind of 't . 



joll.   Well said , I 'll dress thee within , and all the Servants shall acknowledge thee , you conceive the Design — be confident , and thou cast not miss ; but who shall do trusty john ? 



Will :  O , Ralph the Butler , Sir , is an excellent tried Actor , he played a King once ; I have heard him speak a Play ex tempore in the Butteries . 



joll.   OH excellent Ralph ! incomparable Ralph against the world ! Come away , William , I 'll give you instructions within , it must be done in a moment . Exeunt . 



Scene 3  

Enter Aurelia , Jane . jane.   ha , ha , ha ! this is the best Plot o yours , dear Madam , to marry me to Mr. Truman in a Veil instead of yourself ; I can't choose but laugh at the very conceit of 't ; 't will make excellent sport : My Mistress will be so mad when she knows that I have got her Servant from her , ha , ha , ha ! 



Aur.   Well , are you ready ? Veil yourself all over , and never speak one word to him , what ever he says , ( he 'll have no mind to talk much ) but give him your hand , and go along with him to Church ; and when you come to , I take thee — mumble it over that he may ned distinguish the voice . 



jane.   ha , ha , ha ! I can't speak for laughing — dear honey Madam , let me but go in and put on a couple o Patches ; you can't imagine how much prettier I look with a Lozenge under the Left Eye , and a Half Moon o this cheek ; and then I 'll but slip on the Silver-laced Shoes that you gave me , and be with him in a trice . 



Aur.   Don't stay , he 's a fantastical fellow , if the whimsy take him he 'll be gone . Exeunt . 



Scene 4.  

Lucia .  They say he 's to pass instantly this way 
To lead his Bride to Church ; ingrateful Man ! 
I 'll stand here to upbraid his guilty Conscience , 
And in that black attire in which he saw me 
When he spoke the last kind words to me ; 
'T will now befit my sorrows , and the Widowhood of my Love ; 
He comes alone , what can that mean ? 


Scene 5.  

Enter Truman junior . Trum.   Come , Madam , the Priest stays for us too long ; 
I ask your pardon for my dull delay , 
And am ashamed of 't . 


Luc.   What does he mean ? I 'll go with him what ever it mean.  


Exeunt Scene 6.  

Enter Cutter , Tabytha , Boy . Cut.   Come to my bed , my dear , my dear , Sings . 
My dear come to my bed , 
For the pleasant pain , and the loss with gain 
Is the loss of a Maidenhead . 
For the pleasant , etc.  


Tab.   Is that a Psalm , Brother Husband , which you sing ? 


Cut.   no , Sister Wife , a short Ejaculation only . 
Well said , Boy , bring in the things , — Boy brings a Hat and Feather , Sword and Belt , broad Laced Band , and Periwig . 


Tab.   What do you mean , Brother Abednego ? you will not turn Cavalier , I hope , again , you will not open before Zion in the dress of Babylon ? 



Cut.   What do these clothes befit Queen Tabitha's husband upon her day o Nuptials ? this Hat with a high black chimney for a crown , and a brim no broader than a Hatband ? Shall I , who an to ride the Purple Dromedary , go dressed like Revelation fat 's the Basketmaker ? Give me the Peruique , Boy ; shall Empress Tabitha's husband go as if his head were scalded ? or wear the Seam of a shirt here for a a Band ? Shall I who an zealous even to slaying , walk in the streets without a Sword , and not dare to thrust men from the wall , if any shall presume to take 't of Empress Tabytha ? Are the Fiddlers coming , Boy ? 



Tab.   Pish , I cannot abide these doings ; are you mad ? there come no profane Fiddlers here . 



Cut.   Be peaceable gentle Tabytha ; they will not bring the Organs with them hither ; I say be peaceable , and conform to Revelations ; It was the Vision bade me do this ; Wiled thou resist the Vision ? 



Tab.   An these be your Visions ? little did I think I wiss — OH what shall I do ? is this your Conversion ? which of all the Prophets wore such a Map about their Ears , or such a Sheet about their Necks ? Oh! my Mother ! what shall I do ? I 'm undone . 



Cut.   What shalt thou do ? why , thou shalt Dance , and Sing , and Drink , and be Merry ; thou shalt go with thy Hair Curled , and thy Breasts Open ; thou shalt wear fine black Stars upon thy Face , and Bobs in thy Ears bigger than bouncing Pears ; Nay , if thou dost begin but to look rustily — I 'll have thee Paint thyself , like the Whore o Babylon . 



Tab.   Oh! that ever I was Born to see this day — 



Cut.   What , dost thou weep , Queen Dido ? thou shalt have Sack to drive away thy Sorrows ; bring in the Bottle , Boy , I 'll be a Loving Husband , the Vision must be Obeyed ; Sing Tabytha ; Weep o' thy Wedding day ? 't is ominous ; Come to my Bed my Dear , etc.  O , art thou come Boy ? fill a Brimmer , nay , fuller yet , yet a little fuller ! Here Lady Spouse , here 's to our sport at Night . 



Tab.   Drink it yourself , an you will ; I 'll not touch it , not I  



Cut.   By this hand thou shalt pledge me , seeing the Vision said so ; Drink , or I 'll take a Coach , and carry thee to the Opera immediately . 



Tab.   O Lord , I can't abide it — Drinks off . 



Cut.   Why , this will cheer thy Heart ; Sack , and a Husband ? both comfortable things ; have at you again . 



Tab.   I 'll pledge you no more , not I  



Cut.   Here take the Glass , and take it off — off every drop , or I 'll swear a hundred Oaths in a breathing time . 



Tab.   Well! you 're the strangest man — Drink . 



Cut.   Why , this is right ; nay , off with 't ; so — but the Vision said , that if we left our Drink behind us we should be Hanged , as many other Honest men na'been , only by a little negligence in the like case ; here 's to you Tabytha once again , we must fulfil the Vision to a Tittle . 



Tab.   What must I drink again ? well ! you are such another Brother — Husband . 



Cut.   Bravely done , Tabytha ! now thou Obey'st the Vision , thou wiled have Revelations presently . 



Tab.   Oh! Lord ! my head 's giddy — nay , Brother , Husband , the boy 's taking away the Bottle , and there 's another Glass or two in it still . 



Cut.   OH Villainous Boy ! fill out you Bastard , and squeeze out the last drop . 



Tab.   I 'll drink to you now , my Dear ; 't is not handsome for you to begin always — Come to my Bed my Drinks . Dear , and how was te ? 't was a pretty Song , methoughts . 



Cut.   OH Divine Tabytha ! here come the Fiddlers too , strike up ye Rogues . 



Tab.   What must we Dance too ? is that the Fashion ? I could have Danced the Coranto when I was a Girl , the Currantoes a curious Dance . 



Cut.   we 'll outdance the Dancing disease ; but Tabytha , there 's one poor Health left still to be drunk with Music . 



Tab.   Let me begined ; here Duck , here 's to all that Drinks . Love us . 



Cut.   A Health , ye Eternal Scrapers , sound a Health ; rarely done Tabytha , what think'st thou now o thy Mother ? 



Tab.   A fig for my Mother ; I 'll be a Mother myself shortly ; Come Duckling , shall we go home ? 



Cut.   Go home ? the Bridegroom and his Spouse go home ? no , we 'll Dance home ; afore us Squeakers , that way , and be Hanged you Sempiternal Rakers . OH brave ! Queen Tabytha ! Excellent Empress Tabytha , on ye Rogues . Exeunt . 



Scene 7.  

Enter Jolly , Worm , Puny . Wor.   But where 's my what dee ye call her , Brother ? 



joll.   What Sir ? 



Wor.   My Daughter — Lucia , a pretty fair Complexioned Reads . Girl , with a Black Eye , a Round Chin , a little Dimpled , and a Mole upon — I would fain see my Daughter — Brother . 



joll.   Why , you shall Sir presently , she 's very well ; what Noise is that ? how now ? what 's the matter ? 



Enter Servant . Seru.   Ho! my old Master ! my old Masters come , he 's Lighted just now at the door with his man john ; he 's ask for you , he longs to see you ; my Master , my old Master . 



joll.   This fellows Mad.  



Seru.   If you won't believe me , go but in and see Sir ; he 's not so much altered , but you 'll quickly know him , I knew him before he was Lighted , pray , go in Sir.  



joll.   Why , this is strange — there was indeed some weeks since a report at the Exchange that he was Alive still , which was brought by a Ship that came from Barbary ; but that he should be Split in two after his Death , and Live again in both , is wonderful to me . I 'll go see what 's the matter . 



Exeunt Jolly , Servant . Pun.   I begin to shake like a Plum-tree Leaf . 



Wor.   't is a mere Plot o the Devils to have us beaten , if he send him in just at this Nick.  



Scene 8.  

Enter Ralph ( as John ) and two or three Servants . 1.  Seru.   Ah Rogue , art thou come at last ? 



2.  Seru.   Why , you 'll not look upon your Old friends ! give me your Golls , john . 



Ral.   Thank ye all heartily for your Love ; thank you with all my Heart ; my old Bed-fellow , Robin , and how does little Ginny do ? 



3.  Seru.   A murrain take you , you 'll never leave your Waggery . 



Pun.   A murrain take ye all , I shall be paid the Portion here with a witness . 



Ral.   And how does Ralph ? good honest Ralph ; there is not an honester Fellow in Christendom , though I say 't myself , that should not say 't . 



2.  Seru.   ha , ha , ha ! Why Ralph the rogue 's well still ; Come let 's go to him into the Buttery , he 'll be Overjoyed to see thee , and give us a Cup o the best Stingo there . 



Ral.   Well said ; Steel to the back still Robin ; that was your word you know ; my Masters coming in ! go , go , I 'll follow you . 



1 Seru.   Make haste , good john . 



Ral.   here 's a Company of as honest Fellow-servants ; I 'm glad , I 'm come among 'em again . 



Wor.   And would I were got out from 'em , as honest as they are ; that Robin has a thrashing hand . 



Pun.   john with a Pox to him ! would I were hid like a Maggot in a Peascod . 



Scene 9  

Enter Jolly , William . joll.   Methinks you 're not returned , but born to us anew . 



William   Thank you good Brother ; truly we have passed through many dangers ; my man john shall tell you all , I 'm Old and Crazy . 



Enter Servant . 4 Seru.   Sir , the Widow ( my Mistress I should say ) is coming in here with Mr. Knock-down , and four or five more . 



joll.   O'ds my Life ! this farce is neither of Doctrine nor Use to them ! keep 'em here , john , till I come back . 



Exit Jolly . Wor.   I 'm glad the colonel 's gone ; now will I sneak away , as if I had stolen a Silver spoon . 



William   Who are those , john ? by your leave Sir , would you speak with any body here ? 



Wor.   The Colonel , Sir ? but I 'll take some other time to wait upon him , my occasions call me now . 



William   Pray stay , Sir , who did you say you would have spoken with ? 



Wor.   The Colonel , Sir ; but another time will serve ; he has business now . 



William   Whom would he speak with , john ? I forget still . 



Ral.   The Colonel , Sir.  



William   Colonel ! what Colonel ? 



Wor.   Your brother , I suppose he is Sir , but another time — 



William   't is true indeed ; I had forgot , I faith , my Brother was a Colonel ; I cry you mercy Sir , he 'll be here presently . ye seem to be Foreiners by your habits Gentlemen . 



Wor.   no Sir , we are Englishmen . 



William   Englishmen ? law you there now ! would you have spoken with me , Sir ? 



Wor.   no Sir , your Brother ; but my business requires no haste , and therefore — 



William   you 're not in haste , you say ; pray Sir , sit down then , may I crave your name , Sir ? 



Wor.   My name 's not worth the knowing Sir — 



William   This Gentleman ? 



Wor.   't is my man , Sir , his name 's john . 



Pun.   I 'll be john no more , not I , I 'll be jackanapes first ; no , my name 's Timothy Sir.  



William   Mr. john Timothy , very well , Sir ; ye seem to be Travellers . 



Wor.   We are just now as you see , arrived out of Africa , Sir , and therefore have some business that requires — 



William   Of Africa ? law ye there now ; what Country , pray ? 



Wor.   Prester-iohn's Country ; fare you well , Sir , for the present , I must be excused . 



William   Mary God forbid ; what come from Prester-iohn , and we not Drink a Cup o Sack together . 



Wor.   What shall I do ? Friend , shall I trouble you to show me a private place ? I 'll wait upon you presently again , Sir.  



William   you 'll stay here Master ? — 



Pun.   I 'll only make a little Maid's water Sir , and come back to you immediately . 



Ral.   The door 's locked Sir , the Colonel has locked us in here — why do you shake Sir ? 



Pun.   Nothing — only I have extreme list to make water . 
here 's the Colonel , I 'll sneak behind the hangings . 


Scene 10.  

Enter Jolly , Widow . joll.   we 'll leave those Gentlemen within a while upon the point of Reprobation ; but Sweet heart , I have two Brothers here , newly arrived , which you must be acquainted with . 



Wid.   Mary , Heaven fore-shield ! not the Merchant I hope ? 



joll.   no , brethren in Love , only — How d' ye you Brother ? 



Wor.   I your Brother ; what d' ye mean ? 



joll.   Why , are not you my brother jolly , that was taken Prisoner by the Southern Tartars ? 



Wor.   I Brother , I by Tartars ? 



joll.   What an impudent Slave is this ? Sirrah , Monster , didst thou not come with thy man john ? 



Wor.   I my man john ? here 's no such person here ; you see you 're mistaken . 



joll.   Sirrah , I 'll strike thee Dead . 



Wor.   Hold , hold , Sir , I do remember now I was the Merchant jolly , but when you asked me I had quite forgot it ; alas , I 'm very Crazy . 



joll.   that 's not amiss ; but since thou art not he , I must know who thou art . 



Wor.   Why , don't you know me ? I 'm Captain Worm , and Puny was my man john . 



joll.   where 's the fool , Puny ? is he slipped away ? 



Pun.   Yes , and no fool for 't neither for ought I know yet . 



Wor.   Why , we hit upon this frolic , Colonel , only for a kind o Mask ( d' ye ye conceive me , Colonel ? ) to celebrate your Nuptials ; Mr. Puny had a mind to reconcile himself with you in a merry way o Drollery , and so had I too , though I hope you were not in earnest with me . 



joll.   Oh! is that all ? well said Will , bravely done Will , I faith ; I told thee , Will , what 't was to have Acted a Bear ; and Ralph was an excellent john too . 



Wor.   how 's this ? then I 'm an Ass again ; this damned Punies fearfulness spoiled all . 



Pun.   This cursed Coward Worm ! I thought they were not the right ones . 



joll.   here 's something for you to drink ; go look to Supper , this is your Cue or Exit . Ex. Will & Ralph . 



Wid.   What need you , Love , have given 'em any thing ? in truth , Love , 〈◊〉 ' to lavish . 



Wor.   'T was wittily put off o me however . 



Scene 11.  

Enter Cutter , Tabytha , with Fiddlers . joll.   Here are more Maskers too , I think ; this Masking is a Heavenly entertainment for the Widow , who never saw any Show yet but the Puppet-play o Ninive . 



Cut.   Stay without , Scrapers . 



Tab.   O Lord , I 'm as weary with Dancing as passes ; Husband , husband , yonder 's my Mother ; OH mother what do you think I have been doing to day ? 



Wid.   Why what , Child ? no hurt , I hope . 



Tab.   Nay nothing , I have only been married a little , and my husband Abednego and I have so danced it since . 



Cut.   Brave Tabytha still ; never be angry Mother , you know where Marriages are made , your Daughters and your own were made in the same place , I warrant you , they 're so like . 



Wid.   Well , his will be done — there 's — no resisting Providence — but how , son Abednego , come you into that roaring habit of Perdition ? 



Cut.   Mother , I was commanded by the Vision , there is some great end for it of Edification , which you shall know by the sequel . 



Scene 12.  

Enter Truman signior , Truman junior , Lucia veiled . Trum. sen.   Come , Dick , bring in your wife to your tother father , and ask him blessing handsomely ; 

Welcome , dear daughter ; off with your Veil ; Luc. unveils . 
Heaven bless ye both . 


joll.   Ha! what 's this ? more masking ? why how now , Mr. Truman ? you have not married my Niece , I hope , instead o my daughter ? 



Trum. i.   I only did , Sir , as I was appointed , 
And am amazed as much as you . 


Trum. s.   Villain , Rebel , Traitor , out o my sight you son of a — 


joll.   Nay , hold him ; patience , good Mr. Truman , let 's understand the matter a little — 



Trum. s.   I won't understand , no that I won't , I won't understand a word , whilst he and his Whore are in my fight . 



joll.   Nay , good Sir — Why , what Niece ? two husbands in one afternoon ? that 's too much o conscience . 



Luc.   Two , Sir ? I know of none but this , 
And how I came by him too , that I know not . 


joll.   This is Riddle me riddle me — where 's my Daughter ? ho ! Aurelia . 


Scene 13.  

Enter Aurelia . Aur.   Here , Sir , I was just coming in . 



joll.   Have not you married young Mr. Truman ? 



Aur.   no , Sir.  



joll.   Why , who then has he married ? 



Aur.   Nay that , Sir , he may answer for himself , 
If he be of age to marry . 


joll.   But did not you promise me you 'd marry him this afternoon , and go to Church with him presently to do 't ? 



Aur.   But , Sir , my Husband forbade the Banes.  



joll.   they 're all mad ; your Husband ? 



Aur.   I Sir , the truth o the matter , Sir , is this , ( for it must out I see ) 't was I that was married this afternoon in the Matted Chamber to Mr. Puny , instead o my Cousin Lucia . 



joll.   Stranger and stranger ! what , and he not know 't ? 



Aur.   no , nor the Parson , Sir , himself . 



joll.   Hey day ! 



Aur.   'T was done in the dark , Sir , and I veiled like my Cousin ; 't was a very clandestine marriage , I confess , but there are sufficient proofs of it ; and for one , here 's half the Piece of Gold he broke with me , which he 'll know when he sees . 



Pun.   OH rare , by Hymen I 'm glad o' the change ; 't is a pretty Sorceress by my troth ; Wit to Wit quoth the Devil to the Lawyer ; I 'll out amongst 'em presently , 't has saved me a beating too , which perhaps is all her Portion . 



joll.   You turn my Head , you dizzy me ; but wouldst thou marry him without either knowing my mind , or so much as his ? 



Aur.   His , Sir ? he gave me five hundred pieces in Gold to make the Match ; look , they are here still , Sir.  



joll.   thou hast lost thy senses , Wench , and wilt make me do so too . 



Aur.   Briefly the truth is this , Sir , he gave me these five hundred Pieces to marry him by a Trick to my Cousin Lucia , and by another Trick I took the money and married him myself ; the manner , Sir , you shall know anon at leisure , only your pardon , Sir , for the omission of my duty to you , I beg upon my knees . 



joll.   Nay , Wench , there 's no hurt done , fifteen hundred pounds a year is no ill match for the daughter of a Sequestered Cavalier — 



Aur.   I thought so , Sir.  



joll.   If we could but cure him of some sottish affectations , but that must be thy task . 



Aur.   My life on 't , Sir.  



Pun.   I 'll out ; Uncle Father your Blessing — my little Matchivil , I knew well enough 't was you ; what did you think I knew not Cross from Pile ? 



Aur.   Did you i'faith ? 



Pun.   I by this kiss of Amber-grees , or I 'm a Cabbage . 



Aur.   Why then you out-witted me , and I 'm content . 



Pun.   A pox upon you Merchant jolly , are you there ? 



joll.   But stay , how come you , Niece , to be married to Mr. Truman ? 



Luc.   I know not , Sir , as I was walking in the Garden . 



Trum. i.   I thought ' thad been — but blessed be the mistake , 
What ever prove the Consequence to all 
The lesle important fortunes of my life . 


joll.   Nay , there 's no hurt done here neither — 



Trum. s.   no hurt , Colonel ? I 'll see him hanged at my door before he shall have a beggarly — 



joll.   Hark you , Mr. Truman , one word aside Talk aside . ( for it is not necessary yet my wife should know so much . ) 



Aur.   This foolish jane ( as I perceive by the story ) has lost a Husband by staying for a Black patch . 



joll.   Though I in rigour by my brothers Will might claim the forfeiture of her Estate , yet I assure you she shall have it all to the utmost farthing ; in a day like this , when Heaven bestows on me and on my daughter so unexpected and so fair a fortune , it were an ill return to rob an Orphan committed to my Charge . 



Aurelia   My father 's in the right . 
And as he clears her Fortune , so will I 
Her Honor. Hark you , Sir.  


Trum. s.   Why you speak , Sir , like a Virtuous Noble Gentleman , and do just as I should do myself in the same case ; it is — 



Aur.   'T was I upon my credit in a Veil ; to Trum. jun.  I 'll tell , if you please , all that you said , when you had read the Letter . But do you hear , Mr. Truman , do not you believe now that I had a design to lie with you ( if you had consented to my coming at midnight ) for upon my faith I had not , bud did it purely to try upon what terms your two Romantique Loves stood . 



Cut.   ha , ha , ha ! but your Farce was not right methinks at the end . 



Pun.   Why how , pray ? 



Cut.   Why there should have been a Beating , a lusty Cudgeling to make it come off smartly with a twang at the tail . 



Wor.   Say you so ? h 'as got a set of damnable brawny Servingmen . 



Cut.   At lest john Pudding here should have been basted . 



Wor.   A curse upon him , he saved himself like a Rat behind the hangings . 



Trum. i.   OH Lucia , how shall I beg thy pardon 
For my unjust suspicions of thy Virtue ? 
Can you forgive a very Repentant sinner ? 
Will a whole life of Penitence absolve me ? 


Trum. s.   't is enough , good noble Colonel , I 'm satisfied ; Come , Dick , I see 't was Heaven's will , and she 's a very worthy virtuous Gentlewoman ; I 'm old and testy , but 't is quickly over ; my blessing upon you both . 



Cut.   Why so , all 's well of all sides then ; let me see , here 's a brave Coupling day , only poor Worm must lead a Monkish life of 't . 



Aurelia :  I 'll have a Wife for him too , if you will , fine Mistress jane within ; I 'll undertake for her , I have set her a gog aside . to day for a husband , the first comer has her sure . 



Wor.   ay , but what Portion has she , Mistress Puny ? for we Captains o the King's side have no need o Wives with nothing . 



Aur.   Why Lozenges , and Halfmoons , and a pair of Silver-laced Shoes ; but that Tropes lost to you ; well , we 'll see among us what may be done for her . 



joll.   Come , let 's go in to Supper ; there never was such a day of Intriqus as this in one Family . If my true Brother had come in at last too after his being five years dead , 't would have been a very Play.  

Exeunt . 

FINIS . 

EPILOGUE , Spoken by CUTTER . 

Methinks a Vision bids me silence break , Without his Peruique . 
And some words to this Congregation speak , 
So great and gay a one I never did meet 
At the Monarch's Court in Coleman-street . 
But yet I wonder much not to espy a 
Brother in all this Court called Zephaniah . 
Bless me ! where are we ? What may this place be ? 
For I begin by Vision now to see 
That this is a mere Theatre ; well then , 
if 't be even so , I 'll Cutter be again . Puts on his Peruique . 
Not Cutter the pretended Cavalier , 
For to confess ingenuously here 
To you who always of that Party were , 
I never was of any ; up and down 
I rolled , a very Rakehell of this Town . 
But now my Follies and my Faults are ended , 
My Fortune and my Mind are both amended , 
And if we may believe one who has failed before , 
Our Author says he 'll mend , that is , he 'll write no more . 
EPILOGUE , At Court.  

The Madness of your People , and the Rage , 
  seen too long upon the Public Stage , 
't is time at last ( great Sir ) 't is time to see 
Their Tragic Follies brought to Comedy . 
If any blame the Lowness of our Scene , 
We humbly think some persons there have been 
On the World's Theatre not long ago , 
Much more too High , than here they are too Low. 
And well we know that Comedy of old , 
Did her Plebeian rank with so much Honour hold , 
That it appeared not then too Base or Light , 
For the Great Scipio's Conquering hand to write . 
How ever , if such mean persons seem too rude , 
When into Royal presence they intrude , 
Yet we shall hope a pardon to receive 
From you , a Prince so practised to forgive ; 
A Prince , who with th' applause of Earth and Heaven , 
The rudeness of the Vulgar has Forgiven . 
FINIS . 

