THE HISTORY OF THE Famous and Passionate LOVE , BETWEEN A Fair Noble Parisian LADY , AND A Beautiful Young Singing-man ; A Chanter in the Choir of Nôtre-dame in Paris , AND A SINGER in OPERAS . AN Heroic POEM . 

In Two CANTOS . 

Being in Imitation of Virgil's DIDO and AENEAS ; and shows all the Passions of a Proud Beauty , compelled by Love , to abandon herself to her Inferior ; but finding some slights , how she Revenged herself , and recovered her Honor.  

Licenced , 

January 26th . 1692.  



LONDON , Printed for R. T. near Sationers-hall , 1692.  

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER . 

This Poem was designed for an Epsode to that called the DAENEIDS ; as that of Dido is to the AENEIDS ; but being long , 't was thought by some , if it was joined with the other , it would give too great an interruption to that short Story , and swell it too large for this Age , which seems to have lost its taste of Poetry ; and must be dealt with , as sick People are , have a little at a time given 'em , of what we would have 'em swallow . This Poem therefore is Printed by itself , which it will very well bear , being in itself an entire Story ; but there are several Lines in this and the other , which will help to join 'em together , if the Reader pleases . Both of 'em are a kind of Burlesque , directly contrary to that of Virgil Travestie , for that makes a Hero and Heroine talk like Higlers or Costardmongers , and this represents Priests , Chanters and Vergers , like Gods and Heroes . I have in some places burlesqued some parts of Virgil , in others endeavoured to imitate him , and elsewhere to translate him . But I am no servile Translator . I care not what the Laws of Translation are ; I am a Freeborn Subject of England , and will not be put in Fetters , but by the Laws of the Kingdom . I never say any man chain himself to an Author , without spoiling both their meens . Two men cannot row like Galleyslaves , locked together , with a very good Grace . I have also in this and the other Poem , made bold with the Dean , Choir , Vergers , and Church of Nôtre-dame . I have put the Priests in an English Dress , and Pews into that Popish Church for the hearing of Sermons , where perhaps none are preached ; but I have reason for this Confidence ; French men are our King's Subjects , and aught to obey our Customs ; that Cathedral too was built by English , therefore we have a right to Pews there , and I hope we shall have the Possession o some , by the help of our King's Valour and Conduct . It would be hard , if we might not manage how we will for our Diversion , the Pictures of a few French Priests : France long Governed our Princes and Ministers of State , and made our whole Nation a Jest . 

This little Poem being part o the DAENEIDS , humbly fly's for Refuge to the same great Person whither the other is gone . And I take this opportunity of Addressing while the State permits him to be at leisure for these Trifles , which sure will not be long , in this Age so barren of great Men. And how much so ever he may love Repose , he may venture on Business , since he has an Understanding to make all things easy to him . 

AN Heroic POEM In Two CANTOS : Being in Imitation of Virgil's DIDO and AENEAS , etc.  

CANTO I  

THE wealth Cities insolently bombed , 
The Towns in their own ashes deep entombed ; 
The Lands made desolate , to People graves , 
Or worse , the Galleys to supply with Slaves ; 
All by that Royal Boutefeu's command , 
His Vassals flatter with the name Le Grand ; 
Have some Revenge from proud Parisian Dames , 
Who ruin Paris , by their wanton Flames ; 
Fire , Beds and Hearts ; melt Hills o Money down , 
Enslave the Men , and almost sack the Town . 
High among these a fair One shot her Light , 
In Equipage , in Robes , in Beauty bright . 
Lofty she was in Marriage , Birth , and Size , 
Her terrible Commode besieged the Skies ; 
And threatened Stars , as having need of none , 
Brighter than Heaven she thought her Person shone , 
Heaven one blue Robe , one Sett o Gems has worn 
Thousand o years ; a want she had in scorn . 
When she to Church , Court , Balls or Plays repaired , 
She in new Garments , Modes , and Jewels glared . 
Fresh Roses hourly in her Cheeks were blown , 
She was the lasting Summer of the Town ; 
Which never-failing Heat and Lustre gave , 
Dazzling the Fair , inflaming all the Brave . 
thousands desired her , thousands she desired , 
For with a raging Flame , her Blood was fired . 
But , Oh! the Wonder ! the whole Town should ' embraced 
Hotly in Thought , yet she in Fact was chaste . 
Vast numbers sought her Love , and she sought theirs ; 
Spread for 'em and received 'em in her Snares , 
But lodged not one , or in her Arms , or Heart ; 
Held by Religion to her great desert . 
She thought her Beauty could not be deserved , 
So by her Pride , her Honour was preserved . 
Herself should ' adored , and all things else disdained , 
Her lawless Pride over all her Vices reigned . 
Pride married her to a rich Highborn Lord ; 
She espoused the Title , but the Man abhorred . 
To this half Husband , she half Duties paid , 
Kept when a Wife , the coldness of a Maid . 
Her Kisses had no spirit , warmth or taste ; 
And she was ravished when she was embraced . 
This toil so tiresome to him , and unjust , 
To Strumpets turned the torrent of his Lust . 
With this enraged , for a Revenge , she sought 
Some gallant Lover , worthy of her Thought . 
But such a Man she feared was yet unborn , 
All men to her seemed made but for her scorn , 
For Trophies to her Eyes ; so round she roved , 
Wounding and kill , cursed yet much beloved . 
But pitying Fate at length the world relieved , 
Made her the scorn o those she long had grieved . 
The Church she much frequented and the Plays , 
To be gazed on by all , on all to gaze . 
She found in both a dangerous ambuscade 
In lovely Minnum for her ruin laid ; 
So was the young enchanting Chanter named , 
For Angel's voice and Woman's beauty famed ; 
The Church's Flower , the prettiest Scene in Plays , 
Best decoration of the Operas . 
His voice enticed her careless Eye to stray 
Over his sweet Face , where Cupid's lurking lay ; 
Which as she gazed would from each feature start , 
And in her Veins dip an envenomed Dart. 
Much pain she felt , but what she would not know , 
For she abhorred to think of love so low ; 
Yet something whispered in her Soul 't was Love : 
To strangle the bold whisperer she striven , 
As a malicious Poisoner of her ease . 
This strife but gave more strength to her Disease , 
Which grew apparent by a thousand Pains , 
Glowed in her Bones , and boiled in all her Veins , 
Smoked up in Sighs , through all her Marrow spread , 
From her fair Cheeks licked up the Rosy red ; 
Beaten high in her disordered Pulse and Heart , 
Wept in her Eyes , and raged in every part . 
Around her , through her , ran the melting Flame , 
She plainly saw approaching Death or Shame . 
Ah! now the Church she cursed , all Plays she damned , 
And would not see 'em more , or hear 'em named . 
Churches and Prayers she banished from her thought , 
What ever into her mind , his image brought . 
With sweet Peace-breeding Music she made War , 
She burned her Song-books , broke her rich Guitar . 
Music elsewhere disorders might control , 
But every Note bred tumults in her Soul. 
She burned and blushed if any mentioned Songs , 
Or talked of Crotchets , Quavers , Briefs or Longs . 
Into her Cheeks those Engines forced her Blood , 
And made , she thought , her Folly understood . 
A while she sought the Secret to secure 
In Solitude ; no Visits would endure . 
But there her Torments were too great to bear ; 
The Chanter's Form seized and devoured her there ; 
Closely pursued her wheresoever she sled . 
She could not ' scape the Ravisher i Bed. 
Down lay the wanton Image by her side , 
And kissed and forced her spite of all her Pride . 
Whole Nights it ruffled her ; nor fled at Day . 
Slumbers it from her Eyes kept long away . 
Whenever she slept , it broke her brittle Rest , 
And shed the only Balm that eased her Breast . 
Now Solitude she loathed ; abroad she sprung , 
To lose her Grief , in many a gamesome Throng . 
Her rattling Coach in Visits shaken the Town , 
Her madness oft called where she was not known . 
Her Friends scarce knew her , such a change was seen , 
In her late Gaiety , and lofty Mien . 
Now mute she sat , or wide were her Replies ; 
Fair Minnums form would in her Fancy rise , 
His charming Voice would hover round her Ear , 
Nothing but Minnum could she mind or hear . 
Madly she roved about , but all in vain ; 
Like a fair Hind shot by a wand'ring Swain , 
Trying his Arrows in a Field too near 
The Wood where skipped th' unwary wanton Deer , 
She fly's ; the Arrow sticks ; nay every bound 
Strikes it more deep into her throbbing wound . 
All arts this Beauty tried increased her pain , 
Which now her heart no longer could contain . 
One morning with her flowing Tears bedewed , 
When sleep she vainly had all night pursued ; 
Thus to her faithful Woman she confessed , 
Her half-crazed Brain , and inward bleeding Breast . 
O , Fan ! Dear Fan ! burst out the raving Fair , 
Advice , assist thy Lady ' in deep Despair . 
i  entertained a fatal shameful Flame 
For a poor Youth , I blush and hate to name . 
I know to me he never dares aspire , 
And I must woo , or die in raging Fire . 
I 'll die ever woo , or by a Slave be wooed , 
And rather shed than share my Noble Blood. 
Her tender Confident kindly replies , 
Ah , Madam ! dearer to me than my Eyes , 
I learned your Grief before at Church and Plays , 
By your oft Oglings , and your lavish Praise 
Of Minnum — ' E'er the Name was far in Air , 
Upstart in a rage the guilty Fair , 
Catched madly at the words already gone , 
Held back the shameful Flood was hastening on ; 
Tore her Night-dress , then sunk into the Bed , 
There eagerly she wept , and hid her head . 
Kind sympathising Fan pledged her in Grief ; 
Wept much ; but knowing that was small Relief , 
She sought with Comforts of a solid kind , 
To raise her Lady in Body and in Mind . 
Said she , I 'd help you to suppress this Flame , 
Did I believe it either Sin or Shame ; 
Madam ,   free disposal of your Bed , 
To you , your wicked Lord has long been dead . 
Sometimes the Devil of Drunkenness assumes 
His Corpse and with strange Yell shakes your Rooms . 
He makes your House as horrible a Hell , 
As the lewd Brothels where he 's damned to dwell . 
His Soul is then by an Infernal Crew 
Of Whores , those Brands of Hell , burned far from you . 
Madam , his Crimes your Liberty restore , 
i' th' Eye of Heaven a Husband he 's no more . 
A sentenced Traitor breath awhile may draw , 
But he is breathless i the Eye of Law. 
Your Traitorous lord 's a Shadow in this sense , 
He can no more make any just Pretence 
To aught from you , but Punishment severe ; 
You greatly sin if Justice you defer . 
In deeds of Justice Shame there can be none ; 
But you 'd not slain his Honour and your own 
By execution with a vulgar Sword. 
With a King's weapon you 'd behead your Lord ; 
The rather since yourself must give the blow , 
Madam , your Touch a Value will bestow . 
Some Lords , no doubt , would part with their white Wands , 
For Minnums Title to your snowy Hands . 
For your sake , Madam , great Respect is paid , 
By noblest Lords , to me your humble Maid ; 
How 'll he be honoured then whom you shall place 
In that high-courted Station , your Embrace , 
And by your Seals of Love , your Peer create ? 
He need not envy Ministers of State. 
But your nice Palate cannot relish Fruit , 
Which had its Rise out of a dirty Root . 
With a vain Scruple you yourself torment , 
Madam , all Flesh from Dirt has its Descent . 
From Soil comes Grass , from Grass the Food we eat ; 
We are in part the Offsprings of our Meat . 
Who tastes in pleasant Fruit its Parent Tree ? 
Or who in Beauty its poor Pedigree ? 
Who knows their Stocks ? Love often changes strains , 
Gives with vile Blood a dash to noble Veins ; 
Enriches Peasants with the blood of Lords : 
For our Descent   but our Mother's Words . 
Mean birth is handsome Minnums only blot . 
Sure though low-born he nobly was begot ! 
So fine a Piece no Vulgar Workman made ; 
He plainly is with Quality inlaied . 
All beauty 's Noble , born with Right to reign ; 
Come how it will , that Crown removes the stain . 
You are most Noble , Madam ; for that cause 
Let nothing give your sacred Pleasure Laws . 
Scorn empty Censure ; let none have the power 
To be Electors of your Emperor , 
Or Slave ( for so he 'll be ) ; Why should your Choice 
Of your own Slaves , attend the public Voice ? 
Think nothing but yourself worth your regard , 
Your own great Merit , your own way reward . 
If you 'll needs pay the World respect so high , 
Out of vain Terror of its Ear and Eye , 
In this Affair you 'd softly darkly creep ; 
Minnums sweet Voice can lay the World asleep . 
Let him your Voice and Skill in Song improve ; 
And with that Noise drown all the Talk of Love. 
But o ! you fear you must descend to woo ; 
That he 'll not dare to aim so high as you . 
Without your leave it is not sit he should ; 
But you may soon put Spirit in his Blood , 
By Oglings , Presents , and a thousand ways , 
Whenever you please you may his Courage raise . 
Thus she more fired , her too much burning Breast 
Her too much fainting Modesty suppressed ; 
Fixed her in Sin. Her Sorrow blown away , 
She rises , ventures in the Eye of Day . 
Her Cheeks with Lust , and not with Blushes , blaze , 
Resolved on War , new Colours she displays 
In bloody Paint ; her Cheeks have double Dye . 
Her Heart beats hard to meet the Enemy . 
O'er-pleased with Thoughts of her delightful Crime , 
She trembles — nothing fears but loss o time . 
She pants , sighs , dresses , puts on every Grace , 
then sends her Woman on the amorous Chase . 
The Dev'l who knew the Plot so wisely wrought , 
Fan quickly found the Mischief which she sought . 
The minute Fan on her Embassage fled , 
The Devil near the door sweet Minnum led . 
Anne stopped him , and a pleasing Message told , 
Said Beauty waited for him here with Gold , 
Desiring him to use his happy Skill 
In her , what highly pleased her , to instill . 
From him she had the best and sweetest shakes : 
The words he in a modest sense mistakes ; 
And swiftly mounts to the hid mighty Snare . 
Ah , how the News struck the sick-longing Fair ! 
In Fan's Embraces she fell cold and wan . 
Fan shrieked ; the Maids in frights confusedly ran 
To help their Lady , and in shrieks as shrill , 
Unknown , gave bodings of great hastening Ill , 
Which now trod lightly over their Lady's Face , 
But in her Heart would shortly have their place . 
Her rallying Spirits now defeat their Foes ; 
Her Paleness ebbs , her Rosy Colour flows , 
Life , Beauty , Vigour get their former seat ; 
Now Fan calls Minnum , and the Maid's retreat . 
Between Minnums Beauty , and her inward Gild ; 
Once more the fair One faints , her red is spilt . 
Speechless she stood , breathless almost awhile ; 
And only spoke his Welcome with a Smile . 
That confused silent Interval was short , 
then in high Praise of him she made her Court ; 
Over whelmed the Youth with Praise , he staggered , bend 
Under th'oppressing Storm ; yet on she went ; 
Almost told all the Secrets of her Heart , 
But reined her Words as they began to start . 
In other Modes her Suit she then pursued , 
And the fair Youth by Ostentation wooed . 
Of all her large , richly-adorned Abode ; 
And her bright Closet thick with Jewels sowed . 
From Orbs of Rings , a shining one she choose 
Loaded with Gems , and on the Youth bestows . 
The Present dazzled ; yet it shot a Light 
Which of her Aims gave him imperfect sight . 
Near her she seats him , than a Song desires , 
At once the Screen and Fuel to their Fires . 
Ah! in that Air how thick the Cupids flew ! 
How fast , at both , deep-piercing Darts they threw ! 
He sighed , he trembled ; oft his Paper fell ; 
He sung , but neither of 'em knew if well . 
Yet all seemed well though in or out of Tune ; 
He sung , both sighed , and languished ; on came Noon . 
She stayed consuming , he inflamed withdrew ; 
Both longed and wished for a new Interview , 
Which he next morning eagerly repeats , 
And she more lavishly her Gifts and Treats . 
Thus plainly challenged by the urging Fair , 
High rose his Courage , he begins to dare , 
His Bosom almost burst with torturing Love , 
Which now with Violence for Freedom striven ; 
Flew to its Tongue , and almost forced its way , 
But still a Tyrant , Modesty , had sway ; 
Which held in cruel Pangs his labouring Breast : 
So tore his words , their sense could scarce be guessed . 
Both talked , but neither of 'em well knew what : 
Songs were oft named , and were as oft forgot . 
In tangling Clues of Beams their Eyes entwined ; 
By Wishes in all Parts they closely joined . 
But meddling Modesty between 'em stepped . 
O with what Pains their Lips a distance kept ! 
Pulling against th' attraction of a kiss , 
And throwing off th' encroaching rampant bliss ? 
In these intestine Bosom Feuds , this Morn 
And some days more were idly lost and torn . 
At length their Modesty to death was teized , 
And both took Resolutions to be eased . 
He came with firm Decrees to break all Bars , 
She for the same Design that hour prepares . 
In Walls of Forms she 'd make no more Defence , 
Which prolonged War at her hearts great expense . 
Her Troops are now in exact order spread 
In th' open naked Field of Love , her Bed. 
There like Aurora on a gentle Wave , 
She Audience to her eager Lover gave . 
Tempted beyond what mortal could resist , 
Her white hot Hand he seized and hotly kissed , 
then poured out all his Soul. Her rolling Eyes , 
Sighs , tender Press , gave him kind replies . 
Emboldened to her Bosom he advanced , 
then both a while in Raptures were entranced ; 
Only in Pant , and by silence spoken . 
At length a murmuring smoking Flood out broke , 
Of kindest Words , hot Kisses , Sighs and Tears , 
Which bore down all his Modesty and hers . 
All thoughts of Virtue and its guardian Pride 
Were chased away ; all Pleasure was enjoyed , 
Love's ripe and plenteous Vintage could bestow , 
And from plump luscious Grapes well pressed could flow . 
That Day they part not , nor the ensuing Night , 
They melt down both in ravishing Delight . 
Both often swore never to part in Mind , 
And grieve their Bodies ever should be disjoined ; 
Into each other wish their whole could flow , 
And by strong Roots firm to each other grow . 
So joined they are , let what will step between , 
Something has hold of both by Ties unseen , 
For all Affairs , and Locks and Walls too strong , 
And will not let 'em be asunder long . 
They gazed , they sung , they kissed the Morn away ; 
Love only by some forms adored by Day , 
Made some Processions round his outward Courts ; 
Devout preparatives for close resorts 
At Night , to his Recesses' most concealed , 
Where all his Sacred Mysteries were revealed . 
CANTO II  

Long were they happy ; fifty times and more , 
The Sun his daily Heats had galloped over , 
And always found 'em hot as he , and near : 
Night as oft found 'em in a mad Career . 
At length , Fame with the Story chanced to meet , 
Than it ran fast . Than Fame no ill more fleet . 
By travelling she thrives , her Sinews grow ; 
She first sets out weak , timorous and low ; 
But soon she far in Air begins to spread , 
And fills the Earth , while Clouds conceal her Head. 
She is a vast swift Monster , feathered round , 
But does not more in Plumes , than Eyes abound , 
Which rarely sleep ; than noisy Tongues which walk 
All Day in Shades , yet waste the Night in talk . 
From lofty Towers , Realms , from repose she frights , 
And both in Fiction and in Truth delights . 
Over joyed , with babble she supplied the Crowd , 
Things done , things never done she sung aloud . 
How this proud fair with Minnum cooled her Fire , 
And he for her forsaken the Stage and Quire. 
This Story sullied with Inventions foul , 
The sluttish Goddess poured in every Bowl , 
Plenteously mixed in every Dish in Town , 
That at all Entertainments it went down . 
At length she lights at the great Dean's Alcove , 
And much inflames that Ecclesiastic Jove . 
Said she , has all Church-lightning lost its Heat , 
Church-thunder lost its Bolts , Can it but threat ? 
Is it but lowing Clouds , and bleating Air , 
A young Retainer to the Church should dare 
To disgrace yours , contemn the Church's sway , 
And slight your lovely Niece , Lavinia ; 
The brightest Apprentice in the Change , or Town ? 
Her Shop when she is there , appears a Throne . 
Her Yard-wand seems a Sceptre in her Hand , 
All the Town Gallants are at her Command . 
She shuns 'em all , and Minnum she adores , 
Who melts his time , himself with wanton Whores . 
The mighty Church-power heard , enkindled fast , 
His Verger to the Youth dispatched with haste . 
Fly swift ( said he ) to this bold Debauchee , 
Who wrongs at once the Church , my Niece , and me . 
This will not much his handsome Mother please : 
She promised better things of him than these : 
That he in Song should to high Fame attain , 
Give the Choir Laws , over all the Chanters reign . 
By Marriage with my Niece he 's sure of Rule ; 
Cannot such Glory stir the stupid Fool ? 
What can he hope from Harlots , Kissing Foes ? 
His Life they ' ndanger , at the least his Nose . 
These sinful Leagues always conclude in strife , 
Drubs from the Husband , Pox from the Wife . 
If this lewd Course he does not leave and loath , 
My Niece he loses , and his Office both . 
This spoken , forward the Church Merc'ry paced , 
With all his Ornaments by Fortune graced , 
For than it Chimed to Prayers : his Gown was on , 
His Head in a new Cap of Satin shone . 
He bore his bright Enchanting Silver Rodriguez , 
With which he serves , disserves the drowsy God ; 
Leads Souls to happy Seats , and Slumbers deep , 
And often wakes 'em out of heavy Sleep : 
Of Graves called Pews he locks , unlocks the Doors , 
Guides Souls to Shades , and back to Light restores . 
With his winged Robe , Rod tipped with Turtles Wings , 
The Divine Mercury to Minnum springs , 
And finds the Hero dressing for the Choir ; 
But , ah ! profaned with Ranting lay Attire ; 
Of his Love-victories the wealth Spoils , 
And bold Confessions of his Nightly Toils . 
Him the Envoy invades ; and word for word , 
Told what was uttered by his Heavenly Lord ; 
then vanished into thin , and spacious Air , 
With Horror stiff-upstarted Minnums Hair ; 
Boar from his Head the Wig which hedged it round , 
In his cold freezing Jaws his Voice was drowned . 
Affrighted by Commands from one so great , 
From his sweet Crimes he thinks of a Retreat . 
But , ah ! what Words , what Heart he should assume , 
To his high-spirited Dear to break this Doom , 
He knew not : various ways he racked his Mind , 
Now he 's to her , anon to Heaven inclined . 
Hell he fears much , and loss of Heavenly Joy , 
more the great Dean , and loss of his Employ ; 
But of the Husband he stood most afraid , 
And on his Soul drubs most impression made . 
So he concluded 't was the safest way , 
To take this warning , and the Dean obey ; 
Forsake his pleasant , but most dangerous Sin , 
Preserve his Soul , his Office and his Skin . 
And with the Dean resolves to make his Peace , 
By this Night's Service , and deserve his Niece . 
But to tread foftly in this new Amour , 
Till in his Arms Lavinia was secure : 
Mean while all Sounds and Colours to device , 
Could Cheat the injured beauty 's Ears and Eyes . 
This Night's unlooked for Parting to excuse , 
He Billet-doux with Billet-doux pursues ; 
Curses his Stars and Fate , the Tyrants will , 
And strives to gilled the nauseous bitter Pill . 
In spite o those thin Arts the fraud was bare , 
Lover's soon feel in Love , the least cool Air. 
And impious Fame brands in her Bosom threw , 
All Minnums falsehood told ; abroad she flew , 
Like one from Bedlam broke with heavy Chains : 
This raving Beauty battered her own Brains 
With her Love-fetters ; madly hurried on , 
whither she knew not , for her Sense was gone . 
The Warriors chosen for the great Design , 
In the Dean's Palace then were deep in Wine . 
Thither this Beauty pale , her Visage rend , 
Driven by Fan's Conduct , and for Minnum sent . 
Out Minnum starts , than thus his Ears she bruised , 
False Slave ( said she ) have I myself abused 
To please thy Love , and dar'st thou fly from me ? 
What! from a Beauty of my Quality ? 
And for a stitching Wench , who earns her Bread , 
Whose Life depends upon a rotten Thread ? 
For thee I wronged my Noble Lord , my Soul , 
Nay my high Blood , now with dishonour foul . 
Now a poor Wench must have my dear-bought Joys , 
I must have nothing but thy Frauds and Lies . 
If ever I was kind to thee , or dear ; 
If ever thy Passion was like mine sincere , 
If Pity in thy Heart can find a room , 
For me , or thy own Infant in my Womb , 
Warm with some kindness thy poor Child at least ; 
Desert me not , till at my panting Breast , 
I see an Innocent sweet Minnum play ; 
then thou mayst take the treacherous one away . 
I shall not quite be of my Love bereft , 
The loveliest part of Minnum will be left . 
Pale Minnum started when she named her Lord , 
Mused deeply on her Husband's Cane and Sword ; 
took both into his Heart , which made it hard , 
That to her Beauty he paid no regard : 
By all her Prayers and Tears he stood unbent , 
And stead o closing , widened thus , the Rent . 
Madam , said he , I sign th' Account   brought , 
Whilst i  a Soul , you will delight my thought : 
Lovely you are , and loving you have been , 
Too kind ; your Beauty and your Love gave sin , 
Enticing Beauties which undid us both ; 
Yourself I love , my sin I greatly loath . 
The Heavens and Earth have joined , my Soul to save ; 
My disturbed Father rests not in his Grave , 
But haunts me Nightly ; nay , the mighty Dean 
Hears I defile the Church with Life unclean , 
And threatens me with everlasting Fire ; 
Nay , more , of me quickly to cleanse the Quire. 
Destruction in both Worlds attends our Crime , 
Oh! let us both repent and mend in time . 
Sweet Penitence will cleanse your Noble Blood. 
Madam , I must forsake you for your good , 
Else I am cruel to you , and unjust . 
I leave you with Regret , but part we must . 
Whilst thus he spoke , her Eyes around him walked , 
T' examine what provoking Monster talked . 
Wonder , Aversion held her silent long , 
At length a Flood of Rage thus forced her Tongue . 
thou art to nothing soft or sweet akin , 
Thy Father never touched Flute or Violin . 
no Woman bore thee , from some Rock thou art sprung , 
A Rock is able to repeat a Song . 
Pity or Love never came near thy Heart ; 
more faithless than thy Fiddle-strings thou art , 
Which for their Truth on altering Air rely , 
And as the Wether is are firm or fly . 
Traitor , I took thee'n Purse and Person bare ; 
When many a Wench of both had had their share . 
Thy Finery , thy graceful Part is mine ; 
And now , forsooth , i  made him Great , and shine , 
With Earth and Heaven he is in high Esteem ; 
His Father's Soul leaves Joys above for him . 
Suppose a Soul from Earth to Heaven can pass , 
Would it take such a Journey for an Ass ? 
Go , for thy Ruin , thy Lavinia wed ; 
Anchor on Needles , seek thy floating Bread 
In the uncertain Air of windy Song , 
In a great waving Town never fixing long ; 
But what it lately lifted to the Skies 
Soon sinks to Hell ; as Humours fall or rise . 
Shortly , wracked Wretch ! split into Girls and Boys , 
And swimming only on thy frail Employs , 
thou bitterly wilt curse our Parting Hour ; 
And wish , once more , my Heart were in thy Power : 
In vain , Scorn only shalt thou have from me . 
then the tormenting , haunting Memory 
Of my Endearing Love for ever lost , 
Shall , like a Restless , Dire , Infernal Ghost , 
Frieze thee i Bed , and blast thee at thy Board , 
Till thou 'rt the verier Ghost , and more abhorred . 
This News will bring great Pleasure to my Ear , 
And be the only Music I shall bear . 
then she abruptly hurried from his Eyes , 
Left him in Fears , deep-studying soft Replies . 
Muse , leave him too a Moment , and attend 
The injured Fair , to give her Griefs an End. 
As drawn by Dragon's home she swiftly whirled , 
There on her Bed her lovely Body hurled . 
then sighed , wept , groaned , oft into Swound fell ; 
Oh! Love ! to what canst thou not Hearts compel ? 
Love drives this Beauty , late so full of Pride , 
Once more to woo , once more to be denied . 
Submission she resolves by Fan to send , 
And leave no way untried the Youth to bend . 
Ah , Fan ! said she , I cannot lose him so ; 
With softest Words to haughty Minnum go . 
Ask for what Crimes I am thus odious grown ; 
Besides my o'er-fond Love I know of none . 
And I desire that Error to amend , 
I only beg for it an easier End ; 
A Death lesle violent . I do not pray 
He would cast off his fair Lavinia . 
Only stay with me , and my Voice improve , 
Till I have got the better of my Love. 
This favour 's innocent , and 't is the last 
Return I beg , for all Endearing past . 
Kind Fan repeats her Message oft with Tears 
To Minnum vainly , Fate had stopped his Ears . 
As on a Giant-oak when Tempests crowd , 
And strongly strive to crush ; th' Uproar is loud : 
oft his vast Trunk beneath their Vigour bows , 
The Earth is beaten with her broken Boughs ; 
Yet still their Hold his Roots unvanquished keep , 
His head 's not loftier than his Feet are deep . 
The Hero thus attacked by Tears and Prayers , 
Felt in his Bosom strong contending Cares , 
And pitying Drops rolled down her Cheeks in vain ; 
His last Designs firm rooted still remain . 
The fair One than begged Death ; the Sight abhorred 
Of Heaven , which on her Head such Ruin poured . 
't was Night , when the tired World takes needful ease ; 
Silent were Fields , quiet were cruel Seas . 
Wild Winds were banished , lofty Woods were still , 
Stars seemed to rest upon the Heavenly Hill. 
Fast slept the Cattles , though in thorny Brakes , 
And deep the Fish , whether in oozy Lakes , 
Or in the murmuring , unquiet Streams . 
The watchful Dogs barked only in their Dreams . 
The breathless Air had not the Strength to wake 
The least of Birds , nor weakest Leaf to shake . 
Sleep in this Silence stole all Care away , 
But what in the unhappy Beauty lay . 
She in the general Peace not once engaged ; 
Increasing Tempests in her Bosom raged . 
This cruel Night as bad a Day pursues , 
And to the wretched Lady brought the News , 
Minnum with his new Love was seen to meet . 
then twice and thrice she violently beaten 
Her graceful Bosom , tore her flowing Hair , 
And on her Knees made this Revengeful Prayer . 
Let him be plagued with a vexatious Race : 
Foul and lewd Whores lay waste his conquering Face . 
For him bold Fools write and set every Song , 
Blockheads as daring hiss him right or wrong . 
Give him a plenteous Portion with his Wife , 
Of open Infamy , domestic Strife , 
Of Brats he 'll dote upon , and not beget ; 
And from their Arms let him be torn by Debt . 
Let horrid Lewdness drive him from the Choir , 
then let not Players think him worth their hire . 
From them a starving Bargain let him pray , 
When he has gained it , forfeit all his Pay. 
Out of all Rule let him both sing and live , 
But Rules of Gaols ; and those let him deceive : 
Till he 's an universal Nuisance grown , 
For Debts and Riots into Dungeons thrown . 
His Beauty , Voice , Wife's Love , and Skill in Song , 
Oh! may be long survive , yet perish Young. 
then may his Wife be forced to beg a Grave , 
And that be all the Land she 'll ever have . 
May all my Friends all Harmony abhor , 
And with it wage an Everlasting War. 
Let fierce Dissenters from my Womb arise , 
Which may pursue all singing Colonies . 
In Churches , Musick-meetings , on the Stage , 
And with the Edge of Wit , and Fire of Rage 
Be th' entire Extirpation of 'em all , 
And ' stead of Music fill the World with Brawl . 
This said ; she shaken with Resolutions dire ; 
Her rolling Eyes darted a threatening Fire . 
then a high Pile she reared of Viols , Lutes , 
Of Harpsicals , Gittars , Hautbois , and Flutes ; 
Of Songs and Tunes , of Airs both grave and light : 
She stacked up Crotchets to a wondrous height . 
In greater heaps Briefs , Sembriefs , Quavers lay , 
Than Billets do on any Wharf or Key . 
Her Fiddles made a little sounding Hill. 
She had not one Harmonious Utensil , 
She did not thrust into the bulky Crowd , 
And the bewitching Bawds to fire she vowed . 
Pale and disordered then a shining Sword 
She drew , belonging to her Noble Lord 
Mounting with Courage the Melodious Pile , 
She wept , mused , sadly gazed on it awhile . 
then said ,   oft dissolved my Cares in Song , 
Now y' are my Griefs , but shall not be so long . 
The Race my Fate ordained me I have run ; 
Ah! happy I , had it never been begun , 
And treacherous Minnum never had touched my Shore , 
Now I 'm for Shades whence I return no more . 
then deep she stabbed her Arm , and wrote in Blood 
A Bond , to bind herself to all that 's good , 
And eat all Ill , on Pain of suffering Hell , 
When she in Thought once more to Lewdness fell . 
Now a new Course of Life she close pursued ; 
Her Lord to her , herself for him she wooed . 
To the good Work applied with such Address , 
In little time she met admired Success . 
Their mutual Love was the World's Wonder grown ; 
TO enjoy each other they renounced the Town ; 
To ever-happy Shades and Seats they went , 
And in all Bliss their following Moment's spent . 
Minnum was still to his past Love inclined ; 
That she was dead to him much grieved his Mind . 
The tuneful Hero , Orpheus-like , invades , 
For his lost Love , Furies and dangerous Shades : 
But trusted not to Song , like him of old , 
On a wise Sibyl he relied , and Gold. 
Entrance he got in a Wood thick and wide , 
Where walking all alone his Love he spied . 
Dimly he saw her , for 't was far in Night , 
And the New Moon but edged the Clouds with Light. 
Her Charms and Beauties were , he thought , increased . 
Ah! than a thousand Passions tore his Breast ; 
Desire of her , Rage for his Follies past . 
Low at her Feet himself in Tears he cast ; 
And for his Faults his Piety accused , 
He swore her Love he no way else abused ; 
To her he never did aught but Heaven prefer , 
And now not that , he would leave Heaven for her . 
From him she sternly fixed on Earth her Eyes : 
Rocks more regarded him , they gave Replies 
In gentle Echoes ; not a word she spoke , 
Away she fiercely with Aversion broke ; 
And wand'red fast into a winding Grove , 
Where her kind Lord met her with equal Love. 
Minnum wept , followed , begged , but all in vain , 
He lost the Lady , and he kept his Pain . 
A new vain Labour now he must begin , 
Toil much for what he little cares to win ; 
Must the Dean's Glory raise , his own degrade , 
Leave highborn Beauty for an humble Maid . 
FINIS . 

