A true relation of the progress of the parliaments forces in Scotland : together with the king 's wholly abandoning Scotland , and , in despair , with what forces were left them , Marching into England : with part of our forces in his van : and my Lord general following in his rear . By an express messenger to the council of state . 

London , printed by William Du-gard , by the appointment of the council of state , anno dom. 1651.  

A letter to the honourable council of state relating the progress of the parliaments forces in Scotland , together with the King's Marching into England , &c.  

Truly honourable ! 

Having taken in Brunteland , and the enemy still continuing within their trenches at Sterling , it was unanimously concluded a necessary and a quick work to endeavour the reduction of st Johnstone , which , as i hinted in my last , is a place of great importance lying in the centre of that part of Scotland , which is on the other side forth . The enemy had put in a regiment of foot into the town , not above two hours ere our van came up , who were boated from the other side of the water into the town , which made them very high and peremptory : but our men having broken down the sluices and let out the water out of their graft , their courage failed , and the Lord's day morning last the town was surrendered to us upon Brunteland articles : my Lord went in and viewed it : and we find the place every way answering our thoughts of it : and that night the whole army Marched back towards Brunteland , eleven miles : on Monday last we came to Brunteland , and that night shipped over our whole foot to Leith , and some of our horse : and the residue were transporting with all expedition . Lieutenant general Munk is left in Scotland , commander in chief , and Marched from us directly to Sterling the same day we came to Brunteland : and we are confident he was the next day possessed of Sterling town , and doubt not of the hearing a speedy account of the castle . We have left with him of foot and horse a field-force of 7 or 8000.  Col. Overton is made governor of st johnstouns : he hath with him colonel Daniel's regiment of foot , col.  Aldridges' regiment of horse , and 500 dragoons . Tuesdaie in the afternoon , major general Lambert , with about 3000 horse and dragoons , Marched towards the enemy , who will with all expedition , get into the rear of them : and my Lord hath now sent me with orders to maj.  Gen. Harrison to get into the van of them , to stop them what he can , and do what further he thinks fit in the counties as he marche's : i am to keep with him till the army come up . Both maj.  General's will March night and day till they get to them : yesterday morning , my Lord general , with the foot , and residue of the horse , Marched from Leith : he will eas himself so of his train as May expedite his Marches : he bring's out of Scotland 8 regiments of horse , besides dragoons ; and 8 or 9 ( If col.  West come with him ) regiments of foot . Truly , the Lord hath done wonderfully for his poor servants , with you , and here , beyond what we could have thought ; and now the whole hopes of the enemy is cooped up in this party that Marched by Carlisle yesterday . Thursday the enemy removed from Sterling : Friday we had intelligence thereof , but however we resolved to go on with our work : after that their Marches were in such traverses , that we knew not well what to conjecture : however we resolved after them , assoon as the business of st johnstouns was over . After their March , they first resolved Middleton should return to keep the North : then that Robert Montgomery ( Who was on the other side forth ) should go : and this a little put us to thoughts what they will do : but , in conclusion , Robert Mountgomery and all were ordered to follow them . They are not above 11000 men at most ; they have very little provision with them ; through all the country in Scotland we find their runaways : in a word , nothing was left them but a desperate cure , or a desperate ruin , with my heart is filled in the confident expectation of . I suppose rational men will put a wide difference between their condition now , & it 2 or 3 months ago , when their army was in its strength , Fife , and all the side of that side the water theirs . They have not left in Scotland the face of any authority or force , or town garrisoned . The Lord keep his servants humble , but believing himself , and let every one bestir himself , and play the man ( Or rather the Christian ) in this hour . I must beg pardon for not writing to any others , being weary , and the messenger taking horse . My humble and hearty remembrance to mr Roe . 

I am , Sir ! Your honor 's most cordial and humble servant , g. Downing . Newcastle , aug. 7. 1651.  

Postscript . 

The generality of the Scots were against the present attempt for England ; but the King told them , he would March with such as would follow him : he looks very despondingly , but must adventure all . 

A letter from the council of state to the Lord major of London . 

My Lord ! 

This letter coming to the council by a messenger express , showing the progress that our forces have made in Scotland ; so , as the Scottish army , which would never be brought to fight in their own country , have now left the same for lost ; and are Marched into England . By it you will also see in what posture our forces are in order to them ; you will find st Johnstone's surrendered to us , and Sterling town before this time in our possession : by all which we hope that whole work is near a good and happy end ; which we thought good to give your lordship notice of ; and desire you it May be published in the congregation where your lordship is , that the persons Might be thereby stirred up to give God thanks for the great progress made in Scotland , and for the hopeful condition our affairs are in for a speedy and good issue . 

White-hall August the 10. 1651.  Signed &c.  







