ΕΥΧΑΡΙΣΤΙΑ : OR A Grateful Acknowledgement UNTO HEAVEN For the Happy Discovery of the Late Horrid Plot : WITH Some brief and yet plain remarks upon that Hellish CONSPIRACY . 

DELIVERED In a discourse unto a Country Auditory upon September IX . 1683.  BEING A Day of Public and Solemn Thanksgiving Appointed by Authority for the said wonderful and Blessed DELIVERANC . 

By a Country Parson . 

LONDON , Printed for Walter Kittilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard . 1684.  

ERRATA , disturbing the sense . 

Page 10.  Line 24. deal and , in the same line after for , add and , p. 14. l. 22. for Observations , r. Obsecrations . p. 16. l. 25. for heat , r. he at . p. 17. l. 10. for It is not halting between God and Baal , this it is the Bowing the Knee unto both , read it thus pointed ; It is not halting between God and Baal , this ; it is the Bowing the Knee unto both ; p. 18. l. 15.  After If , add I p. 26. l. 1. after the word secure , add us ; l. 31. for terming , r. teeming . p. 27. l. 12. after the word Ninth add of ; l. 15. after the word Ninth add of . 

Psalm . LXXIII . ver . I  

Truly God is good unto Israel , even unto such as are of a clean Heart . 

Notwithstanding unto pious Men do freequently occur great Impediments in their way unto future Happiness , yet nothing ( usually ) is more hazardous than an uninterrupted Affluene of outward things , for as when it falls upon themselves it is ready to slacken the Reinss of duty , so when it lights upon those whose Opinions and Practices declare them Profane and Debauched , whose wickednesses meet with a success suitable unto their desires , than it strikes deep , and commonly raises those storms in Religion which are not easily calmed , and shakes that very foundation which the Religious Education of many years had laid ; For our own and others Experience informs us , that nothing offers more doubts and scruples in Religion , then successful Villainies , nor gives a deeper wound unto a Pious Course of Life , then Prosperous Impieties to see those lie upon beds of Ivory , and stretch themselves upon their Couches , whose Oppressions have wrung so many tears from others , to find an Impious Wretch without regret Possessing his Neighbour's Vineyard : Lastly , to see those eat the Lambs out of the Flock , and the Calus out of the midst of the Stall , which they had taken from those that are ready to starv , and after all this to see such Violenc dy in Peace , and quietly laid in its Tomb. To see ( I say ) all this and much more , may prove an high Temptation to the Best , and Encouragement for the Profane to deny a God , and doth ( usually ) destroy more than the greatest care can preserv . This the good Psalmist gives us in this Psalm a full account of from his own Example , who although he had the Occurrences of such Troubles as cost him many a tear ( so many as sometimes to water his Couch therewith ) yet they could never change the soundness of his Judgement concerning God , and his Providenc , whereas he ascertains us Here , that a looking back upon that lofty and fortunate State , that wicked Men undisturbedly enjoy , gave him some Astonishment ; I say , such a reflection made him almost lose his standing , and his footsteps had well nigh slipped . If this Temptation pressed the Psalmist so hard , as to say , Verily I have cleansed my Heart in vain , and washed my Hands in Innocency , we have no reason to find fault with Him , for putting up Tabalam post naufragium , and out of a true sense of the greatness of the Delivery , particularly to declare the hazard and sharpness of the Adventure . With how much exactness does he describe those Shelus , and Rocks against which he was like to have split his Vessel . And how thankfully does he point out those Quicksands , wherein he had almost Shipwrecked both his Faith and Conscience . And Lastly , with how great a Triumph does he Poeana concinnere , sing a Victorious 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , to that fortunate Star , that was his Auspicious Guide , and Conductor for directing , and bringing him safe to his desired Haven , and Harbour ! How willingly does he own his brutish Folly , and Ignoranc , how thankfully does he kiss that hand that led him out of that Labyrinth , and being full of thanks empties himself into an Introduction to his Discourse , which a sense of God's goodness Pathetically forced him unto , and from those useful Occurrences to conclude a true and comfortable Proposition ; Truly God is good unto Israel , even unto such as are of a Clean Heart . The words are a kind of abrupt Proposition , whereby the Prophet by a Paralepsis ( which is very usual in Holy Scripture ) suppressing the conflicts of the Flesh and Spirit , and suddenly recovering himself from those difficulties he lay under , propounds this conclusion , and affirms , that how sorely soever the Calamities of this World press God's People , yet his Goodness is always present with them for their Comfort , Help and Assistanc . So then the general meaning and import of these words seems to be this ; that it is a certain and infallible Truth , that God is not only Just and Faithful , but Gracious and Kind unto every true , sincere-hearted , upright Man ; For truly God is good unto Israel , even unto such as are of a Clean Heart . Which words contain in them these three Parts . ( 1.  A general Proposition ; Truly God is good : Where we have Elohim , the Almighty God mentioned with his Activ , Relativ Goodness . ( 2. ) An Object , and a Qualification ; in respect of God an Object ▪ in respect of as a Qualification . ( 1. ) then in respect of God an Object ; and so it is indefinitely expressed by the word Israel , God is good unto Israel . ( 2. ) A Qualification in respect of Us , and under that an Assignation of conditions under which the general Proposition holds good all are not Israel , that are of Israel ; so all are not Christians , that are called Christians , but it is such , and such only as are of a Clean Heart : And in this we have ( 1. ) A Quality appropriate to the Church , and unto every particular member thereof , Cleanness ; Purity , or Holiness . ( 2. ) With its Subject , the Heart ; and there we shall inquire . ( 1. ) Why that alone , and nothing else is expressed . ( 2. ) Whether that alone be enough , and sufficient . ( 3. ) We shall consider them both together in both senses of the Word as a sincere , and as an undefiled Heart . In each of which I shall , as I proceed , view all the several guilts opposed to either notion of cleanness , and see how far each one of them , or all put together remove us from any interest in the Lord's goodness , which is the natural application of each Part. ( 3 ) Here is a pathetical Asseveration , Truly ; which signifies the truth and certainty of the thing spoken of , recommending the belief of it to others . These are the several Parts of the Text ; of these in their Order : I have formerly Preached upon the Text in this place , and then spoken to the first general Head , which I will not now make any Reflections upon , lest I should be hindered in what I design to deliver at this time : Come we therefore unto the next general Part of my Text.  

Secondly , An Object and a Qualification ; in respect of God an Object , in respect of Us a Qualification . 

First then in respect of God an Object , and so it is indefinitely expressed by the Word Israel , God is good to Israel ; So then the Object of God's Relativ Goodness is Israel ; ( 1. ) then the word Israel signifies a Conqueror , or one that as a Prince prevails with God , and thus the Patriarch Jacob is called , and this Name was given him by God , as a Title of Honour and Dignity , Gen. XXXII . 28.  And he said thy Name shall be called no more Jacob but Israel , for as a Prince hast thou power with God , and with Man , and hast prevailed . ( 2. ) The word Israel is taken for all the Posterity of the Patriarch Jacob , to which signification those Phrases of the Holy Scripture in the New Testament which occur concerning Israel are to be referred , for although they seem to refer to the Jews rather than to the Israelites of the Ten Tribes , yet notwithstanding in Holy Scripture they are not improperly referred to both ; because upon their Transportation from Babylon , many Israelites of the Ten Tribes were commixed with the Jews , and the Twelve Tribes of Israel , to whom our blessed Saviour was sent , are understood in this sense by the Evangelists and Apostles . And likewise the whole People of God is made up of the Israel , or Posterity of the Patriarch Jacob , and the Nation that believed in the Messiah then exhibited . ( 3. ) The word is accepted for the adoption or assumption of any Nation taken in to be God's peculiar People , or for such as have entered into a Stipulation , or Covenant with God , and chosen him to be their God , and He accepted them for his People ; and in this sense the true Israel have several Titles in Holy Scripture , for they are called the desire of God's Soul , the House of God , the Elect of God , ( or the chosen Nation ) the People of God's Inheritanc , the People of God ( the People of the God of Abraham ) 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the Holy and the peculiar People of God , the People whom God hath purchased with his own Blood , an Holy Nation , a Nation whose God is the Lord , the portion and the possession of God , the First-fruits of the increase of God , the Firstborn of God , a Royal Priesthood , the Sceptre of God's Heritage , the Servants of God , the Tribe of the Inheritanc of the God of Jacob , the Vine-yard of God , and the Anointed of the Lord ; and now by all these Titles of Honour , Comfort and Advantage , God it signified to us to be good to his Israel , to his People : For truly God is good unto Israel . What Israel was when the Psalmist indicted this Psalm needs not much enquiry ; after the account I have now given you , this may be at present enough for our business ▪ ( 1. ) Israel represents a Nation , it being at that time a flourishing and potent one , when this Psalm was penned . ( 2. ) Israel was a visible Church under the Law , shadowing forth a visible Church under the Gospel . ( 3. ) Israel signifies a chosen peculiar People , and so it represents the invisible Church of God ; in all these senses then , we may see that in the general , by Israel is to be understood the Church of Christ ; and now I shall declare God's goodness unto Israel in each of these Notions , and make appear the truth of this Assertion in our Text , that Truly God is good unto Israel . 

First then Israel represents a Nation , it being at that time a potent and flourishing one , when this Psalm was penned , and in this sense of Israel as a Nation , do each Society , even the remotest Nations of the World , liberally partake ; I mean of this Relativ Goodness of God ; if Inanimate Creatures be full of it , and if those that understand no further than sense , be visited with peculiar refreshments , Man ( as Man ) is not forgotten ; I spoke upon this Subject the last Lord's day , and made some remarks upon the Discovery of the late Horrid Plot , which we do now upon this day thankfully commemorate . I will not so far distrust your memories , as to make a large repetition of what I then said , but give me leave to mention the heads of my discourse , that I may the more methodically introduce myself to what remains behind ; that this truth than may the more plainly appear , I desired your attention to these four subsequent Propositions . ( 1. ) That which appertains to the necessary subsistence of every : Nation is dealt forth unto them by God ; General Acts of Providenc none are excluded from , for the evil as well as the good are warmed by the kindly rays of the greater Luminary , and the influences of Heaven's showers descend upon the unjust as well as the just . That which is necessary needs not much toil , being dealt forth by God so liberally , as Man scarce needs do any thing more than receiv : Deus & Natura non deficiunt in necessariis ; Every Nation may subsist by itself without the greedy Invasion of another's Right . ( 2. ) God deals forth unto all People , that which may conduce unto their Wellbeing , by which we may understand three things . ( 1. ) Wellbeing may be taken for outward Affluenc , and external Prosperity , Plenty , and Peace . ( 2. ) As Wellbeing may be taken for outward Prosperity , Plenty , and Peace ; so likewise for Internal Security , Satisfaction , and Quiet , I mean for Peace of Conscience ; and then there is the Law of Nature , and Reason , which Men may live by , and by ordering their Conversations according thereunto they may enjoy the Happiness , and Advantage of an excusing Conscience , which is the only thing that converts our outward Comforts into Blessings to us . ( 3. ) Wellbeing may be accepted in the most proper sense for God's Goodness , and we may find that excludes not all means from any People of coming unto his Knowledge ; and this sense comes nearest to that of our Text , and verifies , and makes good the Psalmist's Assertion : Truly God is good unto Israel . ( 3. ) Another Conclusion that proves God's Relativ Goodness is communicated to all People , is , the great and extraordinary Acts of Providenc , wherewith Men ( as such ) have been visited . ( 4. ) The last Conclusion is an unquestionable Proof of the Divine Goodness . And that is this , That God never dispeoples , and desolates any Land or Nation , but for their Iniquity , their Notorious Unthankfulness , and their Contemptuous Abuse of his Mercies . From all which Conclusions it may be truly Inferred , That God's Activ , Relativ Goodness liberally flows down upon all People , all the Nations of the Earth ( in some measure ) plentifully partaking of this his Divine , Communicativ Goodness . For truly God is good unto Israel . 

Secondly , As Israel was a Nation , and a flourishing , and potent One , and as such eminently tasted of God's Goodness , so likewise , it was a visible Church under the Law shadowing forth a visible Church under the Gospel . From whence this Proposition may be naturally inferred , and concluded ; That every visible Church , and Company of Christians do very eminently taste of the Favour and Goodness of God. This may be apparent , and evident enough , if we consider , ( 1. ) That those gracious Acts of God's Lovingkindness formerly recited , which all , and every People did communicate in as to their Being , and well-being , do all appertain unto Israel as the visible Church . ( 2. ) Moreover superadd to this , the Visible Church tastes of God's eminent Lovingkindness in a Blessed Covenant of Peace , that which God entered into with obedient Abraham , and his Elect Posterity , is every where recorded as a signal expression of God's kindness . Moses challenges any People to lay a claim to the like signs and tokens of God's Favour , and Goodness , Deut. IU. 7 , 8.  For what Nation is there so great , who hath God so nigh unto them , as the Lord our God is in all things , that we call upon him and for ; what Nation is there so great that hath Statutes , and Judgements , so Righteous , as all this Law , which I set before you this day ? And by this Privilege they gained the Character of a great Nation , a Wise , and understanding People : The Royal Prophet David , and the rest of the Inspired Writers ▪ recite it as the Grand Sign , and Characteristic token of God's Love to his People : Thus Christ's visible Church are within the enclosure of this Holy Sept , and all of that Company this Covenant of Peace hath a Regard unto . Hence St. Paul makes a great Differenc between the Ephesians in the darker condition of Heathenism , and the State within the Church , as being ( before that merciful Reception ) Gentiles in the Flesh , who are called Uncircumcision by that which is called Circumcision in the Flesh made with hands , who were without Christ , being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel , and strangers from the Covenant of Promise , having no hope , and without God in the World. Finally , who were sometimes afar off , but now in Christ Jesus are made nigh by the Blood of Christ . But now God's Lovingkindness will be evident to us in a great , and excellent Lustre , as a merciful Shine upon his Church , and People , if we consider these four Particulars . ( 1. ) The Mandates which God honours his visible Church withal in the Covenant , do plentifully signify to us his Lovingkindness . Thomas there be too many , who take a View of God's Precepts with a Sullen , Partial , and Prejudiced look , as Bridles , and Cheques put upon their Appetite , who receiv them ▪ upon their Necks as a hard Yoke , and upon their Backs as an heavy Burden , yet these are too dull , and Melancholy Reflections ; For our blessed Lord ascertains us the quite contrary , telling us , that his Yoke is easy , and his Burden light , and this Truth is owned , and confirmed by his Beloved Disciple , that lay in his Master's Bosom , and therefore we may upon good ground suppose best acquainted with his Mind , St. John I mean , who affirms , That none of his Commandments are grievous , though it be most true , that whatever Precept proceeds from God carries with it an Obligation upon the Creature , and he ( to whomsoever it comes ) is in duty bound to Obedienc , yet we may remember , that sometimes God's Precepts , and the Revelation of his Mind to us carries with them , that Honour , and Privilege which brings peculiar Advantage , and encouragement . I will not dispute whether the Sovereign Creator may not pro Imperio , in the right of his Sovereignty bind his Creature to a Duty , whence no other Advantage shall arise , but only the very Duty of Obedienc , as he might , and did engage Abraham to offer up his Son , his only Son , his Beloved Son Isaac , in whom all the Nations of the Earth were to be Blessed , and to expect no other Recompence , to look for no other Compensation , but the Reward of doing the Duty itself , and that was his Obedienc ; yet I conceiv God's settled Institutions , and established Appointments do not only engage to Service , but propound Advantage ; and thereby allure to Obedienc . Deut. X. 12. 13.  And now OH Israel what doth the Lord thy God require of thee , but to fear the Lord thy God ; to walk in all his ways , and to love him , and to serve the Lord thy God , with all thy Heart , and with all thy Soul , to keep the Commandments of the Lord , and his Statutes , which I command thee this day for thy Good : Thus in our Civil Relations , though our Duty engages us to Obedienc to our Prince from a Principle of Conscience , and out of respect to God's Law , yet we frequently look upon it as a great Honour , and high Privilege to be employed in his immediate Service . This is the apparent Differenc between the Peremptory Dictates of the Law of Nature given to all ; and those which are dealt forth unto the Church : Those come with an Absolute Intimation of a necessary Engagement from a Supreme and Severe Legislator ; These with more Intimations of unquestionable Honour and Privilege to be so enjoined . Now hereupon ( 1 ) We may take notice of the manner of Delivery ; the Law of Nature , or the Moral Commands were pronounced to Israel with Thunders , and Lightning , attended with an astonishing Darkness , and the sound of a Trumpet , striking all those that approached the Mount with a Terror , and a fearful Amazement , penned in an austere , and commanding Style , thou shalt , and thou shalt not , whereas God speaks unto his People under the Evangelical Dispensation in a more facile , and familiar way , which it may be worth our while a little to animadvert upon . ( 1. ) In a serious Exhortation , or a passionate Entreaty , we beseech , we pray as in , 2 ▪ Cor. v. 20. 21.  Now than we are Ambassadors for Christ , as though God did beseech you by us , we pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God , for he hath made him to be sin for us , who knew no sin , that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him . Or else ( 2. ) In an heavenly Advice , and an affectionate Counsel in the Instanc of the Church of Laodicea , rev. III 17. 18.  Because thou sayest I am rich , and increased with goods , and hast need of nothing ; and knowest not that thou art wretched , and miserable , and poor , and blind , and naked : I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the Fire , that thou mayst be rich , and white raiment , that thou mayst be clothed , and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear , and anoint thine eyes with the true Collyrium , the Spiritual eyesalve , that thou mayst see . ( 3.  Or lastly . ) In a kind , and loving Invitation in the words of the Holy Jesus , St. Matth. XI . 28 , 29 , 30.  Come unto me all you that labour , and are heavy laden , and I will give you Rest ; Take my yoke upon you , and learn of me , for I am meek , and lowly in Heart , and you shall find Rest unto your Souls , for my Yoke is easy , and my Burden is light . This is the pleasing Dialect in which Christ's Precepts are pronounced the New Covenant , this Law of the Gospel delights not itself in those sharper sounds , but though it may enjoin , yet it stoops to a kinder Delivery . When a King expresses that in a Desire , which he may do in a Command ; it is meritoriously accounted as a great Favour , and if the King of Kings stoops so low , as to declare his Mind in the same precarious way , it may deservedly challenge from us the greatest Reverenc , and oblige us to embrace Obedienc both as an Advancement , and as a Privilege . ( 2. ) If we consider the substanc of these Precepts , we may find that they carry Glory enough in their Obedienc . Loyalty frequently accounts , that some Services ( though perchance hazardous Erterprises ) do merit thanks for being employed in them ; yet some Precepts there are which God will disdain some Mens performanc of ; There is a wicked Generation to whom God speaks in the Language of the Psalmist : Psal . L. 16 , 17.  What hast thou to do to declare my Statutes , or that thou shouldst take my Covenant in thy Mouth ; seeing thou hatest Instruction , and castest my Words behind thee ? As the dealing forth of Laws to Israel is owned , and acknowledged as a great , and excellent Privilege ; so the gracious Revelation of Christ's mysterious Gospel in a greater Lustre outshines all before it ; conveying a Beauty to the very feet of those that are Bearers of such happy News . How beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet of them that bring good tidings , that preach the Gospel of Peace , that bring glad tidings of good things , that publish Salvation , that say unto Zion thy God reigneth . Those Cordial Observations , those Loving Invitations , and those Commands that respect nothing more than our Benefit , are all but so many proofs of God's Goodness , and our Honour , nay , even our severest Afflictions in so Righteous a Cause , but a glorious Piece of Privilege , and Triumph . St. Paul accounts it a Blessed Gift from God , and such as with Holy Job we ought to thank God for . Phil. I 29.  For to you it is given in the behalf of Christ , not only to beleiv on him , but also to suffer for his sake . Thomas to beleiv , and suffer , are Precepts which carry an Obligation , yet to you it is given , signifies an high peculiar Prerogativ in being called thereunto ; the consideration of this made St. Peter , and St. John with the rest of the Apostles glory in their stripes , and triumph in being counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name . ( 2. ) Thus as the Precepts of God's Covenant , so the great , and excellent Promises of it do most eminently declare God's Goodness to his Israel , his visible Church . Thus Israel in a Relianc of God's Promise to be their God need not fear any Enemy , and Christ's Church is heartened on by exceeding great , and precious Promises , that by those they may become partakers 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , of the Divine Nature . A total forgiveness of all sin , an happy Reconciliation to an offended Justice , Eternal Life , and Salvation , do every where offer themselves in a Gracious and Benign Tender unto God's Church and People . ( 3. ) God's Lovingkindness to his Israel , his visible Church , is further apparent , in that they have a conditional Right to the valuable Rarities , and Excellencies of the Gospel , all being theirs , if they perform the Condition , all the Promises of Christ are in him , Yea , and Amen to them , ratified , and verified , Christ being theirs , who is all in all for the good of his People . Forgiveness of sins is theirs , if they sincerely , and heartily Beleiv , and so likewise is Salvation too , if they truly , and really Repent . ( 4 and Lastly . ) God's Goodness is eminent to his Israel , his visible Church , in his gracious Provision of Means sufficient for the Performanc of the Condition of the Covenant on their Parts , which gives them a Right and Title to the Promises . The Spiritual Armour is impenetrable , and the Weapons of this noble Warfare not to be blunted by Opposition . The Devil may speedily be uncased , and this strong Man dispossessed of his Tenure , by right handling these Powerful Instruments . Here is a glorious Dispensation of Light to direct , and of Grace to enable ; and the Covenant is not only a bare Manifestation of God's Laws , but also a more Inward Engravement upon the Heart . For this is the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel , after those days , saith the Lord , I will put my Laws in their Mind , or inward parts , and write them in their Hearts , and I will be to them a God , and they shall be to me a People . From all which it may be truly deduced ; That the Honour of God's commands , the Inestimable Value of the Promises , the Right granted , and the Grace afforded to his visible Church , do most manifestly declare God's High , Activ , and Relativ Goodness to his People . For truly God is good unto Israel . 

I will now consider the first part of the Text , a General Proposition , God is good , and also the first particular of the second part thereof , both together , ( that is ) both God's Goodness , and the Object of this Goodness , to whom it extends ; and this may serve as the Use , Improvement , and Application of the praeceding Discourse ; Truly , God is good unto Israel , to his Church ; in which I will be very brief , and for the most part of this I shall be obliged to a Reverend , Worthy , and Great Divine of our own Church , and Nation : And certainly this is evident to us by its own light to whom God hath proved his Goodness to Astonishment , by exercising it to a Miracle , while heat once wrought Prodigies of kindness , and Conviction too . For which we have only this Proof to add , that God hath been so plentiful in the expressions of his Bounty , that we are weary of the mention of them ; and have so surfeited on Divine Goodness , that we nauseate the Acknowledgement . But now if Atheism grow against Goodness , and Miracle too , and Men do most deny God , when he gives greatest Evidences of his Being , and Providenc ; I know not by what argument encouraged , unless that in the Poet , — Factum quod se dum negat , hoc videt Beatum . 


Because they see , they fare best , that deny him most , teaching his Goodness to confute his Being ; If they look upon the wondrous Restitution of God's Service , as but a shifting the Scene of Worship , only another , and more gaudy Draught and Landscape of Religion shot upon the Stage , and do accordingly esteem it as an entertainment for their senses only . If they assist in them not out of Principle , but mere Indifferenc unto all ; It is not halting between God and Baal , this it is the Bowing the Knee unto both , which they can do unto each alike , when either is uppermost , and truly count them Deities alike I fear . Nay when the only Ordinance , the Sermon is but as a Prize in the Temple : The Preacher but — Rhetor dicturus ad Aram , 


that comes to do his exercise before the Altar in which Men are concerned no further usually , then to hear , and judge , not to be sentenced by it , or him . If God doth endure all this , and yet do continue still his Church , his Worship , and his other Mercies . then we may well conclude and infer , Truly God is good unto Israel ; But I will not be this Fastidious Remembrancer . These Arguments may prove his Goodness , but certainly these Qualifications will not continue this his Divine , Communicativ Goodness unto us . The Limitation must suggest and declare them unto us , which plainly , and clearly acquaints us , who God is thus good unto , even unto such as are of a Clean Heart . Truly God is good unto Israel , even unto such as are of a Clean Heart . 

It will not be improper to my Text , as I have now handled it , nor unseasonable upon this Day , that his Sacred Majesty's Declaration hath been read unto you , to say some little matter of the great Deliveranc of our Gracious Prince , and in Him of this Nation too ( we being the Israel of God in this sense , as it representeth a Nation ▪ and Blessed be the Lord , for some years a potent , and flourishing One ; and may we long continue so to be unto the Terror of our Enemies abroad , and of all undermining Traitors at home , who under the Vizard of Religion contriv Rebellion . ) And this Deliveranc was from an horrid , and direful Mischief , plotted against our King by Absurd , and Nefarious persons , whom no Obligations of Divine Goodness , or Human Kindness , could keep from laying such an abominable Design against Him , His Dearest , and only Brother , and all His Loyal Subjects that were in the three Kingdoms . I hope all true Christians of this Land have before this time offered to Heaven their personal , and hearty Thanksgiving in their secret Retirements for Prayer , and Praise , and it is fit we should offer some more open Testimony and Acknowledgement . I dare not doubt , but that your Spirits are overjoyed with the Feeling , and Reflection of so great a Deliveranc . Give therefore your Hearts , and Passions some ease by an Eruption of this joyful Exclamation , and now sensible Truth , That Truly God is good unto our Israel ; It is evident unto those that consider the great Transactions of our Kingdom for about Twenty year's last passed , That England never flourished in greater Splendour , and Plenty , then under the Reign of this present Prince ; and possibly had a Person of other Parts , and Principles ruled in our Age , our Condition had been much worse than now ( Praised be God ) it is . Never could any Nation upon the highest Probability promise themselves greater Felicity , then under His Government , if the People of this Land be not wanting to themselves . Never was there a greater Assuranc of the Truth of that place of Holy Writ , that tells us , The The Powers that be are ordained , or ordered , of God , then under our present Government . If we consider His Gracious Majesties many Deliverances from the Scaffold of his Pious Father , of ever Blessed Memory , unto his own Coronation , and from thence unto this Day ; Our present Prince may Experimentally repeat a great part of St. Paul's sufferings , 2 Cor. XI . 26.  In journeying often , in Perils of Waters , in Perils of Robbers , in Perils by mine own Countrymen , in Perils in the City ; and I may add in Perils in the Country too , ( if this late Cursed Plot had taken effect ) in Perils in the Sea , and in Perils among false brethren . So that our Prince may say in St. Paul ' s words , with a very little Variation , vers . 30.  & 31. of that XI . Chapter of the second Epistle unto the Corinthians , If must needs Glory , I will Glory of the things which concern my Deliverances , the God , and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ knoweth , that I lie not ; I have a plentiful Subject to treat upon , but because there is a Particular Day appointed for the Commemoration of this Mercy , I will not now say much more , but reserve myself till then for further Enlargement . I must not therefore go much further out of a du regard to the limits , and proportions of time allowed me ; and if I should now enlarge concerning our Prince's Sufferings , and Deliverances ; possibly some will tell me , that they know the considerable Passages of his Life as well as myself ( they having been transacted within the compass of most of your Memories : ) Indeed I may truly say , That our Prince hath been the Darling of Heaven , and possibly the greatest Instanc of its Protection since the Reign of that King , who was a Man after God's own Heart . And I am inclined to believ that when Posterity shall record the Transactions of his Reign , they will either suppose them the Ingenious fancies of a Romanc , or believ him to have been one whom the Providence of Heaven hath culled out of the vast Race of Reasonable Being's , to be an Example of what Wonders the Almighty Potentate is able to discover for those that depend upon him , and to signify how solicitous the Great Governor of the Univers is for the safety , and security of those Kings to whom his Gospel , and true Worship are as valuable as their Sceptres . These kindnesses of Heaven have been of late manifested in the Discovery of a Rebellion contrived by such persons , whom no Engagements , no Civilities , no Acts of Clemency , no Indulgencies , no Vows , no Praetexts of Reformation could disengage from the most mischievous Attempts upon His Person , upon His Subjects , and upon every thing that can be believed estimable by the sincere Worshippers of the Peaceable , and most Holy Jesus ; And therefore the Highest Thankfulness ought to be expressed both upon the Account of our regard unto him , and to ourselves likewise ( if that Interest be Dearer to us : ) All our highest concernments are centred in Him , and next unto the kindness of Heaven are indebted to Him for their Settlement , and Duration ; And His , and our Adversaries so believed , because they would mischief us by His Ruin . OH what ground therefore have we to be as Grateful unto Heaven for this Mercy , as if in our own persons we had been to be Executed , and to have been the Marks at which their Blunderbusses , & Pistols were to have been aimed , and leveled . I will now conclude this Discourse , and this Time with One Intercession unto Heaven , in which I hope you will all join with me : [ That all Rebellious Spirits , like Sheba , that shall enkindle ( I hope I may say ) the dead Ashes of Rebellion , may have his End , and forfeit their Lives that will Adventure so much as to entertain Rebellious thoughts against the Anointed of the Lord ] 



Now before I conclude , it will not be Improper to my Text , as I have now handled it , nor unseasonable ( because our Duty . ) upon this Public , and Solemn Day of Thanksgiving , to say somewhat of the Great Deliverance of our Gracious Sovereign , and in Him of this Kingdom too ( We being the Israel of God , not only as that Word representeth a Nation , but also as it signifieth a Visible Church under the Gospel , being as pure , and defaecate a Church as to its Doctrine , and Discipline , as any in the known World , and pray we God that it may long to succeeding Generations continue so to be , and that He would preserv Her , so to remain against those malicious Enemies , that have of late wickedly designed to deface Her Beauty , and destroy Her Purity . All Rebels use Religion as a Plea for Rebellion , and none pretend more to keep up the Face , and Notion of Israel as a Visible Church , than they . Religion is the Highest , and Dearest Concernment in this World , but it seems a destructiv Method for Men to secure their Salvation by such a Way , as God hath declared will damn their Souls , and such is the Way of Resistanc , Rom. XIII . 2.  Whosoever therefore resisteth the Power , resisteth the Ordinanc of God , and they that resist shall receiv unto Themselves Damnation . no persons take up Arms in Defence of Religion , that have any sense of it upon their Spirits . Religion is a meek , humble , modest Principle , and submissiv unto Government . It instructs , and prepares Men to die , rather than to resist Lawful Authority ; And were there any unmixed Zeal for Religion in this Plea , can we believ the most Debauched wicked persons , should be so much concerned for Religion ; but it 's clear , and evident , it is not in truth Religion such persons are so much concerned for , but a Toleration of all Religions . That is , That they may profess any , or indeed like some Indifferents in France , or some Hobbists in England rather , have no sense of Religion at all , which answers the Purpose of the Atheist that denyeth a God , as much as of our Dissenters , & Separatists , which is not at all for the Credit , Glory , and Reputation of that Religion , which hath any thing of Sincerity or Truth in it ( even of the Truth as it is in Jesus . ) So that whatsoever the Pleas , and Excuses of such Men are , it is a proud , imperious , unpeaceable , and implacable Temper , which disorders public Settlements , and throws from the heads the Crowns , and casts out of the hands the Sceptres of Monarches , and Governors . After this Introduction give me leave to offer some few Inferences for Practice , which may have a respect unto that Dangerous , and Damnable Plot , whose Discovery we do , and are upon this Day Solemnly , and thankfully to Commemorate , and Remember . ( 1. ) Consider how hazardous , and destructiv the Diversities , and Differences of Opinions in Religion are unto the Truth of that Doctrine , which I have now handled from this of Israel , and this Nation being a Visible Church , and how disadvantageous , prejudicial , and Perilous such Opinions , and Practices , are unto the Public Tranquillity , Safety , and Interest of this Kingdom . Christianity is the strongest Defence , and securest Fulciment of Monarchy both in its Mandates , and Exercise . It enjoins submission unto every Ordinanc of Man for the Lord's sake , 1 St. Pet. II 13.  It instructeth us to pay the Obligations we owe to all persons in their several Capacities . Rom. XIII . 7.  Tender therefore unto all their Deuce , Tribute to whom Tribute is due , Custom unto whom Custom , Fear to whom Fear , Honour unto whom Honor. It commands Obedienc to our Governors in all lawful , and honest Matters , and patiently to lay down our Lives rather than to Rebel ; and the Holy Institutor of our excellent Religion ; was the greatest Instanc of this Doctrine , and lived , as He commanded His Disciples , and Followers . Thomas He was Son & Heir to the King of Kings and could command more than twelv Legions of Angels unto his Assistanc , yet He looked not upon Himself , as the Emperor's Competitor , nor laid He any claim to the Roman Throne . His Empire was not from Below , but from Above , and therefore He would not engage His Disciples in his Defence , as He declares unto the Roman Precedent , when He was brought as a Criminal before his Tribunal . St. John XVIII . 36.  Jesus answered , My Kingdom is not of this World ; If my Kingdom were of this World , then would my Servants fight , that I should not be delivered unto the Jews , but now is my Kingdom not from hence . This is the proper , and genuine Temper of our Religion : Under the severest Torments of the Heathen Governors , no Disciple of the Meek and Holy Jesus ever died as a Traitor : Thomas their Force was considerable , yet after the Example of their Gracious Master , they suffered with the same Meekness , as did the Lamb of God , that came to take away the sins of the World. ( 2. ) Consider how hazardous , and destructiv a violent , excessiv , overheated Zeal is , though it be for that , which is Dearest unto us , whatsoever secret murmurings , or private repine might underhand influenc some powerful persons among us , who understand how to abuse the Passions of the Mobile ; yet this is very apparent , that the first seen Opportunities or Start of these late Miseries , and Plots ( which have hazarded the Safety of our Prince , and threatened the Destruction of the Monarchy ) were founded in a warm Passion against the Popish Interest , and for the Security of our Protestant Principles . The Popish Confederacy was first designed , those Purposes , and Contrivances excited , and awakened the Suspicions , and Jealousies of all inquisitiv , and sober persons . And the Respect , and Regard Men had to their Sovereign , and their established Profession , raised their Zeal into so great a Fervour , and Heat , as foreboded a General Destruction , and became more terrible , and dreadful than the mischiefs it designed to avert , and to secure us from . There is nothing so destructiv as Zeal , when it imperiously governs , and overtops the Consultations of Reason , and beats down the Arguments of Religion ; And upon this Account , it is too frequently known , that persons who enter upon designs with a warm Pretenc of Conscience unawares fall into Seditions against the Civil Government ; and are usually immediately obliged beyond the Innocency of their first Intentions . Nay , so far engaged many times , that they cannot retire , or come back with any Credit , or Reputation , but must either overcome , or be beaten . Let us then have an especial regard concerning our Zeal , that we do not err , and take that for Celestial Fire , which is a Flame , that comes from below , and is no higher than the Earth , or rather beneath that , from the Bottomless Pit. An Holy , and Devout Zeal will engage us to a greater affection for our Religion , then for our lives . Such a Zeal will keep us within the limits of our Duty , to our Neighbour , and Brother upon Earth , especially our Rulers , and Governors , whatever proposal of profit should tempt us to the contrary . To despise Dominions , and speak evil of Dignities in St. Judes' Phrase , vers . 8 of that Epistle , and to form designs , and conspiracies against the Government is a Zeal like the Wisdom , that descends , which is not from Above , but is earthly , sensual , and devilish , for where envy , and strife is , there is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , consusion , that is , Tumult , and Unquietness . St. Jam. III 15 , 16.  ( 3. ) Let antecedent Instances , and Examples , and the Observations , and Remembrances of former times instruct us to set a Guard upon our selus , and be cautious against any seeming risings , or tempting motions of a Rebellious Temper , though masked with the specious Vizard of Religion ; Sedition like some other Crimes hath some seemingly insensible , and almost unseen Springs , but when those Motions are cherished , they quickly grow into the Power , and ability of doing Mischief . It is as facile a thing to stop thyself in the Descent of a Precipice , when thou art in the middle thereof , as to stop thyself , when thou hast made an entranc , and hast for some season been hurried on in the ways of wickedness ; Omne in Proecipiti vitium stetit ; When men give way to any uncomely , and Unhandsome Action ; they may understand at what place they enter ; but can never tell when they shall come to an End ; When their feet go down to Death , they cannot stay themselves till their steps take hold of Hell ; when men undertake any wicked Enterprise , who can fathom the conclusion of their designs ; and who can pierce into the depth of their Machinations ? If we should make a search into the Records of former Ages , we shall find , that the differences that wrought the desolating Battles , that were fought between Greece and Asia , Caesar and Pompey , Augustus and Anthony , did in the beginning Spring from slight , and not valuable Causes . But our own Knowledge , and sad Remembranc hath largely , and therefore sufficiently convinced us , how hazardous , and perilous it is to yield unto that we should not , though never so Inconsiderable . What was the ground , and cause of our late direful Calamities ( the most astonishing , and amazing Mutation , and Confusion the World ever beheld , since the most dolorous Passion of the Holy , and ever Blessed Jesus ? ) Was it not entered upon by Multitudes who never designed it , and effected the Overthrow of that which both Parties pretendedly did endeavour to secure from ? Was it not brought about by yielding to , and cherishing the Phanatique Freaks of the UNTHINKING MANY ? Whereby is transmitted to Satesmen , and Governors of Kingdoms this Rule of Policy and Instruction ; [ That there is no Hazard or Peril so small , and inconsiderable in its beginning , but Connivanc may render it terrible , and slighting of it make unconquerable . ] But to return from whenc we may have a little seemingly digressed ; I Question not but several persons have lost their lives upon the account of seditious Plots , who in the beginning thereof did as highly detest , and abhor the suspicions thereof ; as the most Loyal persons alive . Thus I doubt not but it was in the late Horrid Conspiracy , the Discovery whereof with grateful Hearts we this Day make a Solemn Commemoration . Let these few Instances I have produced make us Cautious , and wary , not to lend an Ear , or harken unto any Jealousies concerning our Sovereign , and His Monarchy , nor to attend with Delight , while others make malicious Reports upon the one , or the other . Such as can with Pleasure harken to Reproaches cast upon the King or Monarchy , will suddenly believ Him not capable to Govern His Subjects . ( 4.  And lastly ) Let me desire you to offer your devout , and hearty Gratitude , and Thanks to the Majesty of Heaven , for his gracious Protection over our Sovereign , and implore his Mercy for a Continuanc of the same Defenc. And assuredly if ever we had ground to offer our Laud , and Thanks to the Lord of Heaven , for any Mercy , we ought for this , which is so complete and terming a Blessing , that it extends to all our Interests here upon Earth . If we esteem our excellent Way of Worship , our Estates , or the Safety of our persons , the Public Tranquillity , and the Continuanc of our Monarchy , we have cause to Praise the Lord for this Deliveranc ; Who is able without trembling to imagine the Confusions we had beheld at this time , had this Conspiracy been completed ? Who can tell by what Character they would have distinguished their Party from their Foes ? Certainly , the Clergy had suffered most , for it is strongly believed by some , that there was not one Minister that wore a Black Gown , but he should have been knocked on the Head , as one popishly affected ; Praised be that Good God who rideth upon the Clouds , and smiles at , and disappoints the Machinations , and Contrivances of such Rebellious Spirits . Certainly , the Ninth September will be recorded in the Annals of Time , and should be kept as an Anniversary Gratulation , as well as the Fifth of November , or the Twenty Ninth May , and may deservedly be accounted as great a Deliveranc as the Former ; and as valuable a Blessing as the Latter , it being a second Restauration of His most excellent Majesty to His own Happiness , and Glory , as well as unto the Comfort , and Joy of His Subjects , whom God long continu , and preserv amongst us , unto which I hope all good Christians , and Loyal Subjects will heartily , and loudly say , Amen . 

Consider what hath been said , and the Lord give you understanding in all things . 

Now then , unto God the Father , God the Son , and God the Holy Ghost , be given of every one of us , and by this whole Kingdom , all Honour , Glory , Power , Praise , Might , Majesty , and Dominion ( particularly for the valuable Mercy of this Day ) from hencforth , and for evermore , Amen , and Amen . 

The End.  

Sermons lately Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Sign of the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard . 

A Hithophel's Policy defeated ; a Sermon preached on the 9th . of Sept. 1683.  

A Sermon preached in the Cathedral Church of Norwich on the 9th . of Sept. 1683.  By William Smith , Preb.  

Samaritanism revived ; a Sermon preached at the Parish Church of Great Yarmouth , on the 9th . of Sept. by Luke Milbourne . 

A Sermon preached at Stow in the County of Bucks , on the 9th . of Sept. 1683.  

A Sermon preached at St. Laurence Jury , Sept. 9th . 1683. by Benjamin Calamy , D. D. Vicar of St. Laurence , and one of His Majesty's Chap in Ordinary . 

A Sermon preached at Epsom on the 9th . of Sept. 1683. by John Turner , late fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge . 

The unlawfulness of Stretching forth the Hand to Resist , or Murder Princes , with the Principal cases about Resistance considered in two Sermons ; The first preached upon the Thirtieth of January last : The other upon the Day of Thanksgiving for the Deliverance of the King and Kingdom from the late Treasonable Conspiracy , by William Payne , Rector of St. Marry White-chappel . 

The Religious Rebel ; a Sermon preached at Southmarston near Hyworth in Willshire on the 9th of Sept. 1683. by Charles Powell sometime Student of Christ Church in Oxford . 





Sect , I The Introduction . Amos. VI 4 , 6.  Ver. 2.  Ver. 13.  Sect. II The sense and division of the words . Sect. III The 2d . general , 1.  Particular ; in respect of God , an Object . Tit. II 14.  Sect. IU. The first particular handled in 3. senses . I It represents a Nation , and so God is good to every Nation ; a brief Repetition of what was said under this Head.  St. Matth. v. 45.  Rom. II 14 , 15.  Sect. v. 2.  Particular . Israel was a Visible Church under the Law shadowing forth a Visible Church under the Gospel . Deut. IU. 6.  Eph. II 11 , 12. 13.  St. Matth. XI . 30.  1 Joh. v. 3.  Rom. X. 15. compared with Isa . LII . 7.  Job I 21.  Act. v. 41.  2 Pet. I 4 ▪  Jer. XXXI . 33. compared with Heb. VIII ▪ 10.  Sect. VI The Use and Application of the praeceding Discourse in a consideration of the General Proposition , God is good , and the Object of that Goodness Israel , God is good unto Israel . Dr. Allestry in locum . Sect. VII . An account of what was said by the Author upon the same Text , in Referenc to the Plot upon Sept. 2d being the first day the King's Declaration was read . Rom. XIII , 1.  Sect. VIII . An Account of what was said upon Sept. 9th . being the Day of Public and Solemn Thanksgiving when the King's Declaration was again read . prov. V , 5.  