LOVE IN THE DARK , OR The Man of Business . 

A COMEDY : Acted at the THEATRE ROYAL By His MAJESTY'S Servants . 

WRITTEN By Sir FRANCIS FANE , Junior ; Knight of the BATH . 

Naturam expellas furcâ licet , usque recurret . Hor.  





In the SAVOY . Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman , and are to be sold at the Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange . 1675.  

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE , JOHN , Earl of ROCHESTER . Gentleman of His MAJESTY'S Bedchamber . 

My LORD , 

Offender's , long connived at , come at last to be tried for their Lives , and are forced to call upon their fatally indulgent friends to bring them off : for Volunteer Poets are at least as mad as those who , out of wantonness play themselves into the Galleys . 't is high time to cast myself at your Lordships , Feet , and humbly beg your Protection to this ride Piece , which grew the bolder by your encouragement . All Poems in their Dedications , aught to return to your Lordship , as all Rivers to the Sea , from whose depth and Saltness they are seasoned and supplied : none of them ever coming to your Lordship's hands , without receiving some of the rich Tinctures of your unerring Judgement ; and running with much more clearness , having passed so fine a strainer . If this receives any approbation in the World , I must ascribe it principally to your Lordship's partial recommendations , and impartial corrections . Your Lordship is the first person in the World , by whom I have been Highly and Heroically obliged : and if the first Impressions of Gratitude , may be as strong and captivating , as those of the first Love ; they must needs be much more lasting and immutable , in my Passion for your Lordship ; since the World affords no object so high and admirable , ever to work a change ; your Lordship being the most accomplished of all Mankind , that I ever knew , read , or heard of , by Human testimony . Eminent Being's are as hard to be believed , as they are to be understood : and no Man can speak Truth of your Lordship's Superlative Endowments , without suspicion of Flattery ; nor conceal them without conviction of Ignorance . That famous Temper of weight , so rarely found in Bodies , appears most Illustriously in your Lordship's Mind . Judgement , and Fancy , seldom concurring in other Men , in any small proportion , are possessed by your Lordship in the highest degree that ever was allowed the Soul of Man ; yet with so happy and harmonious a mixture , that neither of them predominate nor usurp ; but , like two peaceful Colleagues in Empire , agree within themselves , and govern the rest of the World ; acting in your Lordship's noble , and elevated Mind , like Fire and Air in the upper Region , whose Purity makes them easily convertible , and mutually assistant , whilst they are always quarrelling and preying upon each other , in gross inferior Bodies . What was favourably said of my Lord Bacon in his time , may much more justly be affirmed of your Lordship , in yours ; That if ever there were a beam of Knowledge , immediately derived from God , upon any Man , since the Creation , there is one upon yourself . Others , by wearisome steps , and regular gradations , climb up to knowledge ; your Lordship is flown up to the top of the Hill : you are an Enthusiast in Wit ; a Poet and Philosopher by Revelation ; and have already in your tender age , set out such new and glorious Lights in Poetry , yet those so Orthodox and Unquestionable , that all the Heroes of Antiquity , must submit , or Homer and Virgil be judged Nonconformists . For my part , I accounted it one of the great felicities of my life , to have lived in your age ; but much greater , to have had access to your Person , and to have been cheryshed and enlightened by the influences , and irradiations of so great a Luminary . For , I must confess , I never return from your Lordship's most Charming and Instructive Conversation , but I am inspired with a new Genius , and improved in all those Sciences . I ever coveted the knowledge of : I find myself , not only a better Poet , a better Philosopher ; but , much more than these , a better Christian : your Lordship's-miraculous Wit ; and Intellectual powers being the greatest Argument that ever I could meet with , for the immateriality of the Soul ; they being the highest exaltation of human Nature ; and , under Divine Authority , much more convincing to suspicious Reason , than all the Pedantic proofs of the most Learnedly peevish Disputants : so that , I hope , I shall be obliged to your Lordship , not only for my Reputation in this World , but my future Happiness in the next . Reflect then , my Lord , I beseech you , on your own sublime perfections , the profuseness of your Favours , my powerful ( though presumptuous ) inclination to your Person , and judge if it be possible , for any other Man living to pay your Lordship so sincere and affectionate a Veneration , as 

My Lord , Your Lordship's most Devoted , Obedient , and Humble Servant , FRANCIS FANE . 

PROLOGUE . 

What though 't has been the Genius of this Age , 
Tame Pegasus to fetter on the Stage ; 
TO imprison in close Rhymes , well-governed Rage ? 
Alas 't is easier much for them in France , 
The English do but Walk , when Frenchmen Dance , 
Rhyme comes to them by Nature , Wit by Chance . 
Rhyme is a cheating Vapour , which unseen 
Ill Poets , like ill Spirits , pass between 
To good Wits but a shade , to bad a Screen . 
then since our Heroes roused with French Alarms , 
Have beaten the Mounsieurs at their own slight Arms , 
With lofty Sense , in Verses gingling Charms . 
Our Poet hope 's you 'll not expect to day , 
TO have all his downright thoughts dressed up so gay , 
If his Coin chinks too much , you 'll doubt allay . 
But o ! the hungry Critic longs to bait 
And thinks , like Men on Scaffolds , we Dilate 
Preaching to stop irrevocable Fate . 
Lean Wit ! who like some indigesting Eater 
With Wolf in 's Stomach , preys on all fresh Matter 
By his ingrateful Gut , ne'er made the fatter . 
no no , our Author hope's you will excuse 
The yielding Parties of his Virgin Muse. 
Who learns to Court , practising to refuse . 
For Modesty's the Daughter of Desire 
An Artificial Ice that 's made by Fire . 
That does at first deny , at last require . 
Pardon the struggle of his Maiden Pen. 
Embrace her briskly , the first time , and then 
she 'll never leave you , till you do 't again . 
persons Represented . 

By 
Loredano , Doge of Venice . Mr. Lydal . 
Cardinal Colonna , the Pope's Legare . Mr. Burt.  
Hircanio , Procurators of St. Mark.  Mr. Cartwright . 
Grimani . Procurators of St. Mark.  Griffin . 
Cornanti , an old jealous Senator . Mr. Wintershul . 
Intrigo , a curious formal Coxcomb . Mr. Lacy.  
Count Sforza , Gentlemen of Milan . Mr. Kynaston . 
Trivultio , Gentlemen of Milan . Mayor Mohun . 
Visconti . Gentlemen of Milan . Mr. Hayns . 
Jacomo , Cornanti's Man  Mr. Charlton . 
Circumstantio , Intrigo's Man  Mr. Shotterel . 
Satana Advocate-general . Mr. Harris . 
Proveditor . Mr. Powel . 
By 
Parbelia , the Doge's Daughter . Mistress Vphill . 
Bellinganna , Cornanti's Wife . Mistress Bowtel . 
Aurana , Daughter to Hircanio . Mistress James . 
Melinda , Daughter to Grimani . Mistress Slade . 
Vigilia , Bellingana's Duegna . 
Hircanio's Wife . 
A Confessor . 
Senators . 
Officers and Servants . 
LOVE IN THE DARK : OR , THE Man of Business . 

ACT I  

SCENE I The Piazza of St. Mark.  

Trivultio Solus . The Carnival's begun ; the Feast of freeborn Souls , 
Where Nature Reigns , and Custom is deposed : 
That Magistrate of Fools , Wisemen's Usurper ; 
And yet no news from Milan ! 
Enter Visconti harkening . Was ever Man so disappointed ? I have no lesle than Fifteen Marriages on foot ; four of 'em are already consummated , by the help of some flight Vows , without the solemn Perjury in a Church : five or six more are finely warmed and softened , and ready for the Seal ; and all are at a stand , for want of these same little scraps of Paper , called Bills of Credit : and , besides , now I think on 't , I am to pursue my Legitimate pretensions to my rich Mistress Anrana ; but a Pox ; these Marriages in earnest come time enough , and spoil the others . The Oaths and Promises of Bachelors pass currant , and are not disproveable ; but a married Man , that swears Virtuous Love to others , is perjured in a Court of Record . 

Visc.   Come , Sir , for all your Perjury and Idolatry , 
't is Money makes the shortest way of Courtship . 


Triu.   Who the Devil sent for thee to condole ? 



Visc.   How many Letters , Legs , Cringes , Compliments , does this Money save you ? most Woman's Pride is greater than their Lust , and if they Love to see themselves admired , how much then must they needs love them that make 'em admirable ! 

The suppling Worshippers are but Slaves to Beauty : 
The Givers are superior Deities . 
That send the Jewels and fine Clotheses , guilty 
Of half the murders those plumed Females cause . 


Triu.   I Sir , and make 'em insolent and inaccessible to themselves . Those that give fine things to their Mistresses , like Dutchmen , in time of War , sell Weapons to their Enemies . 



Visc.   Faith , Sir , I believe the Ladies need not fear your Liberality at this time . But , to be plain ( Friend ) if thou hast received no Bills of Exchange , try the old Banquer Cornanti , your Father's Friend , who ( by the way ) has a lovely Woman to 's Wife , and is as jealous of her , as becomes old age , that knows its own Wants : he 'll lend at first , for fear you should come twice . 



Triu.   IS life , so I will ; but is she to be seen ? 



Visc.   Nay , stay a little . Now has he as clearly forgot the thought of Money , as if he had the indies in his pocket . Don't you consider that you must put yourself in Equipage , to do Honour to your Countryman Sforza , who is this day designed to be Gentleman of Venice , and Admiral of the Galleys , for his exemplary service the last year , against the Turks , in Candia ; where you know , he slew two Bassa's with his own hands ? After his Election , he intends to Feast the Senators a week , and desire's our assistance at the entertainment . 



Triu.   Is this the day designed ? Faith , 't is a noble fellow , 



Visc.   He is the very Soul and Quintessence of Honour ; and has reduced that wand'ring Science , made up of Vice and Virtue , ana from Moot-points , to judged Cases : he has tamed that Monster got betwixt Pride and Justice . 



Triu.   OH , I ; he is a Man of so much Honour , one would not be troubled with it : 't is as squeamish and as sore as a tender Conscience . But who told you this ? 



Visc.   I just now parted from him , and Intrigo . 



Triu.   ha , ha , he ; Intrigo ! that insufferable Coxcomb , that Ape of Wisdom and Gravity , that haunts the Court and Council of Ten , and places of Judicature , and brings away all the Shells of business , and leaves the Kernels behind ? 



Visc.   ay , the very same ; He will sit you seven hours alone in the Lobby , next to the Doge's Bedchamber , to be thought a Privado ; and , for the most part , when the Dog and all the court 's abroad , but Turn-keys and Bed-makers : he will watch you a Twelvemonth to pick up Papers that drop from Senators and Ladies , though torn in pieces for the worst of uses ; and has a Frame like a Bonesetter , to put those disjointed fragments together ; and when , with much labour , he has traced out the insignificant Sense , Glories as much as a Country Parson , that has found out a piece of Hebrew , to make an easy Text the harder . 



Triu.   O , ay ! he has all the mechanic parts of a Statesman : he 's a notable Herald too , an Antiquary , and Cabalist ; and affects all those conjuring Studies , that fools cannot easily judge of , and wise Men will not take the pains to inquire into . How do I long to see this fellow again ! 



Visc.   Mistake him not ; his company is not so cheap to such hare-brained light fellows : unless you can pretend some great affair , or can raise his attention with some reverend Lie ; he 's as busy , as if his Head were a Beehive . 



Triu.   ay , as secret , as if his Mother's Confessor got him . 



Visc.   And as formal , and full of ceremomy , as if he was descended from one of Moses his Gentlemen-ushers . But his principal Virtue is his love to Decency , and Order . As others at their Festivals , have their Lords of Misrule ; so he has his Muster-masters of the Movables , and his Clerks of the Uniformity . 



Triu.   that 's more than e'er I heard . 



Visc.   If a Dish comes up to his Table out of its rank and file , he will eat no more meat that day ; if his Cheese be cut awry , he is ready to cut his own Throat : his Stools and Chains move like Chess-men ; if one of 'em be removed by chance out of its walk , which his Servants know by privy Tokens ; he is in a cold sweat , and never forgives the Malefactor . He turned away a Servant tother day , for not making him three Legs , at his coming in ; though he came to tell him his House was on fire . If he were called away in haste to Heaven , he would not stir a foot , till he had out on a clean Band , a pair of white Gloves , up to his Elbows , brushed his Clotheses , and erected his Mustachoes . 



Enter Sforza and Intrigo , walking together : Trivultio and Visconti spy them . yonder 's Intrigo with the Count  
Triu.   ay , and he walks as stately as an affronted Turkeycock . As sure as I live , the Dog has spoken to him , if it were but to call him Rogue or Rascal , or bid him stand out of the way . 



Visc.   He takes no notice of us , because he thinks he 's in better company . Your servant Signior Intrigo . Intrigo nods like a Grandee . 

Scarce to be spoken with ! Let 's harken a little . 


Int.   Pshaw ! the loss of Candia was inconsiderable ; a Plot of the Grand Council , to betray the Turks into a greater security : O' my knowledge , a mere Trap. But do you hear the news ? 



Sfor.   What , Sir , I beseech you ? 



Int.   Mary , Sir , the Great Dog of Venice yesterday morning and no longer since , about eight of the clock , in a most admirable grave , prudential Temper , put on a pair of great French Pantaloons . 



Sfor.   Is 't possible ! but what will the people say of these innovations ? 



Int.   I'marry , Sir , that 's the worst on 't . I 'm afraid ( under the Rose ) pray let it go no farther , 't will breed no good Blood with the ill-affected . An high point of the Prerogative , to alter the sumptuary Laws , without advice of the Senate . There are some persons about his Highness — Well , I 'll say no more ; yet , if it appears to be done , with the approbation of the Grand Council , I warrant you 't is an Hieroglyphic that imports something . 



Sfor.   Not otherwise — 



Int.   What did Agesilaus ride on a Hobby-horse for , but to teach his Children Humility ? What did Augustus lie with Senators Wives for ? not for his Lechery , I warrant you ; but to discover their Councils , as Tacitus Trivultio falls a singing & dancing . admirably has it . — OH brave ! do you ever think to be a Privy Counsellor , at this rate ? — He sings on . Well , Trivultio , I pity thee : thou hast a great deal of Wit , but no Judgement at all . 



Triu.   then I should be a madman . 



Int.   thou 'lt never make a Statesman . 



Triu.   I 'm sorry for 't . But shall I ever make a Courtier ? 



Int.   I 'm afraid not . Let me see . Measures his height with his Hand and Cane . Scarce tall enough ; he must be a proper , strait , or at least , a stiff-going uniform Man , that undertakes that Province ; else no hopes of him : he must strive to be always in the Prince's Eye , and seen in a Crowd . 



Triu.   Sejanus lost himself with a pair of low heeled Shoes . 



Int.   Very right , Sir : Moreover , give me leave to tell you , you understand not the language of the upper Sphere . 



Triu.   what 's that , good Sir ? 



Int.   Mary , Sir , under the Types of Balls , Plays , Hawking and Hunting , and such small matters , are comprehended the greatest secrets of State : and you seldom hear Courtiers talking of any thing else . 



Triu.   that 's true enough . 



Int.   And do you think Courtiers so ignorant , as a man would take 'em to be ? by no means : they appear so only to deceive us : As for example ; in the Parable of Hunting , Horses signify Princes ; Hounds , Soldiers ; Foxes and Hares , Rebels and Sectaries ; Gunners and Pochers , are Jesuits : and if ever you chance to hear 'em talk of on old grave Man in the Field , with a great Montero Cap on , than you may swear the Pope has a hand in the business . 



Triu.   Bless us all ! very strange ! 



Enter Masquerades upon the Piazza , with all sorts of ridiculous Disguises . Int.   O horrid ! the scum of the Earth , the reproach of the Republic , an inundation of Vanity ! 



Triu.   Well said Boys , to him again ; He offers to go away ; they push him to and from to keep him in . these fellows know him as well as we . 



Visc.   How properly they abuse him ! . 



Triu.   To him again long Nose ; this fellow will never outlive the Carnival ; come , now let 's away to Cornanti's . 

Intrigo runs out from him . Exeunt Trivultio & Visconti . 

After the ridiculous Habits , come in Ladies of all Dresses ; and after them Enter Parhelia the Doge's Daughter , with Aurana and Melinda , with Attendants . Aur.   But , in good earnest , Madam , did you never acquaint the Count with your Passion , by words , or Message ? 



Parh.   Never ; but now will I appear to him in Dreams and Visions , and make him love by Inspiration : I 'll haunt him in as many shapes as a Spirit , that invites a Man to find out a hidden Treasure : I 'll try his Love , by all the Arts of Woman . 



Mel.   What needs that torture , Madam ? Men on the Rack will still out-talk the Truth ; Swear , Lie , Blaspheme , for present ease . 



Aur.   To your Guard , Madam ; the Count comes up towards us , but our Gallants are fled . 



Parh.   that 's as I would have it ; clap on your Masks , and let 's give him a broad side . 



Sings a Song to the Theorbo . 

Let us turn Usurers of Time , 
And not misspend an hour ; 
The present , not the future's in our power . 
To think to spend what 's not our own 's a Crime . 
He whose soft life 's in mirth possessed , 
Enjoys his time with interest , 
Love , and a Muse , 
Brings Use on Use ; 
For money 's but the Slave , and Time the Measure , 
And Wit the Handmaid , Love the Queen of Pleasure . 
Parh.   Sir , if this rude address may find from you , 
Or Credit , or Excuse , there is a Lady 
Has oft wished you happy : whether through 
Love to Justice , which would cease to be so 
Were she not tributary to your Merits ; 
Or some kind secret Charm which strongly ties 
All unconcerned Spectators to be partial , 
I 'll not determine : yet in all dubious sports 
As well as War , where Art and Courage rule , 
She wished you still victorious , and you proved so : 
Therefore she thanks you , for her joys received . 


Sfor.   Madam , did not my faith in you outweigh 
th' opinion of myself , and unbelief 
Were not a greater sin than arrogance ; 
I ne'er should harbour such a flattering thought : 
Yet had I dared to hope my abject Fortune 
could move the precious cares of a fair Lady ; 
Sure I had spurred Ambition , though I 'd tired her . 


Parh.   If passion 's bitter Throes frail Women hide , 
They silence Love through Modesty or Pride . 
My thoughts from such accusers are exempt . 
This keeps off other's laughter , your contempt . Pointing to her Masque . 
I shall no longer then suppress my fires : 
Sublime Deserts may justify Desires . 
If love 's a Virtue , 't is by all Men known 
Useful to show , and Glorious to own : 
If 't is a Vice that Women should detest ; 
Yet Crimes become lesle sinful when confessed . Exit . 


Sfor.   Methinks I find some Lightning piece my Heart ! 
Heavens' ! what a Voice , a Wit , a Shape , an Air ! 
The Face is kept for nothing but despair , 
And yet she seems to love , but gives no hopes 
Of seeing her unmasqued . Well , 't is no matter 
How a Man plays his Cards , if Women show their Hands . 
O I 'm content she may be ever veiled ; 
My heart 's too narrow to contain more Love : 
It will boil over like some flaming Mountain , 
And burn the Vital Regions round about it . 
religion 's veiled in Types from vulgar Eyes ; 
None ever returned to tell Celestial joys , 
If Heaven were left for every one to see , 
Heaven would be Hell , with too much company . Exit . 


The SCENE Cornanti's House . 

Enter Bellinganna and Vigilia . Bell.   This Trivultio is a pretender to my Cousin Aurana ; he 's a handsome young fellow , and talks well . 



Vigil .  And the other is Signiora Melinda's Servant . 



Bell.   The very same . 



Vigil .  But I think their ●i stresses are kept up so close , That the Gallants are at liberty . 



Enter Cornanti furiously . Cor.   Hell and Damnation ! nothing draw out 
But Airy Bankrupt , gaudy Butterflies , 
The Apes of chattering Frenchmen , that boast 
Of every Lady's favour they once saw , 
Or once but heard of ! 
I 'll stop your peep-holes , and your Jalouzies ; 
And here 's my Justice for thy next offence . Shows his Dagger . 


Bell.   O Heavens' ! be pleased to hear , 


Cor.   I 'll no more , 
Impudent Strumpet ; stir not from thy Chamber , 
Nor you from her , Vigilia : Eunuch , lock 'em in , 
And guard the door ; and you , Jacomo , 
See that the Eunuch execute his charge . 
Let no man enter upon pain of death , 
But Father Scrutinio the Confessor , he may secure 
Unstable airy Minds , with strong preservatives 
Of Holiness , and wisely throw in Seeds 
Of Virtue , pregnant Grounds to keep from Weeds . Exeunt Bell. and Vigil . the door shut upon them . 


Knocking without . Enter Scrutinio the Confessor . O , here comes the searcher for prohibited Goods . 
Yet 't is well , if this Confession have not the effect of vomiting , 
To make Men the more ravenously hungry afterwards . 
Welcome , reverend Father , thrice welcome , and in season . 
Scrut .  I 'm glad , Sir. you are one of those , that give our Coat 
it 's primitive esteem : 't will not be lost , Sir , 
'T will not be lost , nor unrewarded long . 


Cor.   I hope some years yet . Aside . 
My Wife attends your Fatherhood within . 
O , Sir , Confess her strictly : there has been 
Of late some secret practice , I can tell you , — Draws it out ridiculously . 
That should not be . — May not a Husband have 
A little Item , or so , how things do go ? 


Scrut .  Wicked , and blasphemous ! repent that thought . 
In what storms is this poor Man tossed , wanting 
Religion's Ballast ! 


Cor.   O what a feeble fort 's a Woman's Heart , 
Betrayed by Nature , and besieged by Art ! 
O represent the horror of the Crime ; 
Give Vice the darkest and the ugliest shade , 
And put the Devil in a Masquerade . 


Scrut .  Sir , we can add wry Mouths , and Horns , and Claws . 
And Prayer-provoking Tails ; as we see cause ; 
But , Sir , 't is strange you should instruct me thus 
In an employment so well known to us . 
Is Jealousy than Conscience more severe ? 
My Duty lesle Religious than your Fear ? 


Cor.   Well , 't is enough Boy , guide the Reverend Father in . Exit Scrut . 
Well , now the Guards are set , the Garrison secure , 
I 'll go ramble , and inquire after this Purchase 
Trivultio spoke of . Yet hold — not to Trivultio , 
lest he come hither again a visiting , 
With a Pox to him : I 'll treat with him by a Friend . 
Hold again . — But if Offers to go , and stops . 
This secrecy be a Gallants highest quality , 
To please the Females , curbed by Fear and Honour ; 
May not these Priests be held secure Offenders , 
Whom fear of Death obliges to be silent ? 
Or , were there no such Law , why , then 
they 're Favourites of necessity ; not choice , 
Or Prudence : like to chief Ministers of State , 
Who dive so far into their Master's Secrets , 
't is dangerous to refuse to show 'em more . 
Well , search no farther , Reason ; Faith , take place : 
Old Age and Piety resolve this Case . Exit . 


The SCENE , The Piazza of St. Mark.  

Enter Intrigo and Circumstantio . Well , Circumstantio , now give account of the Message I gave you this morning , and all the memorable occurrences of your journey ; but remember withal , that you must make your approaches regularly to your Betters , and in due form : not leap upon 'em , and take 'em by assault , or storm ' 'em . 

Circle .  then , Sir , with due submission to your Honourable prudence . — 



Int.   Or rather thus . Striking sail to your intellectual Gravity . 



Circle .  Striking sail to your Hectical Gravity — 



Int.   Why , I hope it is no Disease , Circumstantio , but the most perfect state of mind . 



Circle .  Why , did not your Worship bid me make my reproaches regularly to your Honour's Worship ? 



Int.   Still erroneous . Well , go on to thy Message . 



Circle .  Well then , Sir , going to go , according to your Worship's Command , as much as to say , according to my Duty , as much as to say , to fetch the Naples Waistcoats of Don Henriquez the Spanish Merchant ; I had no sooner got to the end of the street , but , as sure as my Grandfather was at Lepanto , who should I meet with but honest Lorenzo , Count Sforza's Man , my old Comrogue ; if your Worship chance to see him , he 's a Redheaded fellow , and goes with his Hat turned up on one side , with a silver Button , and a brown Suit of Clotheses , a little out at the Elbows . 



Int.   Wondrous exact ! Aside . 



Circle .  So in we went into a little House , to take our morning's draught together ; by the same token there was in the room we sat in , an old Worm-eaten Cupboard , two Tables , with a greasy Curtain betwixt 'em , four Forms , and three Joyn'd-stools . 



Int.   Admirably punctual ! He improves daily . Aside . 



Circle .  And on the Walls were deciphered certain Warlike Instruments , like Cannons or Battering Rams , which I conceive to have been done with the smoke of a Candle . 



Int.   Alas ! some ancient Fresco-piece of a Roman Battle : I 'll inquire farther of it . Aside , shaking his Head.  



Circle .  Our Liquor exhausted , and our reckoning paid , out I went into the street again towards Don Henrique's as fast as ever I could run , but , as sure as my Grandfather was at Lepanto , who should I meet with at the next turning , but a whoreson Chimny-sweeper — 



Int.   Well , Circumstantio , I 'm a little in haste , I will dispense with any farther occurrences : go on to the point , and give me an account of the Naples Waistcoats . 



Circle .  O Lord , Master , are you mad , to interrupt me ? why , then my story 's at an end ; I cannot tell one syllable more , it I were to die for 't , unless I begin again , word for word . 



Int.   Nay , prithee proceed for once ; I 'm in haste . 



Circle .  Why , I tell you 't is impossible , Your Worship commanded me to forget no circumstances of my journey , and my Head is so full of 'em , and they are ranged in such order , that , being once put out of it , I cannot speak one word more forward , if I were to be hanged . 



Int.   Believe it , I fear this admirable method turns to an infirmity . Well , we will rectify this at another time . Exeunt . 



Enter Scrutinio , Trivultio . Scrut .  I 'm sorry , Sir , to find you so incredulous . 
Were there no evidence of future Worlds , 
Yet it were worth the while to wave a little 
th' uneasy sins of overacted Life , 
And play at Hazard for such high rewards . 
Who would not stake a Cottage for a Kingdom ? 


Triu.   Sir , there are few grow rich at Lotteries , 
But those who keep 'em ; yet I am all faith , 
But cannot think that Nature prompts to crimes . 
Would Heaven make Laws on purpose to be broke ? 
Put Cats and Mice into a Chest of Glasses ? 


Scrut .  O , Sir , forbear , forbear ; in these dark points . 
The more we seek , the lesle we find : 
Like Men that Hunt in wide and shady Forests , 
Pursue the Game till they have lost themselves . 
In this deep Gulf , short Reason's Plummet cannot 
Sound to the bottom , till by Faith 't is lengthened . 
But , Sir , set Faith aside ; you are a Man 
Of Honour , and of noble Blood , you fear 
To do an injury , more than take one ? 


Triu.   ay , were there no Religion . 



Scrut .  You would not 
Defraud your neighbour of the meanest good ? 


Triu.   no , not the least . 



Scrut .  And yet you 'll take away the greatest . 
then do you think a Woman no great good ? 


Triu.   no , faith , don't 1  



Scrut .  Not a Wife ? 



Triu.   no , work of all , 



Scrut .  Not a beloved one , or a Mistress ? 



Triu.   That may require Reflection . 



Scrut .  then know you not the fair and young Wife of old Signior Cornanti . 



Triu.   I hope , if she be so , he is too wife t' expose her to be known . 



Scrut .  Alas , who can be secure from inquisitive Adultery ? 

Did not you attempt her Honour ? 


Triu.   Who , I , Sir , — What the Devil means this ? Aside , 



Scrut .  Add not one sin to another , by denying it : the circumstances will convince you . 



Triu.   't is true , Sir , I saw her at her House this morning , and put the jealous Coxcomb her Husband into a cold sweat ; but , what more ? 



Scrut ,  O , Sir , deny it not , for Heaven's sake . The truth of this was witnessed by her Tears . You came afterwards to her Window , which looks to the Strada Nuova , and gave her some Music . 



Triu.   O , are you there , Sir ? I never did this ; but it seems she has a mind I should do it . Rare Wench . Aside . 

Well , Sir , 't is a folly to deny such manifest proofs . 


Scrut .  Are you a man of Honour now , and Justice , 
To catch at that which cannot be restored ? 
O , Sir , conceive the horror of the crime 
If acted , doubly mortal . 
The Highway Thief , that bids a man deliver , 
Though valour , or some accident , frees th' assaulted , 
By most of Human Laws shall suffer death , 


Triu.   Lovers are rather , Sir , blind Highway Beggars , 
That nothing ask , but what the Ladies in the Coach 
Are able both , and willing to be rid of . 


Scrut .  Compare not Charity with vicious Love.  


Triu.   Launce me no farther , Father ; I feel already 
Most sharp compunction , and beg the salve of Penance . 


Scrut .  If you be serious , find me in my Cell : 
I have discharged my Message . Exit . 


Triu.   And an excellent one , i'faith , for thy Coat ! O most Divind Bellinganna ! this was a Masterpiece : there is Lechery in the very contrivance . As sure as I live , her Husband has so straight confined her , that she can make use of no body else . A man had need to have his wits about him , in this quicksighted Philosophical Age , wherein whoring is improved to a liberal Science , and deserves the consideration of a Society . I 'll lose as little time as I can , but to the Window by and by towards the Strada Nuova . 

O ay ! there ' 't is . Exit . 


Enter Sforza walking alone . Sfor.   The State decrees me Honours and Commands ; 
Nor want I wealth , the Dregss and lees of Virtue , 
It's grossest part , but that which keeps it working : 
Fame is my waiting-woman , everywhere so officious , 
That she is troublesome ; yet cannot I suppress 
A newborn Passion , for an unknown Lady . 
This Love usurps upon , and baffles all enjoyments else : 
't is like Religion , or is a kind of one , 
Which makes us dull and senseless to all other things ; 
While we are wrapped in splendid Contemplations : 
And this Amour of mine is a high piece of Faith , 
Unseen Perfections , undiscovered Worlds ! 
I 'm like the worst of Prodigals , that Sign to Blanks , 
And blindfold pass Estates without all power 
Of Revocation . Oh! these Passions 
Are but the cracks and splinters of the Soul , 
Shattered and bruised by some external Power , 
Which might securely lie in its own Haven . 
men's minds , like Kingdoms , never so much flourish 
As when they raise the price of Native Goods , 
And set low values upon Foreign Wares . 


Pathelia appears at a Grill unmasqued , than she Masques herself , and speaks to him . Parh.   Sforza , Sforza . 



Sfor.   Ha! A Woman's voice ! Starts . 



Parh.   ay , and a Friend's : draw near ; 
Disdain becomes a Lover more than Fear . 


Sfor.   My Goddess too , I think ; 't is hard to know 
Our Friends revealed ; disguised , 't is much more so . 


Parh.   If Actions more than Looks , the mind declare , 
then learn to love ; but who 't is , take no care . 


Sfor.   Madam , the Eye as well as Ear , would feast : 
Carve not for one alone , but every Guest : 
Or , if some wait , yet Love would see at least . 


Parh.   Why shouldst thou think that pleasure to confine 
Which all Men that have Eyes , must share with thine ? 
The beauty of the soul 's the ground of Love , 
And her Ideas , in the face do move : 
For no Man is to White and red inclined ; 
But to the Air , the Picture of the mind : 
then , if the Soul will show itself as clear 
Without the Face , her weak Interpreter ; 
Sure he is wise that with the Sov'raign Treats : 
Courtiers and Mediators oft prove Cheats . 


Sfor.   Soul , with all her Maids and Spies , 
Comes down to Dance , and Revel in the Eyes ; 
And shall we trust the Tongue , the falsest part 
In Womankind , next to the Heart ? 


Parh.   I scorn to be adored the vulgar way : 
If fair , I you ; if foul , myself betray . 
But hope the best , true Love will pass a Veil : 
Your Faith may save you , when your Works do fail . 


Sfor.   When the Soul grants what Reason makes her see ; 
That is true Faith , what 's more 's credulity . 


Parh.   Dispair more Souls , than does Presumption slay ; 
And Hope sends Men to Hell the sweeter way . 


Sfor.   Fight not so weak a Foe , and use a Shield : 
Youlye in Amoush ; I , in open Field 
't is I that Fight upon unequal Ground . 


Parh.   't is you that Fight , and can receive no Wound . 


Sfor.   Oh! I am wounded ; but shall lingering dye : 
Give me the blow of Mercy from your Eye . [ One calls within Madam 


Parh.   I 'm called away , Farewell : 
In th' afternoon you 'll find me here again . 


Sfor.   O , admirable , Divine Person ! O I am all , on fire ! If this Lady should have an ill Face , to so excellent a Soul , it were the greatest Cheat that ever was put upon the World. But , if it be so , 't is in mercy to Mankind ; an Antidote to her poison , as most destructive Creatures carry with them : 

Or else the World would be destroyed once more ; 
Now , by her Flames , as by the Waves , before . Exit . 


ACT II  

SCENE I  

Trivultio , and Boy . This is the backside of Cornanti's Palace , and this his Lady's Chamber Window the Confessor spoke of . There is no failing of Women it their critical minutes , if you do , they 'll hate you ever after , and think you want vigour , or apprehension . Counsels in Love , like Stratagems in War , are to be taken on the sudden , when you find the Enemy in disorder , or your own Men sittest for action . I 'll give her a Song ; but none of your whining Ditties to Women of experience . Boy , play the Tune I told you of . The Boy Plays , and Bellinganna appears at the Window , Vigilia her Duegna in a Veil and Muffler peeping after her . 

Bell.   't is Trivultio . 



Boy or Trivultio Sing . 

Cupid , I scorn to beg the Art 
From thy imaginary Throne ; 
To learn to wound another's Heart , 
Or how to heal my own . 
If she be coy , My Airy Mind . 
Brooks not a Siege : if she be kind , 
She proves my Scorn , that was my Wonders ; 
For Towns that yield I hate to plunder 
Love is Game , Hearts are the Prize , 
Pride keeps the Stakes , Art throws the Dice : 
When either's wone 
The Game is done . 
Love is a coward , hunt's the flying Prey ; 
But , when it once stands still , Love runs away . 
Enter Intrigo . Int.   Ha! now shall I find one of his Mistress' Lodgings , and be revenged of him for his Dilapidations . Trust me , 't is the backside of Cornanti's Palace . A brave Lady indeed . 



Bell.   [ Looking out . ] A very indifferent Lover ! What , Triultio attempting the Honour of a Senator's Wife ? here 's a penitential Note for you . Throws down a Paper and retires . 



Triu.   Blessed Vision , stay a little , she 's gone : but that 's her Body , here 's her Soul. Takes up the Letter and opens it . 

My Husband fears no Devils but your White ones : therefore for the security of his Person , he has just now sent out his servant Jacomo , to buy a Negro Slave : put yourself into that Colour and Habit , and find means to be sold to him , and you shall be assu'rd of a kind Reception . 

Ha! a Negro Lover ? for aught I know to abude mr . I 'll not leave myself wholly to your discretion , Madam , for all my great Passion ; I 'll find a cleanlier way than that , sure ; Let me see : I 'll send for the old Gossip that appeared at the Window , and corrupt her : there 's none of 'em proof against ten Checquins ; and Sforza has supplied me with Money enough . How Sanctify'dly shall I look in along Veil and a Chin-cloth ! 



Boy .  O , Sir , I know a Charwoman that haunts the House everyday . 



Triu.   send her away presently , and let her promise the Duegna ten Checquins to come to my Lodging . In the mean time will I go see what divertisement the Church affords , where I shall meet all the good company . I love to shoot at a whole Covey at once ; ten to one but some drop . Trivultio puts his Note towards his pocket , and drops it , and Exit with his Boy . Intrigo comes and takes it up , and reads it to himself . 



Int.   What a Jewel is here neglected by this idle young fellow ! no wiser than Aesop's Cock. O the giddiness of these Kickshaw-gallants ! 't is a high point of Wisdom to take occasion by the forelock : take heed of her bald Pate as long as you live . I must not let this slip however . Exit . 



The SCENE , A Church , full of Ladies . 

Enter Parhelia , Aurana , and Melinda , walking . Mel.   Your Courting the Count in a Masque , is the whole Town-talk . 



Aur.   And everybody's guessing who you are . 



Parh.   And no body right I hope . 



Aur.   I 'm sure we suffer for 't , and could hardly get leave to come to Church to day . 



Parh.   Alas , poor prisoners ; I 'm in perfect freedom . 



Aur.   But do you hear how Cornanti guards my poor Cousin Bellinganna ? 



Parh.   I hear from her hourly . But hark you Melinda , shall I ask you a hard question ? will you lend me your Gallant for an hour or two , for a design I have ? 



Mel.   Content , Madam . 



Parh.   I am informed Count Sforza will be here presently . In this new Habit 't is impossible to know me : I 'll pretend to be another Woman , and try his constancy . 



Mel   What a pretty device will that be ! 



Parh.   I 'll leave you , that he may not guests me by my company . Puts on her Masque , and slips into the crowd . 



Enter Visconti : comes up to Melinda . Visc.   Madam , well met . 
Must I own this to Fortune , or Design ? 


Mel.   O , Sir , Devotion brings unthought of Blessings ; But happinesses here on Earth are short . 

We have spies upon us : 
As their Devotions end , so must our Conference . 


Visc.   Ah my dear Saint , these fleeting Heavenly Visions 
Serve but t' increase our pains by their privation : 
A broken Interview 
Is worse than absence which may quench desire : 
This serves to blow up , not enjoy the Fire . 
Raising a Passion , leaves us to its fury , 
there 's no such torment as too short a joy . 


Enter Trivultio , and comes up to Aurana . Mel.   The sweetest Meats are the most apt to cloy 
But I have found , out an expedient : 
My Father has been enquiring out a French Master for me ; 
Disguise yourself presently like one , and come and offer your 
service to him : 't will take my life for 't . 
When you have got free admission to our House . 
The Princess Parhelia desire's your assistance 
In some of her affairs . 


Visc.   I 'll about it straight . 


Aur.   Such swarms of Beauty fill this Carnival , 
That you must needs be stung that are so venturous . 
I am too happy that I hear no more 
Your frolicks nor your flatteries at my Window . 


Triu.   I hate to see our Mistresses at Grates 
Look like cooped Chickens piping for their Meat , 
Or like poor Prisoners , begging for an Alms. 
And Lovers in the Streets , like helpless friends 
Who may uncharitably entertain 'em 
With a discourse of their miseries , 
But must not lend a farthing to their Purse . 


Aur.   't is Men that are the Canting Mimic Beggars , 
Whose Art , not Misery , attracts relief . 
i  said too much , Trivultio , were observed . Turns away . 


Triu.   whither so fast ? 



Aur.   I cannot choose but love this young fellow , for all his , indifference : I love a Man that knows how to value his own Sex , and cheapen slight-wrought Woman . 



Triu.   Here are riches , but Marriage attends it : a Golden Trap. My freeborn Genius moves for Bellinganna . Lying with another Man's Wife , is like invading an Enemy's Country : there 's both-love and Ambition in 't ; 't is an enterprise . fit for a great Spirit . 



Enter Visconti and Sforza , who-comes up to Trivultio . Sfor.   Heigh ho ! What a Streams here ! 
I wonder much what makes these Females so devout ; 
Is it their Fear or their Credulity ? 


Triu.   O , no. Two other Graces : Pride and Lechery . 
I wonder more that Men , who searce allow them Souls , 
Will give 'em leave to crowd into our Churches , 
Where they have as ill an efflect as fine strangers 
In Grammar-schools : for , though the Boys keep on 
Their humdrum still , yet none of 'em mind 
Their Lesson for looking about ' 'em . 


Visc.   O , Sir , this is the great Market of Matrimony : 
Here 't is begun , made up , and broken too . 


Triu.   Matrimony ! for Heaven's sake name it not . 
I do not love to hear the sound of Fetters . 


Sfor.   O , pray let 's humour him a little , I think indeed the strictness of it was but a kind of juggle , betwixt the Women and the Friars . 



Triu.   True , Such a devilish thing could never have been found out else . 'T was worse than the invention of Gunpowder ; and 't has altered the course of Love , more than the other has done of War.  



Visc.   Imparity of Minds is worse than Bodies : 
And which two are of the same mind for ever ? 


Triu.   ay , or at any time . If People love well , there needs no Marriage to confine 'em , if not , 't is cruelty to couple two churlish disagreeing Curs , and sin not to unloose ' 'em . I would not use my Dogs so . True ; Men are chained in Galleys , Horses bridled , and Oxen yoked to work : 

For slavish Offices and things ungrateful , 
Constraint is necessary , but for the Sweets of Love , 
To have a Task imposed ; t' have Men , like hired Town Bulls , 
Made amorous by force , and beating to ' 't ! 
Do Men chain up themselves at Dinner to their Tables ? 
Or do they Hunt , or Bowl , or Dance in Shackles ? 
If Marriage is a sport , confinement makes it less ; 
If 't is a work , are drudgeries the better for being endless ? 


Parhelia , Masqued , comes up to Sforza . Parh.   Sir , if you please to withdraw into this private Chapel , I shall acquaint you with a thing that may concern you . They withdraw . 



Triu.   So , faith , he 's engaged , the Lord knows with whom ; whether my Mistress , or another Man's Wife , no matter . The World runs round , and I 'll be behind hand with none of 'em , But I must slip away to the old Woman . Exit . 



Visc.   Another Familiar ! Let me see , Who may this be ? or who may it not be ? ON my conscience , this credulous Man of Honour , will have his Throat cut , by one of these Courtesans . Looks nearer . 



Parh. to Sfor.   Sir , your accomplishments have wearied Fame , 
Employed Man's Tongues , and Ladies Hearts ; you keep 
A correspondence with all Female Breasts ; 
Yet some deserve that influence more than others : 
And how can they deserve 't , that are ashamed 
Of their defects , and dare not show themfelves ? 
Sir , , your adventure 's blazed about the Town , 
Your meeting since , and with you know not whom : 
Your Prudence suffers in 't , and others Passions ; 
amongst them , mine I 'll be as free in all things , 
As she 's reserved : I 'm jealous of your Fairy , 
And am resolved to break all her Enchantments , 
If Beauty , Place , or riches can uncharm you 
Equal to hers I 'm sure . Your Eyes shall be 
My Judges , before you sleep Exit . Sforza following : Visconti stops him . 


Visc.   What does she say to you ? 



Sfor.   I 'll tell you presently . Let me go . Death , how is she lost in the crowd ! 



Visc.   Let her go , with a pox to her ; she 'll come again , when the fit 's upon her . Look , look , here 's a pretty Woman , without a Mask . 



Sfor ,  thou hast undone me . Walks a turn or two melancholy . 
Now am I like a Partridge betwixt two hooded Hawks , 
Pecked at by both , and killed outright by neither 
I fare like to some guiltless Great one 
Whom armed , injustice brings to his destruction , 
By Executioners in Vizors tortured , 
Ashamed , or fearful , of the impious Act. Persians . 


Visc.   you 'll rather die the death of Tubed and pickled 
With Honey first anointed , then Flyblown to another World. 
These Masquerades are all Trapans and Cheats : 
It is the Cause , not pain , that makes the Martyr ; 
I ne'er had loved , had I not viewed Melinda . 


Sfor.   I grant she 's lovely ; but she 's to be seen . 
Tell me of Angels , those are my Amours : 
Those things are mean , are forced to court the Eyes , 
The Porters of the Soul , to give 'em entrance . 
Give me the Charms that enter without knocking ; 
The intellectual Graces , that , like Lightning , 
Pierce , and inflame the Soul , before they ' reseen . Exeunt 


The SCENE , Cornanti's House . 

Intrigo like a Moor , Eunuch . Eun.   Here , will you play at Cards ? Shows him Cards . 
Will you play at Mora ? Opens his Hand , and throws out his Fingers . 


This fellow 's no better company than one of my Master's Statues . A murrain of this jealousy , we shall never have but Mopes and Owls in our House . 

Enter Trivultio like the Duegna , with a Muffler on . O , are you come ? then my Lady may come forth . Runs and opens the door for his Lady 
Enter Bellinganna . Bell.   O , Vigilia , how does thy swelled Face ? 



Triu.   Something better , Madam , with a Medicine I had from the Speciale . Curtsying . 



Intr.   May not this be an occasion Adequate , or Quadrating to my Design ? She is never to be spoken with , without her Duegna ; and if she overhears , they are all one . Aside . 

O , Madam , 't is I Coming close to Bellinganna . 


Bell.   Who are you ? 



Intr.   O , 't is I , 't is I , 't is more discreet not to name Trivultio . Aside . 



Bell.   Which of the I's ? there 's many of the name , Sir.  



Intr.   't is I myself . 



Bell.   Better and better : but who are you yourself ? 



Intr.   O , Madam , I tell you 't is I myself ; who should it be else ? Your Beauty is the cause of my present deformity . 



Bell.   Well , Sir , I 'm sorry I could not contrive a better disguise ; my Husband is so extremely careful of my conversation , a lesle would not have blinded him . 



Triu.   So , so , i'faith , the next word is into the Bedchamber ; But I 'll forbid the Banes. Aside . 



Intr.   Madam , to my Conception , this Disguise is a most prudent Veil for illicite Love.  



Bell.   Methinks Trivultio talks a little idly : 
Pray Heaven he have the Wit I fancied . Aside . 


Intr.   And , withal , let me tell you , Madam , under the Rose , ( pray let it go no farther ) you are not the first Lady , whose Secrets I have participated ; and , though I say it that should not , managed with circumspection and taciturnity . 



Triu.   ha , ha , he ! Under the Rose ! nay then I smell a Rat.  

O , I shall burst with laughing . — Aside . 
Madam , methinks this Man looks not like Trivultio . 


Bell.   Trivultio ! why Trivultio ? Seems strange . 



Triu.   Why , Madam , you walk not in the dark to me . 
Did not you invite him by your Confessor ? 
'T was a pretty invention . 


Bell.   Aye me ! Nay , if these Confessors betray us , what will become of us poor Women : But who could have thought this Man of Heaven could have picked out the meaning of an amorous Message ? 



Triu.   And did not I see you throw down a Note to Trivultio . ? 



Bell.   ay , to abuse him . 



Triu.   I take it very unkindly , that I , that have been employed by you , upon so many difficult occasions , should now be left out . Turn out your Black , that we may talk more freely . 



Bell.   Pray , Sir , stay without , and have a little patience . 



Int.   Patience , Madam ! there lies my Talon . I have waited seven years for the kiss of a fair Lady's Hand , and when it came , 't was with her Glove on too . Exit . 



Bell.   O admirable ! 



Triu.   God b'ye , good patient Packhorse . Well , Madam , you sent for Trivultio , it seems ; but suppose he were here , would you not discover him to your Husband ? 



Bell.   no , indeed : I would employ him about some business ; but , it may be , not such as he imagines . He shall have free Ingress and Regress : that 's as much as a civil Woman can say . 



Triu.   Why then here he is . Pulls off his Disguise . 



Bell.   Trivultio here and there too ! 
May I believe my senses ? 


Triu.   The very same . 
How could I think you loved an Aethiop ? 


Bell.   O , any shape that carried you within it Drollingly . 
But where 's the old Serpent , whose Skin you wear ? 


Triu.   At my Lodging . 



Bell.   O the crafty old Quean ! you paid her well for this . Who would have thought this wild fellow would have come upon so slight an invitation ! But I 'll make use of the occasion , for my Cousin Aurana's sake , and to plague my Husband for his jealousy . Aside . 

And who 's this Black ? 


Triu.   O , I shall die ! — O , 't is I , 't is I Laughs . 't is he himself , indeed , Madam ; the first of the name . An Original . Who should it be else ? 



Bell.   O , I know him : the Statesman and the Courtier ! Laughs . 



Triu.   And the most peerless Coxcomb that ever Nature made , or Art improved ; but how he came hither in this reverend Form I was designed for , I cannot guests ; unless it were by instinct to be jeered . 



Bell.   't is strange , unless my Husband sent him for a spy . 



Triu.   no , no , 't was his destiny : no conceited trick could scape him . 



Bell.   Put on your Veil , and call him in . Calls him in . 



Re-enter Intrigo Come hither , Sir ; why do you injure yourself so much , by concealing your name ? your grave and wise deportment , speaks you to be an excellent person , whom Fame has made known to me , by the name of Intrigo . 

no Clouds can keep the Sun from shining through ' 'em . 
How could your Parts and Prudence be obscured ? 
Those Essences betray you . 
Intr.   Well , Madam . that you may not think your Favours misplaced , I will not say I am the person you speak of , but never a man in Italy could have managed this design with so much dexterity , as the person you wot of : and , now I have said so much of him , I must beg your pardon , I shall say no more . 



Bell.   you 're a modest Man , Sir. Well , you are better read in Women , than to doubt my kindness to you . But this kind of Amours must be managed with much Prudence , Circumspection , and Taciturnity . 



Int.   Taciturnity ! my own words ! 't is a sign she likes 'em Aside . 



Bell.   Here is my Duegna , without whose consent we can do nothing . The greatest tie upon her secrecy , will be to make her party to the crime : make your addresses to her first , and oblige her with your Love. You know the Outworks must be taken , before the main Garrison : when that 's done , I will not say you shall command me , but I leave you to guests it . 



Int.   O , Divine Madam . Malvezzi , nor Paruta could not have delivered a more Political Precept . Let me alone for this Province . Now the God of Love and Prudence assist me . 

Comes up to Trivultio , and waits on him out most ceremoniously . Bell follows . 

SCENE , Grimani's House . 

Aurana , Melinda : two , Duegna's attending them . Aur.   With much ado I got leave to make this visit . Well , let us make the best use of our time , since our Fathers let us be together so seldom . How goes it with thy Heart , sweet Cousin , Does thy Lovers go true to ' t ? 



Mel.   As punctually as two Watches that are seldom wound up together . 



Aur.   My Cousin Bellinganna has just now sent me word to come to her House , where I shall meet my wand'ring dear Trivultio , and fix him . 



Mel.   How comes he there ? 



Aur.   Nay , I know not . 



Mel.   And I 'll tell you something more : we must all meet at the Doge's Villa ; whence , if we ever part uncoupled , may opportunity never favour Flesh and Blood again . 



Aur.   Right ; we are no frozen Lovers here in Italy . In lukewarm England , they 'll slabber , kiss , make Love like Cats at midnight , break Gold , promise , contract , and sometimes ne'er enjoy , or Mary seven years after . 



Mel.   ay , I , they 'll sit at dinner when their Meat is cold : Italian Stomaches scarce will stay for Grace . 



Aur.   Indeed I have heard 'em say , they 're an odd sort of puling people in those parts , though they 're something mended of late years . 



Enter Grimani , and Visconti like a Frenchman . Mel.   Now , Cousin , to let you see I 'm as forward as you can be , do you know this Gentleman ? a French Master of mine . 



Aur.   ha , ha , he : Visconti ! how oddly he looks ! 



Grim.   Well , Mounsou , what wind brought you into these parts ? 



Visc.   De natural inclinaseeon that me have had from a Shield to see the World , and the Pays Estranger . 



Grim.   Very good . Of other Nations , none travel but rich Men , but the French go a begging all over the World , and live better than at home . 



Visc.   Me have ver good Estate in France , but me had de mal heur , to have a kerelle wid mien Cousin German , and had the good fortune to wound him dangerously wid the Boutevilles trust , Comme sa ! ( Fences with his Arms. ) So me is retiré for a littel , and in the mean teem , me do chercher de condiseeon . 



Grim.   A true Frenchman ; for at their first acquaintance , they will tell you all the Quarrels , and all the Claps that ever they had , and show their Wounds in any part . — Aside . Well , Mounson , besides the speaking your own natural Language , what are the qualities you are good at ? 



Visc.   O , me be good at the many ding ; me can make the Perukes . 



Mel.   This speaks my Master a Man of Quality . 



Visc.   Me can sing as well as the Eunuch Italien . 



Grim.   I would he were one too , than I might securely admit him into my Family . — Aside . Well , what else Mounsou ? 



Visc.   O , me can Fence , read the great Oarse , me is good Barbier , good Cuisinier , good Button-makere ; and in case de necessité , me can mend de Breeshes , de Stockings , and the Ladies Cowns . 



Grim.   O the Monster ! from riding the Great Horse , to Footing of Stockings ! these travelling Frenchmen are like their Pottages , made up of every thing . 



Aur.   He Acts it rarely ! — Aside . 



Mel.   But , Mounsou , methinks all these good qualities should maintain you in cleaner Linen . 



Visc.   O , the Nobless de France never put on the under Shirt but once in the half year ; but for the Jentilesses that appear , the clean Sleeve , and the clean Crevat , every oder month . Exeunt . 



The SCENE , Cornanti's House . 

Enter Cornanti , Jacomo , Intrigo . Cor.   Where had you this Black ? 



Jac.   I bought him at the Porto Santo , 



Cor.   Methinks he is a better favoured Moor than ordinary . 



Jac.   ay , Sir , his Nose is not so flat as most of theirs , and he has not altogether such a black Mossy Pate . 



Cor.   I like him never the better for his good Features : but speaks he not our Language ? 



Jac.   Not a word , Sir.  



Cor.   O , then 't is well enough . But , a pox , these straitchined Moors will make plaguy signs to a Woman . 

Didst thou ever hear him speak ? 


Jac.   ay , and understand him too . — My Master , I 'm sure , speaks no Morisco ; I 'll pass for a Learned Man  Aside . 



Cor.   How didst thou come to learn their Language ? 



Jac.   O , Sir , I was a Slave fourteen months at Algiers . I was taken in Cavalier Strozzi's Ship , about twenty years ago , and learned their Language so perfectly , that I was made Interpreter to the Ambassadors that came to the Governor . 

O , Sir , you shall hear . Have at you , Sir. 
Andiboron hoblicon hu . 


Int.   Now for some hard words or I 'm undone . Aside pausing . 

Tirenatum tenoch comti . 


Cor.   what 's that now ? 



Jac.   Why , marry Sir , I told him , that you said he should be well used ; and he made an answer , that showed a great deal of Respect , but little manners : in fine , 't is a great compliment in their Country . 



Cor.   Come , come , what is it ? 



Jac.   Why , Sir , the Sense of it is , He takes it to be an Honour to be employed in your most contemptible Offices . 



Cor.   Come , you 're a Rogue : this is no human Language ; but the Dialect of the Barbary Stallions . Say that over again . 



Jac.   Dilloron losicon hu . 



Cort.   You Rogue you , that 's not the same . 



Jac.   Pox o this dull memory of mine . Aside scratching his Head.  't is very near the same , Sir. I confess I cannot now speak it so well ; but never a man in Italy understands it better . 



Cor.   you 're a bold Knave , Sirrah . I 'll go in , to my Wife , and bring her to see her new Servant . Exit . 



Int.   This Steward , be like , is a grave well-lettered Man He was Interpreter to the King of Algiers . Upon second thoughts , he must needs know that I speak not good Morisco . Now is the Critical time , in the absence of his Master , to bribe him to silence . Pray Sir , come near , here 's something for you . Shows him a handful of Money . 



Jac.   O Lord , all Languages ! this is sure the Devil himself . Trembles and starts . Nay , I see his cloven Foot too . begins to run away . 



Int.   This fellow 's going to tell . Runs after & catches him . Jacomo trembles . Intrigo offers him Money again . 



Jac.   Indeed , good Signior Diavolo . I dare not take it ; for I am afraid I must give a Note under my hand for 't , I have heard of many a good Soul lost by that means . Trembles . 



Int.   Come , come , I am no such person as you take me for : I am come hither , as many Heroes have done , upon a certain Politic , private account , or rather ( under the Rose ) Amorous one . 



Jac.   Indeed your Worship has got a very fine wooing Face . I guests who this may be . Looks upon him , and takes heart . ( Aside . ) Well , if the Devil will make a man a Present , without a dangerous condition , I know not what should hinder him to take it . Takes the pieces . These are not Air neither , there is Flesh , and Blood , and Bones in ' 'em . Well , I will cut one piece of knavery into two pieces of honesty . First , I will take his Money , and let him make my Master a Cuckold : that 's a valuable consideration ; there 's my Justice . then will I dutifully acquaint my Master with it : there 's my Fidelity . ( Aside . ) Well , Sir , I 'll do your business for you . I thought indeed your Worship did not speak good Morisco . Laughs . 



Enter Cornanti and Bellinganna . Cor.   Come , Wife , how do you like the countenance of your new Servant ? 



Bell.   't is hard to read a Book that Nature has so blotted : His Soul , I hope , is white and innocent . 



Cor.   It were not amiss to take the Latitude of his Capacity by his experience of our Fashions . Show him the Glass . Jac brings a Glass . Intr. looks in 't . 



Jac   Your Negroship is rarely well adjusted . 
You want nothing but a white Peruig : 
O , 't would set off your sweet Westphalian Hogsface . Intr. looks for his Face o' th' backside of the the Glass ; and does many Apish things . 
O , do you want your scurvy Wainscot chaps ? 
ay , there they are , my pretty sweet Baboon . 


Int.   You might use some moderation in your abases . Intr. whisp . to Jack . 



Jack .  You look like an Ass , and you don't love to be told on 't . Whispering . 



Cor.   what 's that he says ? the poor fool's afraid 
I should understand his Gibberish . 


Jac.   Truly , Sir , I am afraid your Worship and my Lady will be offended with me , if I tell you . 



Cor.   no , no.  



Jac.   Will you not indeed ? 



Cor.   Upon my Honour I will not . 



Jac.   Why , then , Sir , he asks what Devil that is that stands by you , meaning my Lady . 



Cor.   O the innocent wretch ! 



Jac.   Sir , in their Country the devil 's painted White , and their Beauties are all Blacks : you must excuse his ignorance . 



Cor.   ay , that I will , much rather than his knowledge . 
Come , come away , Wife . Exit with his Wife . 


Jac.   This Master of mine is one of the most prudent Cuckolds that I have known . He will stave it off a little longer . I wonder married Men do not more patiently submit to destiny : for these same Lovers will invent stratagems ; and those are more talked of , than the feat itself ; nay , they are written of to Posterity , when many thousands of easy Cuckolds sleep in their Graves forgotten . Exit . 



Enter Hircanio and Trivultio . Hir.   Have you acquainted your Lady with my passion for her ? 



Triu.   So ; i'faith , here has been tampering with my Predecessor . — ( Aside . ) ay , I , Sir , and she receives it very well . 



Hir.   Has she appointed a meeting ? 



Triu.   Not yet , Sir ; but I 'll go in and ask . If she is kind to him , 't is more than I could obtain for myself . Exit . 



Hir.   So , so ; she will open to the Golden Key . 
O the happy fortune ! 


Re-enter Trivultio . Triu.   She will meet you this afternoon , in General Moccenigo's Wilderness , in the Walk of Statues ; but you must bring your Passport along with you . 



Hir.   I understand thee : I 'll present her nobly . Exit . 



Triu.   Farewell , Sir.  



Enter Bellinganna . Bell.   Was there ever such an old Goat as this Hircanio ? 



Triu.   Was there ever such a frolic Saint as Bellinganna ! Pulls off his Veil . 

Why do we dally thus with sacred opportunity ? 


Bell.   O , Sir , I will serve you another way . 
You have a Passion for my Cousin Aurana , 
A rational desire at least : she 's rich . 
My husband 's gone out , and will not be back a great while , and your Mistress will be here presently : put off all this ugly Habit , and appear like yourself . I hear the last time you were at the Church , you talked very coldly to her ; now Court her with the Passion she deserves . 



Triu.   What a Witch have I made of myself , to no purpose ! Would I were hanged if I grow not weary of these Fatigues of Fornication . Well , I 'll take her counsel : Marriage is convenient . If my old humour return again , a rich Wife makes an excellent Bawd.  



The SCENE , a Street . 

Four Armed Men , whereof Visconti is one , in his French Habit , ridiculously Armed . Visc.   The Princess Parhelia has engaged me here upon one of her froliques : and I cannot play the fool in a better Habit.  



1 Man   Why , Mounsou , you are provided for a seven years War.  



Visc.   How do me ken-now but me must feeght wid the Regiment des Espagniol ; and begar , me do deseer to have de honeur of the first Sharge . 



2 Man   Pray let him have it , for they seldom charge twice . 



Visc.   Me have de natural Antipaty to des Spagnols , and de Milanee , de Sujets of de Roy d'espagne , and me de love to chercher l'occasion . Begar , dare is no man in the verld can feeght in the partees like a de French Academists , and the Metre Fence , and the Metre Dance , Francois . One Man will beaten twantee . De agilité of the Hoarse in the Academiste , and of de Fout in the Metre Dance , and Metre Fence , Sa , Sa , here , dare : sometime de grand Saut de recule , de pyroiste , the caprioles ; de animee can no tell how to levelly the Muskets , nor the Guns . 



3 Man   ay , Mounsou , I know he that kills a Frenchman , must shoot flying . 



Visc.   I begar : den dare is an oder ding , to kill a man wid the good grace , de bonne mine , and the address ; 't will do good to the anemee to be kill so . 



1 Man   Here comes Sforza : now we shall hear some of the Lover's Litany . Clap on their Visors . 



Enter Sforza , and knocks with his Key on his Hilt. Parhelia appears , Masqued , at the Window . Sfor.   Still overcast ? when will my Heaven appear ? 



Parh.   O , Sir , this Mift will make the day more clear . 



Sfor.   I need not beg for flames t' increase my store ; 
Yet Love is covetous , and would have more . 


Parh.   Is Love a Miser ? he shall feed his Eye : 
Still look upon his wealth , but ne'er enjoy . 


Sfor.   O cruel Saint ! that fatal voice revoke . 



Parh.   then learn to hope for Fire , and Court the Smoke , 
beauty 's the Book of Fate , Fear my intent : 
't is better not to know , than not prevent . 


Visc.   De Diable is in does Love ; no ding but the fear , the flame , the smock , the wound , the death , and the Bougre de Lovere is ver well , ver gay , fresh , frolic , and feel no pain in de vol verld ! Ke Diable est Savil ! They seize Sforza behind . 



Sfor.   Villains stand off . Visconti fly's back . 



Parh.   Ai , Ai ! Shrieks . 



1 Man   How now , Mounsou ? you have a natural Antipatee to the King of Spain's Subjects , you dare not come near ' 'em . 



Visc.   That is ver true , me do keep myself for the Reserve , that is de kalitee of the good Soldat . 



2 Man   O , I know the reason now , de Spagnol cannot kill you wid de good grace . 



1 Man   Stand still , or you 're a dead Man  



Sfor.   Slaves , Dogs . 



Parh.   Murder , murder , Help , help . Sforza struggles to get his Sword , they disarm him . 



Sfor.   Cowardly Slaves , give me but leave to fight . 
The odds shall make no difference . Chair brought in . 


1 Man ,  Into this Chair , Sir , quick : it is a mercy showed you . 



Parh.   Murder , murder , Help , help . Sforza is carried off , they guarding the Chair . 

She unmasks , So , is he gone ? I 'll be with him presently , and and Laughs search him to the quick . How bravely Visconti performed his part ! Little does Sforza know , what pains Parhelia takes to cheat him of the Doge's Daughter . Woman scarce knows herself : 

then who can search the Mazes of a Heart 
Where natural imperfection joins with Art ? Exit 


Enter Circumstantio and Intrigo . Cir.   Mr. Black , you belong to some Nobleman of this quarter , did you not see my Master Signior Intrigo hereabouts . 



Int.   A new Trial ! Pray Heaven he know me not . 
How should I know thy Master ? 


Circle .  O every body knows him . 



Int.   However , 't will be some delight to hear my own Character from a Domestic : Germanicus disguised himself in a Calfe-skin to hear the commendations of his Soldiers , without offence to his modesty . 

Why , truly , when I was upon S. mark 's , 
He was there too ; we came away together : 
But where he is now , you that are his Servant 
Aught to know better than another . This is no lie now . 


Cir.   But pray , Sir , let me know ; I have some earnest business with him from the Doge's Lock-smith , that makes his Keys for the Privy Garden , and the Anti-cameras , 



Intr.   I 'm overjoyed I shall prevail for a Key ; but this is no time to take notice of it . Aside . 

Why , honest friend ; possibly your Master is in close Council with the Dog , or the Council of Ten ; and therefore not to be spoken with . 



Cir.   Think you so indeed ? I never knew any Man pretend to so much familiarity with the great ones , as he does : every morning our House is full of under-clerks and Doorkeepers ; and they get a world of Money of him , by feeding him with Lies , or impertinent Truths , by telling him how many Caps , and what Clotheses the Dog puts on every day ; what he eats and drinks , and how many Stools he has . 



Int.   Your Masters a discreet Man , I will not say wise and grave : you do ill to abuse him . 



Cir.   what 's that to you , Sir ? I need none of your teaching , Goodman Black , 'T was never a good World , since there were so many Black moors and Frenchmen in the Nation . 



Int.   you 're a saucy Knave , Sirrah . 



Cir.   Call me saucy Knave , who an chief Man to Signior Intrigo , you whoreson Blackmore Dog you ! no , Sir , I 'd have you know , though my Master be one of the simpler sort of wise Men , yet , being his Servant , I 'll take the Knave of ne'er a Man in Italy . Call me knave , you saucy Jack ! Boxes him . 

Int. shruging up his shoulders . Poor Circumstantio ! yet he shows some respect to me in even his wrath : he glory's in being my servant , and quarrelled with me in my own behalf , to uphold my Honor.  

These afflictions are incident to these great designs of going Incognito . 


Cir.   Incognito ! do you steal my Master's words , you impudent Rascal you ? my Honourable master 's own words ? are such words fit for your mouth , you pitiful Rogue ? have at you once more for your fine word Incognito , forsooth ! Incognito , with a vengeance , Incognito . Beats him off . Exeunt . 



The SCENE , Cornanti's House . 

Enter Trivultio , Aurana , Bellinganna . Triu.   Ah , Madam , if my Sighs and Tears prevail not In a passionate posture . 
To expiate my last and fatal coldness , 
That undissolving Frost in so much Sunshine , 
That blindness caused by such excess of Light ; 
Let Death the faithful services prevent 
Of one unpardoned , not impenitent . 


Aur.   Trivultio , how thou strivest to undo thyself ! 
You Act this part well ; but your first 's most natural . 
All sudden Converts are to be suspected . 
Maintain your Character : 
Be constant to yourself , if not to me . 


Enter Hircanio at a distance . Hir.   I have watched my Cousin Cornanti out , and now is a good time to talk farther of my business to the Duegna . — Ha! what Trade's here , my Daughter ! 



Bell.   Come , Sir , we fear you not : this mettled Hern 
Shall spoil your Falcon for any other Game , 
And bruise his Wings . Your swellings and imposthumes 
Must be cured by constant strong Revultions . 
we 'll open a great vein shall stop your heats , 
And bleeding at the Nose . 


Triu.   Say you so , Madam ? then , faith , dear Aurana , I love thee to that desperate extremity , that , if you 'll take me in the humour , I am resolved to undergo the scorn of all wise Men , and my own repentance , and sneakingly submit to that solemn Conjuring Cheat called Marriage ; though my Reason kecks at it , and I shall certainly swoon at the sight of a Priest.  



Hir.   Ha! what do I hear ? as if this young fellow was to marry my Daughter ? You impudent Slut , you , are these your harmless frolicks ? 



Aur.   Aim , my Father ! Shrieks . 



Hir.   Will nothing serve but Matrimonial Gambols ? Come away with me , Huswife . Do you think to steal Procurators Daughters so easily ? Exit with Aurana . 



Triu.   O , she 's lost for ever . 



Bell.   I warrant you we 'll retrieve her . 



Enter Cornanti , peeping . Cor.   Ha! Trivultio ! have I caught the wild Beast in my toils ? Exit . 



Bell.   How soon Hircanio forgot the errand he came about ! 
In men of his age , their Avarice starves their Love.  


Enter Jacomo and Cornanti , with a Sword ridiculously long , and a Target bigger than his Body . He stalks and looks toward Trivultio . Cor.   Death and destruction , and a thousand torments 
Attend thy sinful Carcase , thou Planet-struck , 
And misbegotten Mortal ! Have at thy lecherous Chine . Makes at Trivultio when his back is turned , who turns about , retires a little , takes up a Cushion , and makes him run back to the end of the Stage . 
'Sdeath , these Whoremasters , the devil 's in 'em 
At their Rutting time . He runs behind Jacomo , and bushes him on , peeping over his Shoulder . 
thou 'rt a Knave , Trivultio stand to him , Jacomo . 


Jac.   OH Lord , Sir , I have never a Sword ; but I 'll talk to him . thou 'rt a Knave , Trivultio . Stand to him Master . Runs behind Cornanti , and then Cornanti behind him , shifting two or three times . 



Cor.   ' 'Slife , I think this Man of mine 's an errand Coward . 



Jac.   O Lord , Master , I 'm afraid of your Worship's Sword behind me , and would not take the Victory out of your hands , 



Cor.   'T would anger a Man to be a Cuckold , and be killed too . I 'll go call for help . Jacomo , lock the door upon ' 'em . Exeunt . Jacomo locks the door . 



Triu.   Did you ever see such Cowards ! I 'm sorry I did not force my way out : but now the door 's locked , what shall we do , Madam ? shall I leap out of the Window ? 



Bell.   no , the Barrs are too close . 



Triu.   Or hide myself ? Can you find no way for yourself and me ? Now for a Woman's Wit at a dead life . 



Bell ,  Put on your Duegna's Clotheses , quick , quick . 
Let 's make haste , his Bandogs live but at next door . He catches up the Clotheses , and she helps him 


Triu.   But , Madam , he 'll know I can't get out of the room . 



Bell.   no matter , dispatch . Now your Hoods and Muffler . Noise at door . 



1 Man   we 'll maul the Rogue . 



2 Man   we 'll make him sure . 



3 Man   no , take him alive , and kill him by degrees . The door unlocked . 



Enter Cornanti , with half a dozen Neighbours : himself and Jacomo in the rear of them . 1 Man   where 's the Rogue ? 



2 Man   where 's the Rogue ? 



Bell.   What Rogue , Sir , ? what d' ye mean ? 



Cor.   What , have you hid him , Witch ? 



Bell.   There has been none but I , and my Duegna here these four hours . 



Cor.   That shall not serve your turn , seek in the Alcove . They search within , and come back then search the Closets , Beds , and Trunks , and under them . 

I 'm sure he could not get out here . Goes to the Window . 


Bell.   Are you distracted : Sir ? whom do you seek ? 



Cor.   Peace , Strumpet . Vigilia , dost thou know where he is ? 



Triu.   Indeed , Master , I neither heard nor saw any body ; I was in the Closet , Preserving , when your Worship and Jacomo was here : but I 'll endeavour to find him out , an 't be possible . Mayn't he be here ? or here ? or here ? Looks up and down in the Cupboard , and the Chest of Drawers . 



Cor.   ay , Mary , a likely place ! 



Triu.   Now I 'm confident we have searched is much as is possible : there 's only one Box more in the room . 



Cor.   Search it , search it . 



Triu.   Here 't is , Sir. Gives him a Snuff-box . 



Cor.   What a Snuff-box ! You Whore , do you abuse me : Kicks him . 



1 Man   Pray , Sir , be patient ; sure there is no body in the room , nor the Closet , nor Alcove . 



Bell.   't is strange , Sir , you should trouble your Neighbourhood , and abuse me for such a fancy . 



Cor.   Well then , now I find it , i'faith . Jacomo has betrayed me , and let him out . O you treacherous Villain ! 

't is you , Sirrah . 


Jac.   no indeed , Sir , not I , nor any body else ; for I stirred not a foot from the door , after I locked it . 



Cor.   Go , go , Sirrah , no excuse : provide yourself of another service . A fine juggle indeed ! Walks about , and his back turned , Bellinganna comes to Jacomo . 



Bell.   Say you saw him not , and save yourself and me . 



Jac.   Turned away from the best service in Venice , for my honesty ! — Why , Sir , I believe your worship 's mistaken ; for I saw no body here , but my Lady and yourself , Sir.  



Cor.   Why , you impudent Rogue you , did you not see him , and speak to him by his name , and was afraid of him too ? 



Jac.   Indeed I heard your Worship call one Trivultio all to naught , and I thought it was my duty to call him so too , and be afraid of him too ; ( how did I know but he might lie in Ambuscade , in the Alcove , and shoot us ? ) but the devil a'bit of Mankind did I see , but yourself , Sir.  



1 Man   This is strange ! 



Cor.   Sayest thou so ? The plain truth of it is , I did not hear him speak a word ; but I 'll swear I saw him , or his Ghost , as plain as I see thee . 



2 Man   Thened must be some Spirit . 



Cor.   Think you so , friends ? Verily , I must confess , I had an extraordinary fear and trembling came upon me ; an Army of Men could not have frighted me worse . 



3.  Man   Why , then , 't is as clear as the Sun , neither your Lady , nor your Servants saw him , and yourself did not hear him speak , nor touch him . 



Cor.   Methought I ran him through and through , yet he never cried ohs for 't ; and then , indeed , I began to be a little afraid . 



2 Man   A body of Air , of the devil 's compounding : 't could be nothing else . 



Jac.   Why , Sir , Did you never hear the House was haunted before ? 



Cor.   Never . 



Jac.   Why , Sir , we were loath to tell you on 't ; but , Sir , though I never saw any thing worse than myself in my life , yet I 'll take my death on 't , I have heard some things walk at midnight , when we have all been a bed and asleep . 



Cor.   ON my word 't is more than I heard ever . 



Triu.   I believe so , if you were asleep . This is a rare Rogue , make much of him . Aside , to Bellinganna . 



Cor.   Well , Neighbors , I thank you . Exeunt Neighbors . 



Jac.   Madam , you 're in my debt ; but my Master much more . To her , Aside . 

happy 's the Man whose just doubts are defeated ; 
Cuckolds are never glad not to be cheated . Exeunt . 


ACT III  

SCENE I The Doge's Villa . 

A Scene of Paradise , and Glorious Shows , with Music . Sforza walking in it alone . Sfor.   Now indeed the Lady in the Church is as good as her word . How suddenly these Women execute their designs ! and how impatient they are in Love affairs ! Looks about . 

A Glorious Prison ! 't is wondrous magnificent ! 


After some Music , a Cupid , or Angel held in the Air sings this Song . SONG . 

Take , Hero , take . 
The Presents , Wealth , and Beauty make : 
there 's nothing else , that Mortals know . 
Is worth receiving here below . 
Time runs , Love fly's ; 
He that thinks least , is the most wise : 
And Fortune ever did approve . 
A present Wit in War , or Love.  
Stay , Hero , stay ; 
The Gods grow envious at thy Prey ; 
Or steal what 's rare 
In haste ; for Heaven does seldom care . 
Love and Ambition should conspire 
Mortals to please in one desire . 
After this a Dance of Angels , Sfor.   Sure this is Paradise itself ! 



Enter Parhelia gloriously dressed , attended with her Maids , all in Masques : she comes up to Sforza . Parh.   Sir , you may judge , by th'actions of this hour , 
That I can keep my promise , use my power . 
Perhaps my Rival , by her needy Art 
And first assaults , has prepossessed your Heart ; 
But though my Person , nor my Wealth , should find 
A room unfurnished in your well-built mind : 
I 'll rather be for plain defects despised , 
Than for low cheats and false Perfections , prized . She and all her Women unmask : Sforza seems surprised . 


Sfor.   A most Celestial Beauty ! Assift me , Virtue ! Aside 
Madam . 
Great were my fortune , had it power to climb , 
And changing for the better , were no crime . 
Victorious Princes , Traitors do disdain , 
Though by their Treason they do profit gain . 
Ah! what rewards can his black thoughts suggest 
That makes a Present of a faithless Breast ! 
A Ship full fraught with Stones , or worthless Sand , 
Should it take in a Prize of Plate , 't would sink it . 


Parh.   Cast out your trash , make room for richer lading : 
Virtue may be an Hypocrite , and so may Beauty ; 
But riches never were : the Goods of Fortune 
Are visible , and wear no Masks . Points to the Furniture . 


Sfor.   Pity the Man that wars in every part : 
Eyes , with his Ears ; and all against his Heart . 


Parh.   Silly Believer , canst thou take delight 
In a dark Mistress , 'cause she says she 's bright ? 
Didst ever see a Beauty always Masked ? 
A Wit that never spoke ? a Saint that never prayed ? 
A Courtier never dressed ? A Sun ne'er out of shade ? 
Wouldst thou not , for a Palace , quit a Cell ? 
For Sceptres , Spades , or for a Heaven , a Hell ? 
Or would'dst thou not thy Soul to Heaven restore 
Because thou'dst signed the Devil's Bond before ? Exit in a rage 


Sfor.   she 's gone . Brightest of Angels , in form and intellect , couldst thou not find some nobler Mansions , uninhabited , to fix thy glories in , but thou must claim a Cottage all on fire already ? O what a conflict's this ? You Gods , that make unchangeable Decrees , assist my wavering constancy . I 'll try if I be Captive still . 



Goes to the door , and is stopped by the Vizored Men , that carried him away before . Guard.   whither now ? 



Visc.   Whider now , Bougre Espagnol Milanois ? Begar , me vill be revengé for me Metre the King de France . Cent coups de pieds , Bougre . 



Sfor.   The armed Masquerades here still ! How can this be answered to the jealous Senate ? a capital Crime . 



Guard.   Sir , you may have leave to walk in the Gallery , if you please . here 's your way . Exit Sforza and the Guard.  



The SCENE , Cornanti's House . 

Bellinganna , Trivultio , Intrigo . Intr. courting Triu.  Why do you thus Eclipse so acquaint a Beauty ? 
That radiant Face under such envious clouds , 
Enter Cornanti and Jacomo . And stop the current of your fragrant breath ? 
Cor.   Bless me ! what do I hear ? o horrid ! insufferable ! The Moor in discourse with the Duegna ? Treason , Jacomo , Treason . 



Jac.   What , is the fool talking to her , and sees not my Master ? Aside . 



Bell.   What does she come on apace ? 



Int.   O I , she softens ; she will come Piani piano . 



Cor.   O Heavens' , my Wife tool Execrable Villain : fetch me my Dagger ; I will let out his filthy black Soul. — . But stay ! — may not he have some privy weapons about him ? 



Jac.   Believe it , Sir , there are few Men that come about these stolen-love businesses , but bring along with them sufficient Weapons . 



Cor.   then call the Sbirri that live hard by . 



Jac.   There are two of 'em sitting at the door . Exit . 



Int.   Shall I approach this lovely Citadel ? Taking Trivultio by the Hand 



Triu.   You are too bold , Sir , with the Sentinel . 



Int.   When shall I seal my Happiness , on these Vermilion Lips ? 



Bell.   And yet he sees 'em not . Aside . 



Triu.   Indeed , Sir , I dare not venture the cold Air ; but you may squeeze the Wax through the Paper , if you please . 



Cor.   Kissing too ! fine work , i'faith ! He Curtsies , and Intrigo kisses him with the Muffler on . 



Enter Sbirri and Jacomo . Intr.   When shall we interchange the duty of the Sexes ? 



Triu.   Dear Sir , will you please to walk into a more private room ? 



Int.   O , the easy conquest ! See what it is to Court regularly ! As he is leading ont Trivultio with great ceremony , the Sbirri clap him on the back . 



Sbirri .  I Arrest you of Treason , at the information of Signior Cornanti . 



Intr.   Me of Treason , that have ( under the Rose ) for these seven years , by my vigilance , preserved the State from Foreign Invasions , and Domestic Plots ? I Arrested for Treason ? 



Sbirri .  rose me no rosing , but come away . 



Int.   O the disappointment ! Breaking hands with Trivultio . 



Bell.   O Lord , my Husband ! Starting back . Intrigo seeing Cornanti nods at Jacomo , who winks , and nods at him again . Intrigo cries out in a lamentable Gibberish . 



Intr.   Queki sini baskis . Ahi puli tinderis . 



Cor.   Did not I observe this Rascal talking to my Wife and Vigilia ? 



Intr.   Cajiskis oily melan . Ahi polukis , Ahi . 

Nodding and winking at Jacomo , who nods and winks again . 

Jac.   Alas , good Signior Intrigo , this is worse than A hone , Ahone . no , Sir , I scorn to betray my Master . To come a spy thus from Taffaletta , Under the Rose , it was not welle . 



Int.   O the false knave ! Aside . 



Cor.   Bless me ! is this Intrigo ? 



Jac.   It must needs be he by his way of speaking . 
Never anyman was so deceived by a Rogue . 


Cor.   That grave knavish Fop ! Away with him to Prison , away with him . — Ah you Whores ! you Devil-ridden Witches ! The Women run away . Knocking without . They open , Enter the Messengers of the Council of Death , with black Caps , like Death's Heads , with Maces and Tip-staves . They mome up , and show Cornanti their Maces . 



1 Mess.   In the name of the Duke and Senate , we Arrest you . 



Cor.   Arrest me ! for what ? 



1 Mess.   For Treason , in keeping intelligence with the Turkish Ambassadors . 



Cor.   Heavens guard my innocence . 



1 Mess.   And you are to appear before the Council of Death within this half hour . 



Cor.   Short warning , Heaven knows , for a man so spotless , 
And so deserving of the Common wealth . 
Oh! o ! Bewails himself . 


Int.   ay , Sir , 't is present death . On the admirable wisdom of the Senate , to prefer the Public before the Private still that gives no time to any , though innocent , to defend themselves , when it is for the public good ! 



Jac.   Honest Intrigo still ! 



Int.   O , Sir , I could have told you of all this before ; I knew the whole design of your Treason , the time , the place , your Confederates , the Orders of the Senate , the Critical Minute of your surprisal , and the utmost date of your miserable life . 



Cor.   O good Sir , I am so free from any open act , 
I never wronged the Senate in my thoughts . 


Int.   Take heed what you say , Sir. Do not I know the whole model of your business have not been employed , as an instrument , to convict you ? and a spy upon your actions ? Don't you see , under the Rose , how I disguised myself on purpose ? Do you think this was a wooing Face ? 



Jac.   here 's a turn i'faith ! This Intrigo will prove a plaguy fellow . 



1 Mess.   Say you so , Sir ? then we summon you to appear before the Council . 



Int.   I shall most readily attend the Clarissimo's . 



Cor.   O , good Sir , pardon my misapprehensions of you ; speak but the truth , and no more , and endeavour to support my oppressed innocence . Alas , Sir , you may have free access to my House , at anytime , and what sort of conversation you please with any of my Family , none excepted ; very intimate , unrestrained conversation . 



Jac.   Very good i'faith , O that my Master could compound for one night's Lodging ! 



Bell.   Ah , Husband , I doubt this was a judgement upon you , for your causeless jealousy . How could I prevent this ? 



Triu.   ay , and your distrust of your poor old Servant . 



1 Mess.   Come , Sir , the time draws on . 



Jac.   But hold a little , my Masters . A fools bolt is soon that By what authority do you do this ? 



1 Mess.   What authority , Sir ? To satisfy your fools head , here 's our Commission . 



Shows a Writing with the Seal of the Senate : Jacomo reads it , and Cornanti trembles . Jac.   reads . Dominieo Loredano , the most Serene Dog of Venice , to the Officers of the Council of Death . Whereas we are informed , that certain wicked and disloyal persons have attempted most unchristianly to betray the secret Deliberations of this Senate , to the Ambassadors of the Grand Signior , and have seduced , into their couspiracy , a certain Senator , Aulo Foscarini — Is Foscarini the man you seek for ? 



All Mess.   ay , the very same . 



Cor.   But my name is Cornanti . 



Jac.   Look in your Commission . 



2 Mess.   I cannot read . 



1 Mess.   reads I , Sir , 't is Foscarini indeed , and there is no other name in the Commission . 



2 Mess.   ' Sdiggers , I remember 't was a long name , and had four Syllabubs to 't , as they call ' 'em . — Foscarini : Cornanti ; that 's too short . I 'll take my death on 't 't was Foscarini . 



1 Mess.   But we were told this Foscarini lived here . 



Jac.   The mistake was easy ; he life's within three doors . 
Have a good Heart , Master , all 's well . 


All Mess.   kneel . We humbly beg pardon of your Magnificence . 



Cor.   ay , I , 't is well enough . 'Slid , I can hardly recover myself to talk to these Rogues . Sirrah , take heed — hereafter how a man of my Robe — 



Jac.   Avaunt , you Rogues ; we 'll trounce you . 



Cor.   But , hark you , friends ; though I 'm clear of this Treason , here is a certain Gentleman knows of a Treason , the time , the place , the Confederates ; and was employed , under the Rose , as a spy ; to betray a Senator in his House , as you may see by his Face : you had best seoure him . 



Jac.   't is pity indeed he should lose his labour : let him be hanged first , and examined after . 't is all for the public good still . 



1 Mess.   Indeed our Commission extends not so same ; but if your Magnificence please to command us , or so , we 'll venture . 



Intr.   O , good Signior Cornanti , let me rather go with my friends here , the Sbirri . 



Cor.   O , by no means . This could be no wooing Face ; but a most dangerous Politic Calf's Face . 



Intr.   You will I exercise my patience , and not betray my Mistress , nor the ocassion of my coming . Why should Harebrained fools triumph upon my infidelity . Aside . 



Cor.   You would not aim so low as a Woman ! the Public ! over as long as you live , before the Private . Therefore good Sbirri , take him for once ; and be sure you let him have no private room , but the abominable , public , stinking hole , amongst the poor prisoners : there let him lie , under the Rose , still . — This was a judgement upon me , Wife , and you , old Witch , for distrusting you , was it not ! Messengers , you may be gone . Sbirri , away with him . Exit Messengers . 



Int.   I thought I should have no good luck this day , for putting on my Breeches before my Doublet , and saying my Prayers before I washed my hands . 

Exeunt Sbirri , Intrigo , and Jacomo . 

Cor.   After a turn or two with his Wife , Well , Wife , 't is enough ; I believe you : this fellow's fool enough to attempt any ridiculous thing without encouragement , and Jacomo might be deceived in him . But , deal ingenuously with me , was you never Courted by Trivultio ? 



Bell.   Good Sir , be patient , and I 'll tell you all . That there was ever any allowance to his Courtship , on my part , I utterly deny ; but that he has made some addresses to me , I will not be so unjust to you as to conceal it . 



Triu.   Now shall I go th'pot next i'faith . 
Plague of all Womankind . Aside . 


Cor.   But how , and where ? 



Bell.   Why , Sir , at my Chamber Window , with Serenades . 



Cor.   But was he never within doors ? 



Bell.   Did not you find that was a mere delusion ? 



Cor.   True ; but it runs in my head still . he 's a wicked fellow , the Devil would never have come in his shape else . But go on . 



Bell.   At last , tired with his importunity , I appointed him a meeting this afternoon about this time , in General Moccenigo's Wilderness . 



Triu.   Ha! what means this ? A Man can never dive to the bottom of these Women , Aside . 



Cor.   How a meeting ? an unlawful meeting ? 



Bell.   no , good Sir , no unlawful one : there 's to be none but us two there . 



Cor.   A dangerous lewd Conventicle . 



Bell.   But you know I have no power to go out , unless you give me leave , for once , or so . 



Cor.   O rare ! 



Bell.   Come , Sir , in short , the whole scope of my design is , to give you satisfaction ; therefore go along with me , and when you find his intentions , vindicate my Honour and your own , with all the severity Revenge can dictate . 



Triu.   O , now I understand her . 



Bell.   Meet me there , in your own Habit if you dare ; To Trivultio apart . 
You have made my Husband jealous , you are bound 
To cure him of it , or suffer for 't . 


Cor.   Brave wench , now I see thou art honest ; but if thou hadst not a mind to be so , all the Devils in Hell could not compel thee to it . Come away . Exeunt . 



SCENE , A Gallery in the Doge's Palace . 

Sforza walking alone in it . Sfor.   Sure , if this Carnival continued long . 
The Women would run mad : three to one Man ? 
The Ravisher , th' Admonisher , the Courtier . 
Two Suns reflected streaming from the true one : 
Yet those two last could never be the first ; 
But sure one Person , her Rival , or Opposer . 
The Lady in the Church , she threatened what she ' as done . 
Well , my Dear first made the most decent Courtship : 
She did more Love , and they more Rage express ; 
Her Heat was greater , though her Flame was lesle . 
Yet I could wish her Beauty equalled this . Pauses a little . 
I 'll never doubt Nature could err so much 
To take ill Lodging for so great a Guest 
The Face is but the Copy of the mind , 
then sure 't is glorious . 
The Structure's noble ; sure the Front is fair . 
Suppose it were not , must I then recede 
From first Engagements , without just offence ? 
Love , like a weight , thrown in by force , prevails ; 
But Honour weighs more in unshaken scales . One of the Guard steps to him , and delivers a Letter . 


Guard.   Sir , an old Gentleman , that past by the Gate , gave me this , with ten Checquins , and the promise of as many more , to deliver it safe to your hands : but the discovery may cost me my life . Pray be secret . 



Sfor.   Hold.  



Guard.   I dare stay no longer . 



Sfor.   reads . If your Love be equal to mine , your resentment is as great for our violent separation . You are a Prisoner to no lesle a person , than the Princess Parhelia , the Doge's Daughter , who will spare no desperate attempt to give herself satisfaction . But I will suddenly redeem you from this Captivity , if your constancy deserve so great a favour . Kisses the Letter . 

Ah , my dear Saint , than the debate is ended . 
no , no , she shall not ; I can free myself : 
He that dares die , can never be a Slave , 
But cheats a Tyrant of his sweet revenge . 
Yet there is hope still , she may send some Men 
To force the way in ; I can second ' 'em . 
But though I were alone , shall I be forced to do 
What Honour chides me for ? Great God's 't shall never be . 
I should not fancy to be forced to Heaven ; 
At least , by any Earthly Power . 


Enter two Ghosts of Bassa's , with their Turbans , and Winding sheets , and a great many other Turkish Ghosts attending them . Thunder and Lightning , and the place darkened like Hell : Sforza starts , than recollects himself . no , nor Infernal . They stalk dismally about him , with their Scymeters drawn , brandishing at him . Sforza looks for his sword , and finds none . 
And must I be their naked Prey ? 
Caesar , unarmed , veiled with his Robe his Face , 
And was ashamed , but not afraid to die : 
So let me perish ; but sure I know these Ghosts . 
Turks all ; and their brave Leader Achmet . 
Ibrahim too ; both slain with my own hand . 
no mercy now sure . 
Ach.   Prepare , prepare , To turn thyself too Air.  Sings to a dismal Tune . 
An injured Turk , made fiercer by the shades , 
Thy life invades . 


Ibra .  Stay , Achmet , stay ; For I will share the Prey : 
The Blood of man 's too sweet . As thou drankst mine , 
I 'll quaff off thine . 


Chorus of other Turks . Heroic Dust , Be not Unjust ; 
Each Mussleman , that his vile hands have slain , 
A piece obtain . 
Altogether .  By Pluto sent , we draw Terrestrial breath , 
And offer thee too fair , or Love , or Death . 


Sfor.   Is this your business after Death , great Souls ? 
I thought you had been rolling among heaps 
Of naked Beauties , with Eternal vigour ! 
then know , fierce Ghosts , Devils improved to Turks , 
If your own Hell were open , I 'd sooner leap in 't , 
Than do a crime that should deserve it . The Ghosts walk off leisurely as they came in , with Thunder and Lightning . Sforza walks about a little . 
The Doge's Daughter turned a Sorceress ! 
A brighter Angel yet than any fell 
With Lucifer's illustrious train of Rebels . 
O that the virtuous Prince could hear of this ! 
But I must never live to make relations . 
All power 's continued by the same ways 't was got ; 
then doubt not Death , or Marriage . Pauses . 
Death , 't is the least of evils , or a good , 
Because it ends 'em ; courted by Boys , 
For loss of Pins and Counters ; and by Females , 
For lesser toys : mastered by every passion , 
Love , Revenge , and Grief . Shall it obey 
The Slaves of Reason then , and not their Master ? 
death 's the dark entry to more pleasant Mansions , 
The opening of the Scene to show us things more glorious ; 
The first flight of the mewed and hooded Soul. 
It is the starting place , and not the Goal . 
What is 't we live for ? tell life's finest tale ? 
To eat , to drink , to sleep , to fill , and empty , 
Love and enjoy , t' enjoy and love no more ? 
To talk of things we know not , and to know 
Nothing but things not worth the talking of , 
Insipid Acts , by repetition , nauseous ? 
Who would not die for curiosity ? 
A Female , sickly , childish , puking Vice , 
Faith , Fortitude , Affliction : cease your Trumpets , 
For Nature's errors fright such Enemies . 
My Soul is but in Lodgings for a Term , 
Nature , her Landlady , may turn her out . 
True , were the House my own , I would take care 
T'imbellish it , and keep it in repair , 
Make it impregnable against Force and Time , 
To Dye were Folly , and to Fight a Crime ; 
But since Death's unavoided Arrow fly's 
From Foes , Diseases , and from Woman's Eyes : 
Let 's nobly court our Fate , sweet'ning the Race , 
With the full Gallop , not the fearful Pace . 


Enter Parhelia gloriously dressed : She comes towards him . Parh.   What , can you love , or die , Sir ? 



Sfor.   Both , Madam . Love 
They says our only business after death . 


Parh.   And 't is the great and noblest cause of life 
Cannot the greatest fortune in the State persuade you 
To quit your passion for a kill Mask ? 
Pray go to th' Tire-shops , you may chance to find 
A better featured one . 


Sfor.   you 're very pleasant , Madam , 
If Love want Rhetoric , how shall Fear persuade ? 


Parh.   'T was Fear that moved your choice to such an object , 
That would provoke no Rivals . 
no , Sir , you need not doubt that we will force you : 
'T was but to try how wise a man you 'd prove , 
How fit to make a Sovereign in Venice . 
You may have liberty to court your Vizor ; 
Yet know you 're in my Net still . Guards let him pass . 


Sfor.   That grant of liberty , sweetens all your sharpness . Guards let him out at one door . Exit Parhelia at the other . 



The SCENE , General Moccenigo's Wilderness by the Walk of Statues . 

Cornanti and his Wife , with six or seven Bravoess Armed , following him . Bell.   This is the place I appointed to meet Trivultio at Lay your Men in ambush hereabouts , and stand you behind this Arbour , and when you discover the wickedness of his intentions , call out the Bravoes to pistol him . 



Cor.   But you must appear to be very forward and kind , to make him the bolder , that I may have the juster cause to kill him . 



Bell.   Very well thought of ; but take notice , I 'll make you some sport before , which you must not be angry at . 



Cor.   no unlawful sport , I hope ? 



Bell.   Fie , fie , Sir ; I mean with another business . Cornanti gets behind the Arbour , and his Bravoes under the Hedges . 



Enter Hircanio . Hir.   This is the Walk in the middle of the Wilderness , I was to meet her at — And there she is . O the blessed Image ! Madam , 

For the redemption of my Captive-heart , 
Or its good usage in its slavery , 
Be pleased to accept this knot of Diamonds : 
Too small an offering to so fair a Shrine . 


Bell.   A very fair Jewel . Taking , and looking on it . 



Enter Hircanio's Wife . Wife .  I had notice from a friend , that my Husband was to meet a Lady here . ay , here 's the Rogue presenting her with something . 



Hir.   Death , here 's my Wife sees her and begins to steal away . 



Wife .  Ah you old Goat you , have I caught you ? 
Did I ever deny you at home , you false Man ? 
O thou impudent perverter of Mankind ! Turns to Bell.  
Hast thou the conscience to defraud an Honest Woman of the deuce that her portion paid for ? 
Follows her Husband off stolding . When they are gone off , out comes Cornanti . 

Cor.   Brave Wench , i'faith ! ha , ha , he . Didst not thou send for his Wife ? 



Bell.   ay , I Sir ; take the Jewel , and to your place again . He retires . 



Enter Trivultio in his own Habit.  Bell. coming up to Trivul . Dear Sir , I 'm sorry my pretended coyness 
Has so long exercised your patience . 
Triu.   O , Madam , such high blessings deserve some expectation . 



Bell.   But , Sir , I shall no longer torture your desires . 



Triu.   Faith , Madam , Lovers are hard labourers , 
't is pity to keep back their wages . 


Bell.   Dear Trivultio , I am wholly thine . She runs to him and embraces him 



Triu.   How can that be , when the illustrious Senator , Starting . 

Your Husband may pled an elder Title ? 


Bell.   His was by purchase , Sir ; but yours free gift . 



Triu.   you 're very liberal of what 's not your own . 
I 'll ne'er grow rich by robberies : Venetian Commons 
Are well stocked ; I 'll never break enclosures . 


Bell.   Dear heart , what needs this nicety ? this is not 
A place for compliment , but execution . 
Cornanti may appear here , peeping ridiculously from behind the Arbour . 

Triu.   O , impudence ! Know , Madam , than I came to try what I could searce believe ; but knowing it , abhor the injury , intended against my noble friend ; which I durst not acquaint him with , till by this circumstance assured . I say , against my friend , and my father 's old Friend . 't is true , he refused to lend me Money ; but I know he did it for my good . 



Bell.   Well , well , thou 'lt never leave thy drolling , Trivultio . 



Triu.   no , no Madam , the Dignity of a Senator is not so cheaply to be valued . Were I disposed to those voluptuous sins , I 'd quench my Flames in common Waters , and not corrupt the noble Streams , to viciate a Race of Princes . 



Bell.   Come , come , Sir , you do but jest . She hangs upon him , he shakes her off : she comes and fawns again . 



Triu.   Nay , then I 'll be in earnest . O you vile Strumpet ; abuse my noble friend , and an illustrious Senator ! 't is : private justice , and 't is public too , to scourge thy sinful Carcase . Seems to beaten her violently with his Cane . 

Cornanti comes out from behind the Arbour , and interposes . 

Cor.   OH spare my Wife , spare my Wife , she 's Honest , she 's very honest . 



Triu.   Bless me ! the noble Clarissimo ! How came you here , Sir ? you 're too good natured ; no , no , it cannot be . Goes to beaten her again . 



Cor.   Hold , hold , for the Lord's sake : she is indeed , and placed me here to watch you . 



Triu.   She place you ? 't was a cunning honest trick of her . A man had been finely served that had come with a dishonest intent , la.  



Bell.   I could do no lesle than acquaint my Husband with your solicitations . 



Triu.   Nor I , than to vindicate his Honor. Pray , Madam , pardon my Zeal to your Husband . 



Cor.   Dear Trivultio , now shall I esteem thee , as the most faithful friend that I have in the World : my House and my Coffers are all open to thee . 



Triu.   O , good Sir , virtue 's its own reward . 



Cor.   That ever I could imagine there should be any baseness in my old friend , Cavalier Trivultio's Son , that noble Gentleman ! Dear Wife , I am sorry for thee : how is it , Honey ? 



Bell.   Well enough , if it may tend to your satisfaction . 



Cor.   I shall never harbour an ill thought of thee , as long as I live again . Such a Wife and such a Friend ! Kisses her . But this old Satyr Hircanio ! I cannot choose but laugh at him How his Wife peppered him ! Come , come away , my dear sweet Rogue ! — to my House , to rejoice with me and my Wife , upon this admirable confirmation , and settlement of my thoughts . 



Bell.   Now have I honestly accomplished one of my designs , to cure my Husband of his causeless jealousy : the next is , to help this wild young fellow to a Wife , to reclaim him . 



Cor.   Come let 's away . Such a Wife , and such a Friend ! Exeunt . 



ACT IU.  

SCENE I Cornanti's House . 

Cornanti in a modish Habit , broad Hat , open Breast , stiff Pantaloons , etc.  Corn.   How easy and light do I find myself , since I shaked off this lazy disease of Jealousy ! methinks I am not the same man Let me see . ( Takes out his Pocket-glass . ) Why , no : thou liest in thy throat , old Cornanti , if thou sayest so . I renounce thee and thy Works . Well , now that I am new rigged and trimmed , will I launch out into the Ocean of Bravery , and rout whole Squadrons of jealous Cuckolds . Woe be to the yellow Flags . What a world of Mistresses might a Man make , while he sits brooding over , and watching one Wife ! 



Enter Bellinganna . My Wife has not seen me in my new Clotheses yet . 
I 'll try if she knows me . Pray , Madam , what 's become of the jealous Coxcomb , your Husband ? 
Bell.   you 're very bold with him , Sir. Not at home . This is some intimate acquaintance of my husband 's ; Aside . they will abuse him sometimes . 't is a flat-nosed ugly fellow : he looks like one of my Husband's Bastards . 



Cor.   Abuse me ! I 'll try my Rhetoric . 



Bell.   ' 'Slife , I think 't is my Husband himself ! How these fashionable Clotheses , and white Peruigs , ( the great Levellers of Faces ) alter Men ! But I 'll take no notice of him . 



Cor.   Is 't possible so exquisite a Beauty 
Can rest contented in such frozen Arms ? 


Bell.   O very well , Sir : I love to lie cool . 



Cor.   Troth , Madam , to be plain with you , your husband 's my old acquaintance , and friend , my second-self , and I have a great inclination to oblige him with a pair of Horns . 



Bell.   Have you indeed , Sir ? I know not what you see in me , can justify this liberty of talking . Be mannerly , or begun , Sir.  



Cor.   Well , well , Madam , I 'll talk of something else . I was something the more free to droll with you , because they say your Husband , that was one of the most jealous Owls in nature , is now perfectly cured , and convinced of your honesty . I am the most contented Man the Earth bears . 



Bell.   Why , are you such a man ? 



Cor.   I mean , Madam , He said he was . What a Blockhead am I ! 



Bell.   Now will I torment him a little . you 're a goodly Man indeed to talk of being my Gallant ! If I would be concerned with any man in the World , it should be Trivultio . Ah , what a Genty man is this Trivultio ! 



Cor.   Hell and Devils , O the crafty Strumpet ! 't is too true I see . Goes to draw his Sword : she runs up to him . 



Bell.   Why , Husband ; pretty , smug-faced Husband , did not I know thee ? why wouldst thou conceal thyself ? I was resolved to vex thee a little for 't . 



Cor.   O , was it nothing else ? well enough . I did begin to relapse . 



Bell.   Why , Husband , you 're another manner of Man Pretty smirking Rogue , come kiss me . 



Cor.   That I am i'faith : I defy all the young fellows in Town for a Gallant . That I do , so I do . 



Enter Eunuch . Eun.   Madam , yonder 's Signior Hircanio without . 



Bell.   Very good : bid him come in ; I 'll leave you . Exit . 



Cor.   ay , I ; that will make rare sport . 
This Jealousy , what is 't ? A dream of Horns . 
What if I dreamt of Tails , or cloven Feet , 
And had no real blemish ? 
Suppose the Feat was done , what is it then ? 
A wound of Honour , but without a pain : 
The running through of a Ghost , the letting blood of Air , 
The kill a Chimaera . 
honour 's a Shadow , that a Shadow's Dream . 
Uncharitable Error , Vice of Plenty , 
A senseless fright 
That you want that of which you have too much . 
Is a Face worse for being seen : a voice for being heard 
By others ? A Hand , an Arm , a Mouth , and so the rest , 
For being touched , if they be unremoved ? 
Did I imagine that I wanted Arms , or Legs , 
And had them still , were I not more ridiculous 
Than loss of them could make me monstrous ? 
It was not so , when Men in Commons ranged , 
When every Male had Herds of hungry Females , 
When Lechery was ruled by public Votes , 
And Lovers , chose like Magistrates 
In cautious Commonwealths , 
The shorter time , the better for the Public ; 
then from full Meals they interchanged their Dainties , 
But since we were restrained to little Chaps . 
And slender Messes , it is our poverty 
That makes us narrow-souled , and envious , 
Snarling at every Passenger comes near 
Our stinking close-picked Bone.  


Enter Hircanio . Hir.   May I make bold to interrupt your Solitude ? 



Cor.   A worse diversion were a favour , Sir. Faith , Sir , 't is ill halting before a Cripple , I believe you 're of my mind , you take an opportunity to visit the Lady , when her husband 's out of doors . 



Hir.   O fie , Sir , she 's a person of Honour , 



Cor.   Be not so overwise , grave Sir ; I 'll deal frankly with you ; I 'm before hand with you : look , Sir ; do you see this knot of Diamonds ? A small gift of hers . 



Hir.   Death ? my Jewel . This the happy Favourite : we spend to maintain others . But pray , Sir , did you ever obtain the Favour ? 



Cor.   Why , is not this a great one ? 



Hir.   ay , I ; but the favour t' enjoy her , Sir.  



Cor.   Why , what d' ye think , we 're no such Lenten-lovers here in Italy , Jove be praised : i  lain with her five hundred times . 



Hir.   O the happy Man ! but is she not a rare Bedfellow ? 



Cor.   Faith , so , so : if it were not that she smells a little too much of the Frangipani in hot weather . But did you never kiss her too ? 



Hir.   Never but in a civil Salute , or so . 



Cor.   O than she stops her Wind : but she has a breath more poisonous than the Pump-water of a Ship that never Leaks . The devil 's in him if he likes her now . Aside . 



Hir.   O pray , Sir , then spare your leave , and speak a good word for me : I may chance to find you a Buona-roba in another place . 



Cor.   Say you so , Sir ? I 'll go about it straight . 



Hir.   Do , good Sir.  



Cor.   But remember your promise to Pimp for me , good grave Senator : 't is an Honourable employment , and fit for none but Statesmen . Exit . 



Hir.   I 'll not fail , Sir. This is the most hopeful way ; for I fear her appointment in the Wilderness was treacherous . 

Exit at the other door . 

The SCENE , A Street . 

Sforza walking in it , and stopping over against the Prison where Intrigo is . Sfor.   So , now I know where I am : here dwells my Goddess . Knocks on the Hilt , then Hems , Intrigo appears at the Grate . 

O , now my Heaven appears ; but clouded still . 
Dear Saint , 
Did ever mortal suffer so much violence ? 


Int.   Trust me , this noble Count , with Candour and Familiarity , owns my afflictions , is come to see me , and calls me Saint , because of my persecutions . Aside . Certainly , Sir , it was a most unexpected and inhuman restraint . 



Sfor.   ay , to be hurried and halled away by force , 
And mewed up in a kind of enchanted Castle . 
The Lady has caught cold by her voice . Aside . 


Int.   ay , and terrefyed and threatened , and kept prisoner , without any Ground or Reason . Parhelia looks out at a window hard by . 



Parh.   yonder 's the Count has stumbled upon some other Masqued Lady : some mistake . I must go to him : is he mad ? 



Intr.   Verily , dear Sir , this was the most unjust captivity that ever was , since the Jews were in Babylon . 



Sfor.   ay , or the Spaniards under the Moors , in Granada . 



Int.   ha , Moor ! does he abuse me ? 't is true , I could not get out this Black yet . Aside . What e'er the occasion was , is more than every body 's aware of ; but some shall hear on 't on both sides of their Ears . 



Sfor.   Nay , pray forget it now : Ladies hands strike gently . 



Int.   Well considered indeed , and 't is good manners to kiss the Rod , and bear it patiently . 



Sfor.   Why do you reproach me with my patience ? 
Where shall I find the Offenders ? I 'll tell you the whole story . 


Int.   How , can you tell my story better than myself ? 



Sfor.   Methinks the Lady speaks not pertinently . Aside . 
True , there was a Letter sent from a Lady . 


Int.   Now does he abuse me , for taking up Bellinganna's Note . Aside . 



Sfor.   Which I took to be yours . You might hear something ; but you saw nothing , but the beginning of the business . 



Int.   What means this ? Aside . 
But I hope I shall see an end on 't shortly . 


Sfor.   Of what , dear Madam ? Why do you speak so mystically ? Must your Sense , as well as Face , be still obscured from me ? 



Int.   Does he call me , Madam ? Without doubt he abuses me . Aside . For all your scoffs , Sir , some Ladies may have worse Faces ; though , I confess , I am a little Sunburnt at present . 



Sfor.   O pardon me , Divinest Beauty , my faith 's as strong as ever . 



Int.   Why , worse and worse ? I can endure no longer . 



Enter Parhelia veiled . Sfor.   I have incensed my Goddess . 



Parh.   Well , what 's the matter , Count ? 



Sfor.   Here comes the Enchantress . 



Parh.   Another Mistress ? What , are you mad ; or turned inconstant ? 



Sfor.   Avoid , Satan : you impudent Magician , Sorceress ; the Earth shall swallow me , before I 'll leave my first Engagements . 



Parh.   Why ? I 'm your first . 



Sfor.   't is self , you Witch , Medea , Conjurer . 



Parh.   there 's , no talking to him now ; but I 'll stay to see th' event . 



Sfor.   Concealed Divinity , offended Goddess Falls down on his knees towards the Prison . 
Once more impart thy Glorious Rays , 
And visit thy immutable Adorer . Plays and makes most loving Grimaces . 
Pedro , my Guittar . 


Int.   Ha! some Music ! Putting out his Head farther than ordinary . 



Parh.   ha , ha , he ! Intrigo in Prison , black as he was at my Cousin Bellinganna's , which you take for a Masque ; and here 's the Prison . Come , view your Mistress nearer . 



Sfor.   Death , 't is the grave fool indeed ! 



Int.   Abuse me still ! O the ignorance of Mankind , that judges all things by the event ! Withdraws . 



Parh.   Look here , that 's my window I spied you from . 



Sfor.   True , this is the place undoubtedly : now I remember it . Falls on his knees to her . 
A thousand pardons , Madam , if 't be you . 


Parh.   Nay , I 'll convince you . Come , go in with me into my 
House , and thence into some public place , 
Where you shall see her who your faith has tried , 
And judge , if well or ill , your Virtue was employed . Exeunt . 


Enter Jacomo , knocks at the Prison door , the Jailor opens the door . Jac.   Sir , Signior Cornanti has ordered you to release Intrigo . 



Jay .  Very well , Sir. Exit . 



Jac.   Methinks this imprisonment should , have so mortified him , that we shall hear no more of his Love-adventures at our House : but 't is ten to one but he will be launching out upon some new design . He can no more conceal his sergeant Wisdom , than a beggarly Gallant can stay within doors . with a Copper-laced Suit.  



Enter Intrigo and Jailor . Grave Signior Intrigo , you are enjoined not to speak a word of the occasion of your coming to our House . Farewell , Sir , Exit . 

Int.   This release was certainly procured by some overture from the amorous Lady , and the mollifyed Duegna , 

I will patiently expect another Summons . Exit . 


The SCENE , the Doge's Palace , with the same Furniture as before . 

Sforza walking in it with his veiled Mistress . Sfor.   Bless me , great Gods , what do I see , my glorious Prison ! the very same Room , the same Furniture , and the same Guards in Masks ! The Princess unveils , and he falls on his knees . 

O Heavens , the selfsame person ! 


Parh.   What , will you yet adore your shamefaced Idol ? 
( Sure she 's an Angel , 'cause invisible ) 
Or must I force you once again ? Drollingly , 


Sfor.   Mysterious Goddess , 
Blame not my disobedience , misled by duty . 
I 'm yours by such a cloud of Titles , that I 'm lost in 't : 
Slave to your Beauty , Subject to your Wit , 
And Captive to your Power , but as wise Princes 
Who conquer Kingdoms , though by Law their own , 
Claim by the Sword as the sublimest tenure , 
And scorn all other wrangling competitions : 
So let me be the Vassal of your greatness ; 
( Though Wit and Beauty , Empires without Arms , 
Chain me too fast ) kept in material Shackles ; 
And in the meanest Drudgeries employed , 
Where I may view my Tyrant's glorious Image . 


Parh.   I 'll not mistrust your Virtue , nor my Charms ; 
Your constancy has made me value both ; 
Nor call him Captive that 's invincible : 
love 's no Usurper , but a Natural Prince ; 
So good , he needs no Laws nor Customs to 
Restrain him ; nor to protect him , Arms : 
Harmless with Forces irresistible ; 
Invulnerable with naked Innocence . 
then you shall be my Prisoner , but at large ; 
Confined from nothing Love invites you to 


Sfor.   And Honour shall be judge what Love shall do . 



Enter Cornanti leading Aurana , and Trivultio leading Bellinganna . Corn.   A jolly company i'faith , if we had the Fiddles . Walks about Singing . 



Parh.   What , broke loose again , Cousin ? 



Aur.   Pray , Madam , how came you to hear of my escape ? 



Parh.   O , my Cousin Bellinganna and I , have kept a constant correspondence . Well , Count , that you may not be miserable alone , here are some other fellow-prisoners to Matrimony . 



Sfor.   If happiness may be increased by participation , or if I can receive any addition to what I have already , it is to see my friend Trivultio so . 



Triu.   Thanks , dear Count  



Sfor.   But , Madam , one doubt remains yet unresolved ; 
Who were your Angels , and who your Ghosts ? 


Parh.   These were my Ghosts : Pointing to her Guards . 
And these my Angels . Pointing to her Women and Pages . 


Cor.   I have a pretty crochet just now come into my Head : Yonder Parhelia and Bellinganna talk together . Trivultio , o' my conscience , is very honest , and would not cuckolded me , if he might ; and my wife 's a Woman of Honour : I have tried 'em both ; therefore will I cuckolded him . Ah quill est doux de fair , son cher amy Cocu . Come hither pretty Soul , I do intend to make Trivultio my Heir : will you give me leave to visit you , when your husband 's from home ? 



Aur.   'T will be the greater favour , Sir , that you will own me in his absence . 



Cor.   So , so ; Done and Done ; as plain as up and ride . Look how the poor fellows looks at me ! As jealous Triu. and Bell. pry at him , and sergeant a jealousy . as a Goose ! And my Wife too ! ay , Sir , if you knew how near you were being a Cuckold ! ( Laughs . ) How sneakingly a man looks that 's jealous ! ( Aside . ) But , me thinks the Rogue begins to look a squint at me . 



Triu.   I 'll fright him a little . Hark you , Sir , do you endeavour to corrupt my Mistress ? Angrily . 



Cor.   ' 'Slife , what shall I say ? Thy Mistress ! not for a world ? I 'm not such a Rogue . Make a Whore of her I intent shall bring Heirs to my Family ! 



Triu.   It seems you intent to get 'em yourself . Come , come , Sir ; 't is no jesting matter ; I overheard you . 



Cor.   ha , ha , he . Was it not fit for me to try whether she were honest , or no ? thou shouldst never have had her else : my Son and Heir marry a Whore ! I 'd see her burned first . If it had been any other Woman , I had been in earnest , la.  



Triu.   Was it only so ? I 'm satisfied . 



Cor.   O , are you so ? there 's wit for you , at a dead pinch , lafoy ! 
Poor easy Milksop , that shan't serve thy turn . 
thou art already Listed and Enrolled 
Into the Honourable Society . 
Corna , Corna , Corna chi vuol haver di Corna Sings . 
Hark thee , Trivultio , I have forty thousand Crowns to spare ; 
let me see , how many Whores will that make ? 


Triu.   Faith , Sir , I want Arithmetic to count ' 'em . Shall I reckon by Julio's , or Half Crowns ? 



Cor.   Half Crowns . A good Market-rate . Let me see , about eight hundred thousand of ' 'em . that 's all . I have a project , that every one of these Women shall bear me two Male Children at a birth every year : so that about twenty years hence , I shall be able to bring every year a fresh Army of Sixteen hundred thousand fight Men into the Field , out of my own Loins , Boy . The old Patriarches were Asses to me : poor impotent broken-bellyed Fumblers . 



Triu.   But , at this rate , you must get more Children in a night than Hercules . 



Cor.   Hercules ! Why , Hercules never eat French Pottage , nor Jelly , nor Champignons . A poor Carret-eating Rogue ! I 'll have all the Cordials and Elixirs , that Nature treasures up for the industrious , paid by the rich . My Physicians shall study nothing else but the Art of Procreation ; I 'll have none but those that can turn all Nerves into Bones , and all Meat into Marrow . 



Triu.   Right , Sir. You shall have all the three Concoctions in a minute , and the time gained from them shall be employed to lengthen Generation . 



Enter Visconti with Melinda ; Visconti , in his French Habit , stuck with Pistols , and a Musquetoon at 's back . Parh.   Well escaped , Madam . I see you 're as good as your word . 



Mel.   O , Madam , I am as it were at home , under the wings of my Tutor here . 



Visc.   And , Begar , me vil now teach you the finest leson in de vol vorld . 



Mel.   no other Lesson , Mounsieur , but the French Song : Sings a ridiculous French Song . 



Cor.   What the devil 's this fellow that Melind has got ? 



Visc.   Me be de Exant of de Guard to the Princess : vat is that to you ? 



Cor.   Ex : ang , with a pox to 't ! what 's that ? Aside . 
Good Mr. Exang be patient . — Turns his Head always at the word Exang , and laughs , for fear the other should see him . 


Visc.   Do you laughé at me ? 



Cor.   Pray excuse me , Sir ; 't is new word I had not heard before , a fine word : but I honour your Person as much as any man living , good Mr. Exang . Turns his Head and laughs . 



Sfor.   We shall have some Bloodshed by and by , between these two Heroes . 



Cor.   If I might be hanged , I cannot forbear talking to him Hark you , Mounsieur Exang , — ( Turns his Head and laughs . ) are not you some Dancing-master , or some such kind of fellow ? pray throw off your fight Tools a little , and teach me a Corante . Walking about , and singing . 



Visc.   Me Dancing-metre ! Begar you lie in de troate ; me corn dat . Me Metre Dance ? 



Cor.   What are you then ? a Fencing-master ? will you teach me the Stocade ? the Sa , Sa ? 



Visc.   Morbleu : the affront to the Noblesse . Me no Metre-dance , Metre-fence , no Artisan , no Burgeois , no Fout-man . Me be Gentil homme . You be the Son of the Whore , and the Beech , and de Kishen Wench , to say so : me marry does Lady de grand kalité . Me vil have satisfacseeon . 



Triu.   ' 'Slife , what have you done ? The Frenchmen are all Gentlemen abroad , unless their Clotheses disprove ' 'em . The Ladies never question it . We shall have a Challenge presently : will you please to accept of me for a Second ? 



Cor.   no , no ; I hope , no need of that . Trembling . 



Visc.   Me Bourgeois ! Me Roturier ! Me Metre Dance ! Walking angrily . 



Cor.   I did not care neither , but that I strained my Arm tother day , fight with the Watch : I can hardly stretch it out . And you know the chief Thrust lies in the Allongee . I hate to kill a man by halves . 



A Dance ; in the middle of which , Enter Parson . Bell.   Come , come , we loose time : are you ready to be married ? 

To the work presently , Mr. Parson . The three Couples join hands , Sforza and Parhelia ; Visconti and Melinda ; Trivultio and Aurana . A great noise without . ( stand off , stand off ; Traitors , Traitors . ) Clashing of Swords , the Women squeak . 


Parh.   O Lord , we are undone ! who would have thought . of any bodies coming here at this time ? 



Aur.   Heaven defend us . 



Visc.   Que Diable est sa ! 



Triu.   Have a good Heart , man , 't is nothing . Cornanti trembles . 



Cor.   sayst thou so , Boy ? Some frolic I warrant you . 



Some of the Vizarded Men , are upon the Stage , others come running in . Enter the Dog and the Procurators , the Yeomen of the Guard going before . Doge .  Seize on the Conspirators . 



Yeomem .  Deliver , deliver . They seize ' 'em . 



Doge .  If I had not come hither by accident , contrary to my custom , what a scandal had I lain under ! 

Bless me ! my Daughter ! 


Parh.   I humbly beg your Highness' pardon : 't was but harmless mirth . 



Doge .  With Armed Men in Vizards ? and in my Palace too , 
To wound my Servants , and oppose my Entrance ? 
I grieve at the dishonour of my spotless Race . 


Hir.   Just Heaven , my Daughter with her hare-brained Gallant so soon again ! O the wand'ring Whore ! 



Grim.   And mine too with her sharking Frenchman ! 
You Powers above , why am I not struck blind ? 
Degenerate Strumpet , couldst thou find none to make 
Thy Paramour , but this poor Mushroom ? 


Visc.   Begar , me corn your word : me no Mushroom , no Stool-toad . 



Grim.   If you be his Wife , you shall soon be Widow : I 'll have our French Cock roasted alive , with his Gizards and Sausages about him there . 



Mel.   O Lord ! 



Doge .  I 'm sorry Sir , to find you here , after so late an Honour given by the Senate . 



Sfor.   Sir , you will find Ingratitude a stranger to my thoughts . 



Doge .  A Parson too ? The Trumpet of Rebellion ! 
But , what ranting modish gentleman 's that ? 


Sfor.   't is old Signior Cornanti in disguise . 



Cor.   no , 't is false , Sir , 't is young Signior Cornanti . 



Hir.   How have I been abused then . 



Doge .  The Metamorphosis ! 



Cor.   What , you 're but in jest , Cousin ! ' will you never ha' done ? you 'll fright the poor Wenches out of their little wits . 



Grim.   'T will prove a sad jest , good Mounsieur . 



Cor.   Come , come , what a pox , this'll not pass . ha , ha , he . Do you think to make a fool of me too ? How you leer now ! Do you think , if there had been any Treason in 't , I , as a Senator , would not have discovered it ? Have not I as great a love for the Commonwealth , as yourself , Sir ? — Hark you , Sir , have you found out a Buona-roba for me yet ? To Hircanio . 



Doge .  This gentleman 's strangely altered , from a penurious Melancholy , to an exorbitant gaiety . Sure he counterfeits . 



Hir.   no doubt on 't , Sir , — I know this poor fellow's folly ; but let him be hanged however , that he may tell no tales . Aside . 



Cor.   Trivultio , dost thou see how finely they act their Parts ! as if it were a Stage-play . 



Doge .  I cannot guests what this design may be . 
These two are Subjects of the King of Spain . 


Hir.   The Case is plain , these strangers have designed 
To whore our Daughter , cut our Throats , and put 
A Spanish Yoke upon this freeborn State. 
I hear there 's an Army ready , marching from Milan : 
't is no time to think , Sir.  
Now , with this lie , will I come even with my Daughter's Ravisher , and my happy Rival though she hang for 't too , no matter . Aside . 



Sfor.   Great Gods , assert our innocence , 



Doge .  Gentlemen , this is no time time to defend yourselves , 
The danger urges . I must speedily 
Provide for the safety of the Republic . Visconti slips away . 
Guards look to the Prisoners , and keep 'em all in several Rooms , with a Guard to each , that there may be no contriving , or packing of set Tales . And you , Tipstaves , let the Council of Forty be Assembled immediately ; and let the Pope's Legate , Cardinal Colonna , though he arrived here but last night , and has not yet appeared in public , be desired to attend the Senate , in case of Ecclesiastical Censure , upon the lesser Offenders of this numerous Riot : 

That our neglect , Posterity condemn not , 
Nor the least Wheel in this rare Frame be shaken , 
Though to the ruin of our private Houses . Exit . 


Hir.   Look especially to this wild Traitor Trivultio . 



1 Gua.   I 'll warrant you , Sir. Exit with Triu.  



2 Gua.   what 's become of the Frenchman ? 



3 Gua.   I believe he 's run away . 



2 Gua.   that 's like ' 'em . Exit . 



Cor.   What a pox means this ? Hark you , Ladies' , if they should be in sober sadness after all , 't would vex one . 



Parh.   't is too true , Cousin . 



Cor.   Pox o'these grave fellows , there 's more malice in one of 'em , than in twenty of us young merry scabs . 



3 Gua.   Come away , Sir , do you rail at his Highness ? 



Cor.   What , I warrant you , you 're in good earnest , are you , you 'll be hanged as soon . 



3 Gua.   I 'll try that . Takes him . 



Cor.   Nay , prithee good Beef-eater , stay a little ; prithee , prithee . 



3 Gua.   Come aloft , Sir.  



The great fellow tucks him under his arm , and goes out with his heels foremost . Cor.   Do you know who I am ? 
A Senator , a Senator , a Senator , Kicks and struggles . Exeunt Guarded . 


The SCENE , A Street . 

Enter Tip-staffe and Circumstantio . What a coil 's here about this Master of thine ? I tell thee he 's not here . 

Cir.   Why there can be no affairs of State transacted without him . 



Tipst.   Honest Circumstantio , I see thou hast little to do , and I have a great deal of business , prithee take my Tipstaff , and summon the Cardinal . 



Cir.   O I know the House that was taken for him in the Strada della Chiesa ; I 'll do 't for you . Takes the Tipstaff . ] Exit . 



Enter a Watchman , with many of the Rabble about him . Visconti passes by hastily in his French Habit : the Watchman comes up to him . Watch.   Stand ; whither so fast ? Are not you one of the Conspirators ? 



Visc.   Me be pouré Estranger : 



1 Man   A Frenchman , a Frenchman . 



2 Man   A French Dog ; all the Plots come from thence . 



3 Man   Knock him down . 



4 Man   Brain him . This is he that set my House o fire . 't could be no body but a Frenchman . 



6 Man   This is he that got my Daughter with Child . 
That was a French trick too , 


Watch.   Keep the Peace neighbours , and let us bring him before the Senate . He was in as much haste , as if he had been coming from Candia or Gygery . 



All.   ay , I , away with him , away with him . A Plot , a Plot : the French , the French.  



1 Man   they 'll burn the City . 



2 Man   they 'll worry our Wives and Children . 



3 Man   they 'll let in the Sea , and drown us . 



5 Man   ' was they that brought the Plague into Venice . 



7 Man   ay , and the Pox too , formerly . 



Watch.   what 's your name ? 



Visc.   Me he Metre de Language to Signior Grimani . 
Me be no Frenchman , me be Italieen . 


1 Man   no matter , you shall be hanged for looking like one 



2 Man   ay , for clipping the true Language . 



3 Man   You shall be hanged Al-a-mode de France . 



Watch.   Come , come away . 



All.   Away with him , away with him . 



Boys follow him crying . A Mounsire . A Mounser . A Munchir . A Mister Mownseer . Exeunt all in a hurry , haling him away . The SCENE A Prison with a Bed in 't . 

Trivultio in his Nightgown and Cap. A Table , with bottles of Wine , and Glasses upon it . A Soldier to guard him . Triu.   Come , honest Guard , take thy Glass in thy hand . 

Gives him one . 

Guard.   God bless your Worship . 



Triu.   Now let us sing the Catch I showed thee . 



SONG . 

How happy 's our Fate , 
To live thus in State , 
With our Guards at our Gate ! 
None can have access 
But must Court and Address 
And their business confess : 
then take off thy Glass on thy dutiful Knee , Guard knelt and drinks . 
For Princes are Prisoners as well as we . 
Triu.   Now fill my Glass : faith , if we must die , let 's die merrily however . 



Guard.   I have heard 'em say , Sir , that drink 's the cure of all Diseases . 



Triu.   no , thou 'rt mistaken . 
It sweetens sorrow , but removes it hot , 
Unless the mind be made Serene before , 
With sublime preparations : then 't is the highest 
Lechery to die , and , next to that , to be in prison . 


Guard.   Troth , Master , methinks you make very light on 't . 
If I were sure there were good Drink i' th' other World , 
I did not care if I were dead too . 


Triu.   Why dost thou doubt it , man ? They say every thing is more plentiful there , than here ; and all Men are alike , and no poor . 



Guard.   O Lord , Master , how can you tell ? 



Triu.   Why , there are several that have stayed in the other World a little time : as some that have been in long Swoons , Apoplexies , and preternatural Sleeps ; others , that have been halfe-hanged , cut down again , and recovered . The other world , they say , is just such another place , as the Countries of America , Brazile , Mexico and Peru : there are few that venture to go there , but such as can live here no longer ; but , when they come thither , they find every thing so good there , that they never think of coming back again . 



Guard.   O Lord , what would I give to speak with one of those Men that have been in the other World ! 



Triu.   This fellow 's deadly simple , and drunk to boot . Aside . Why , thou shalt speak with one presently . I 'm a dying man , thou knowest , and if I were hanged outright now , 't were but some hours sooner ; and a toy takes me i th' head , to have thee put my Garter about my neck , and half hang me , that I may see what the other World is , we 're going to : but be sure you leave pulling when I make signs to give o'er . 



Guard.   O that would be fine , and pleasant , indeed , if I did not hurt you . But , Master , if I should hang you in good earnest , I should be hanged for you . 



Triu.   O , never fear that . Here , take my Garter , make a running knot , and on with it . ( Guard puts it on . ) Now according to the laudable custom of Malefactors , will I give this wicked World a short exhortation . 



Guard.   O , pray Master , do . 



Triu.   Good People , I am come hither to be a spectacle to Men and Angels , Critics , and Devils ; I am to pay a debt to Nature , which she has made over to a greedy Huswife called Fortune , who calls for it in before the day of payment . But Death is Honourable , Advantageous , and Necessary : Honourable in old Men , to make room for younger ; Advantageous to those that get Legacies by it : and Necessary for Married people , that have no other Jayl-delivery . I am most justly brought hither to suffer this ignominious death , and as my Legacy , do beqneath you an useful caution , concerning that horrid and crying sin , that has brought me to this most Tragical end . My Godly Parents brought me up most virtuously , in hopes to have sold me to a Wife to the greater advantage : but at fifteen years of age , the Devil , the Devil grew powerful in me , and tempted me to a sin , Nature would never have thought of ( good people : I tremble to name it ) Speaks softly and quivering . getting my Mother's Maid with Child . Ah , Bettina , Bettina , thou taughtst me a trick I could never leave since . Thy Sweetmeats , and thy Sugar-plums , have brought me to the Gallows . Hangman , I freely forgive thee ; and more freely , than ever any dying man did . Do thy Office.  



Guard.   O Gemini ! what a brave Speech will he make when he comes to 't in good earnest ! 



Triv ,  Pull down my Nightcap that I may not fright thee , and that I may see more inwardly into the other world . Pulls down his Cap , and pulls the Garter . 



Guard.   What do you see now , Master ? 



Triu.   Nothing yet , but a Myst. Pull harder . Triu. puts his fingers between his Throat and the Garter . 

Now pull o God's name . Guard pulls a little ; then asks . 


Guard.   What do you see now Master ? The Rope's very close : pray God he recover . 



Triu.   I see Rocks and Mountains , and He counterfeits a rattling in his Throat . craggy places , and Men crawling upon 'em , like Snails or Maggots . Now I am come into a fair Plain , all set with Orange-trees , Jessamin , and Rosetrees : the most delicious place that in my life , I ever saw . But o , o , o , now I see — 



Guard.   What , Master , what ? he speaks mighty plain to be three quarters hanged ; but 't is a lightning before death . 



Triu.   O the blessed sight ! At the end of this Plain , I see a great huge pair of blue Stairs , as broad as all the whole World , made all of Turkey Stones , and Lapis Lazuli's , and they are stuck as thick with Checquins , as ever they can hold , with many broad Portagu'us , and English Jacobus' amongst 'em ; and there is one piece of huge bright Gold , as broad as from hence to Milan , and another paler piece , as broad as from hence to Malamocco . 



Guard.   Now , o my conscience , these same blue Stairs are the Skies ; and the Stars , it seems , are nothing but Checquins ; and the Planets , Portugu'us , and Cobus' : and the Sun and Moon are those same great gallant pieces . Pray Master let me be hanged too , and go to Heaven presently . 



Triu.   no , no ; I will see a little more . O the lovely Vision ! Now do I see a great many of my old acquaintance , and some poor Tenants of my Father's , that are dead , going up and down these Stairs , and taking out the great pieces , and playing with 'em at Coits , and tossing about the little ones like Tennis-balls . 



Guard.   O Lord , Master , let me go to Heaven too , for God's sake : I can stay no longer . I will slacken the Rope . 



Triu.   Now the Devil take thee for a cross fool : it 's all gone again . 



Guard.   Nay , good Master , bened angry , but hang me a little too . 



Triu.   Come , and thou wilt , on that condition thou 'lt hang me again . Pulls off his Cap.  



Guard.   I will indeed , Master . Trivultio puts the Garter about his Neck , and the Cap on his Head , and pulls hard . 



Triu.   What dost thou see now ? 



Guard.   Nothing yet Master but a black Mist : Speaks as if he were almost strangled . Triu. picks the key of the door out of his pocket , shows it , and runs and unlocks the door , and and locks it again upon him . 
And yet methinks the Rope is hard enough . 


Triu.   O 't will clear up by and by . 



Guard.   Pull a little more . I see nothing in the World yet , but a great Fog . Pull , for God's sake , Master . Why don't you pull ? Master , where are you ? Pulls off his Cap , and misses him . 



Triu.   Here , Boy , here : is the Mist cleared up yet ? Peeping in at the Gate . 



Guard.   How the Devil got you there ? Feels for his Key and misses it . 



Triu.   How many Checquins have you got in the other World ? will you play at Coits , or Tennis with ' 'em ? Are they as heavy as Venetian Money ? sure they are light , they could not toss 'em so nimbly else . Guard goes to the door , and finds it locked . 



Guard.   O the Traitor ! stop Thief , stop . 



The Scene changes to a part of the Senate-house . 

Enter Intrigo and a Doorkeeper . Door-k .  If you be discovered I shall be sent to the Galleys ; for none are admitted into the Senate-house , but Gentlemen of Venice . 



Int.   Fear not , here 's twenty Checquins for you . 



Door-k .  Here , Sir , you may lie at large in this great Trunk of Records : 't is a little Dining-room . Shows him the Trunk . I 'll get a hole made on purpose to put out your Head and Hands , that you may listen and take Notes . 



Int.   Very well , How shall I hug myself , to hear the condemnation of these imprudent Revelers ! and besides , dive into the fresh Intriqus and Cabinet Councils , that come piping hot from Rome ! How freely will this Cardinal empty himself into this bosom of mine , and know not who has drained him ! This Art do we Politicians call pumping by Proxy , or the Magical Screw . The Scene shuts upon ' 'em . 



Enter Trivultio . So so , I am got off clear . Now for another device to help my friends . The Cardinal Legate is newly come to Town , and scarce known to any man in Venice . Great Bodies move slowly , and he does not think the Senate is in such great haste ; I will have a trick to prevent this Cardinal . The greatest , difficulty will be , to get Hircanio's Daughter ; But Cornanti is bound to make the Match for me , for the kindness I did , in curing him of Jealousy . And shall I then attempt his wife again ? Ingrateful God of Love ! Pox on 't , in matter of Women , the deceit is Trivial . Civilised Mankind that live in Towns , lie with one another's Wives , as Gentlemen cheat in Horses , by a Tacit compact , and rule among themselves . Let Cornanti pursue his inclinations , I 'll follow mine . 

Man's Gratitude may sometimes rise from Pride . 
Friendship to others from the first written Law 
Of pleasing of himself ; why may not I endure 
The burden of a wilful obligation ; 
And not be tossing it still back again 
To one who throws it upon me to ease himself ? 
For why should Mankind live by Rule and Measure . 
Since all his Virtue rises from his Pleasure ? 
ACT v.  

The SCENE , The Senate-house . 

The Senate sitting , the Dog and Procurators of S. Marks and all the Officers : the Prisoners at Bar : Sfor. Parh. Cor. Bell. Visc. Mel. Trivultio disguised like the Cardinal Legat. All in form of Judicature . 

1 Sen.   The boldest frolic this wise State has known , 



2 Sen.   't is Treason in a high degree . 



3 Sen.   'T was nothing but an amorous Gambol . 



4 Sen.   One of Cupid's Conspiracies , 
The God that drolls at Law. 
But hear the Advocate-general . Signior Satana arises up in his Bar-gown . 


Sata .  Most Gracious Fathers , 
I thank auspicious Heaven I find you here , 
That no black unprevented crime has caused 
Your absence , or Adjourned your Session to another World. 
For since this Infant-commonwealth first struggled 
Out of its Chaos , and assumed this glorious form , 
There never was such dark , such hellish practice , 
Not to be spoken of , if not acted first , 
Nor told to listening Children , but with sharpest vengeance , 
lest they should con the Crimes , or hate their Fathers . 
For their supine Indulgence . But what was this design ? 
Naught but subversion of the State. A Peccadillo . 
Naught but the breaking the most curious frame 
The World can boast of , since the Heavens were built . 
A Love toy . 
Making a Chaos of a Firmament , 
A pretty fiddling , dancing , kissing Treason . 
But where was this ? even in the Doge's Palace , 
The sacred Fort , and safeguard of the Prince . 
And when ? 
Even in the Carnival , that time of Licence , 
When all Men may turn Traitors . And by whom ? 
Even by Soldiers , and by Foreigners : 
Men that have Interest in the Camp and Closet ; 
None in the Senate . Men that have no Bowels , 
Nor native tenderness for this our Mother . 
But you 'll say 't was but 
A merry meeting with some Women in 't . 
A Play with Snakes to make it innocent . 
no Vice is perfect , but a woman 's in 't : 
Women , the Lures of Schismatics and Rebels , 
The Pleas of Nature , in the mouth of Grace 
Those Cables twisted round with silken Threads 
Of immaterial Doctrines that would quickly break 
But for the strong attractives under-woven . 


Hir.   True , Learned Satana , 't was a horrid Treason ; 
And should the Senate wink at this great Crime , 
Like Manlius , with these Hands I 'd Sacrifice 
My Offspring to just Vengeance . 


2 Sen.   Spoken like his Ancestors . 



1 Sen.   This was a foreign project . 



2 Sen.   The King of Spain's , 

The Universal Monarch . Intrigo putting his Headand Handsout of the Trunk , unseen to the Senate . 


Int.   Like enough , the King of Spain a hand in 
Stealing the Man's Daughter . Notes it in a Table-book . 


4 Sen.   This 't is to favour Strangers . 



3 Sen.   Yet , some not stick to say , 't was but a Wedding ; 

The more suspicious . Was not the execution 
Of protestants at Paris , acted at one ? 


4 Sen.   But , were there no design , 
Yet , in the rigour of the Law , 't is death 
To go disguised in Arms : expressly against 
The Letter of the Act of Ordelafo , 
For Swords and Vizors ne'er were worn together 
But in believing England , where Saints turn Rebels . 


2 Sen.   Let 'em die then . A Proveditor , or Senator rises up . 



prov.   Illustrious Fathers , did I think this riot . 
Had the least face of Treason , or of Murder , 
None should more blindly Censure , deafly Judge ; 
But since the root of this so deep design 
Is the weak Passion Love , whose follies are 
It's Wisdom , Crimes its Virtues : shall we be so severe 
T' inflict such punishments , as these disorders , backed 
With bloody'st mischiefs , only could deserve ? 
Had these poor Lovers undermined your Senate , 
Killed some chief Magistrate , or fired your City , 
Seized on the Arsenal , or but contrived , or hoped for . 
The least of these ; then had we justly trembled : 
But they , fierce Wights , were in an open Villa , 
Their Bulwarks were their Hedges , Orange Trees their Blinds , 
Their Trumpets , Fiddles , Banners , Ladies Scarves ; 
And Petticoats their Trenches . Monstrous Treasons ! 
Dark Machinations ! Dreadful Spanish Plots ! Intrigo peeps out again . 


Int.   Bulwarks Hedges , Petticoats Trenches ? 
My life for 't , some modern way of Fortification ; 
How this age improves ! Notes it again . 


prov.   Best torture 'em , and mortify those Limbs . 
Which Love would have made suppler before morning : 
Make 'em confess , and choose to die , for death . 
Is lesle to them , than or delay , or pain . 
Extort how many dangerous deep Intriqus 
What Juntoes they have had to blow up hearts , 
How many Towns   taken , plundered , fired , and slighted , 
And which of them by Storm , and which by Treaty , 
And give a List of the Confederates . 
'T would cause some blushes in the Senate House . 
But you must know all ! These were bloody Plots 
To blow up Virgin-treasures : not S. mark 's . 


Cor.   Brave Boy ! 



2 Sen.   Pshaw ! now I am clearly convinced , there was no Treason in 't . 



3 Sen.   no , none at all . 



4 Sen.   Yes , a treasonable piece of Lechery . 



3 Sen.   An inconsiderate Frolic . 
Count Sforza has deserved well of the State.  


2 Sen.   The Ladies could have no design to betray their Fathers . 



Doge .  The severity of the Act of Ordelafo , has been mitigated by two subsequent Statutes , in Gradonico and Friuli's times ; so that now the Law stands thus . This Fact is death without mercy , if proved intentional for Treason , or for Murder ; if otherwise , the Galleys , or Ecclesiastical Censure , according to the circumstances , which heighten or extenuate the crime , Gentlemen , which of these three are you resolved on ? 



All Sen.   Ecclesiastical Censure , Ecclesiastical Censure . 



Doge .  Your Eminence is desired to give your Sacred Sentence . 
And with the sparks of your derived Infallibility , 
To light our stumbling Reason . 


Cor.   How bloodily this Cardinal looks ! 'T would troubble me to die in the very Flower of my Age thus . 



Visc.   And , begar , me have de Fieure quart . 



Cor.   Hark you Mr. Exang , you shall have the Honour to be hanged first , because of your Command ; Mounsieur Exang , la Precedence Monsou . 



Cryer .  Silence at the Bar.  



Triu.   Most Honoured Senators , I much commend your charity . Rising up . 
And Christian tenderness , in case of Blood . 
Your Infant State required that cautious rigour . 
Strict Laws , are like Steel Bodies , good for growing Limbs ; 
But when the Joints are knit , they are not helps , but burdens . 
That which now seems t' have caused this great disorder , 
Is that wild passion Love , which is not tamed , 
But with much Prayer and Fasting , by us Men in Orders ; 
And secular Men must be allowed some grains . 
Most Laws exempt Mad Men from Executions ; 
Their death breeds pity more than terror . All these errors 
Were done by chance , when Love had banished Reason . 
To put to death six Lovers on their Wedding day , 
When they are going to give life to others , 
Would be a Massacre , not execution . 


Int.   Peeps out . that 's to say , People in the solemn Act of Generation ought not to be disturbed A pious Cardinal . 



Triu.   Poor easy Souls , they were going to betray 
Themselves , not you : you fright 'em from the snare 
they 're running in such haste to thrust their Heads in . 


Cor.   ' 'Slife , this'll prove a brave Man of God  



Visc.   O de goodman o the Shourshe . 



Cor.   This fellow talks as if he were frighting away Crows ; 't is pity you should scape hanging , good Mr. Exang . 



Visc.   Begar old Man , if me be no hanged , me vil have satisfacseon for de affront in the Hoose of the great Dogue . 



Cor.   Bear witness , Gentlemen , he threatens me , I shall go in dread of my life ; therefore for the security of my Person , good Mr. Cardinal , hang us both together . 



Cryer .  Peace in the Court ; Peace , Peace . 



Triu.   Four punishments the Church allows us , 
Fire , Galleys , Inquisition , Excommunication : 
Or other Penance at the Priest's discretion . 
And , to conclude , they need 
no other Flames to burn in , but their own : 
Love is no Heresy , but a Catholic Doctrine ; 
The same way made and finished over all the World ; 
Needs no Inquisitors , but cautious Parents . 
Hard Oars were never made for such soft Hands . 
Soul-wounding Excommunications 
Are blows too Airy for such stiffnecked Riots , 
Bordering on Treason . 


Sfor.   whither now ! shall we be transported ? 



Triu.   Love was the cause , 't is fit that Love should suffer . 



Sfor.   I had rather die , than loose my Mistress . 



Triu.   then I decree , by virtue of the Holy Chair's , 
And this Republick's Laws , that first the Prisoners 
Implore the pardon of th' offended Senate ; 
And , farthermore , I solemnly condemn 'em 
To the perpetual Prison of the Nuptial Sheets . 
Late Councils hold , Marriage from Heaven was sent , 
Not the reward of Love , but punishment . 


All Sen.   Agreed , agreed . Admirable Divine Sentence ! 



Doge .  The judgement 's very mild ; but I submit , 
To th' Reverend Church . Count Sforza's Virtue is 
A double Fortune . 
Daughter , are you contented with your choice . 


Par.   The State has tried his Service , I , his Faith , 
With some experiments not lesle distracting 
I dare not now dispute your Highness' Sentence . 


Grim.   My Daughter married to 
A wand'ring Frenchman ! Your Eminence be pleased 
To pause upon that Judgement . 


Int.   peeps out . A Frenchman too in the Plot ! o my word , a shrewd deep-thinking Nation : they cover internal Wisdom , with external Folly.  



Triu.   It is irrevocable . 
'T was first her choice , and now her punishment . 


Visc.   Begar old Fader in de law , me no Vagaboon , me no Rogue wand'ring . 



Int.   Mark his politic Accent , and his craftily transposed Sense . Who sees the bottom of this ? 



Visc. to Grim.   Sir , to perplex you no longer . I am not the first French-master , that has run away with a Gentleman's Daughter . Pulls off his Disguise . 

Your daughter 's wondrous apt to learn the Language . 


1 Sen.   Of Nature , Sir.  



2 Sen.   Visconti ! 



Cor.   Why , my dear friend , and no Exeng ! Hugs him . 



3 Sen.   A good Match for your Daughter . 



Grim.   I have had better offers ; but I acquiesce 
In Sacred Justice , with my Daughter's liking . 


Mel.   Our Vows are sealed long since , Sir.  



Hir.   here 's mad work i'faith ! 
I 'm glad the Reveller is not here , to marry 
My Daughter . 


1 Sen.   How does your Eminence dispose of the married Couple ? 



Triu.   Their punishment shall be to live at home 
Together ; and that 's enough for her ; 
His , to return from a glittering Gallant , to a Threadbare 
Usurer , and to tell , 
All his own Money till his fingers ache , 
Without a Deputy Scraper . 


Cor.   I 'll throw 't away first ! 



Triu.   And for the credit of his forsaken Dignity , 
To have his Senator's Gown stitched to his Back . 


Cor.   This whoreson long gown will utterly spoil my Boon mien . 



Int.   Nay , if the Clarissimo's begin to go in Quirpo once farewell Christendom , unless it be done upon design . 



Bell.   no matter , Husband , if your Reverend jealousy return not . 



Cor.   The Devil lodge such Guests , Cornanti never . 



1 Sen.   But , Reverend Father , there is yet one of 
The chief Malefactors that has broke prison , 
And left his Mistress Aurana behind him . 
How do you Sentence him ? 


Triu.   To be married to her , assoon as ever he 's caught . I have heard 'em say , he 's a wand'ring Gallant ; 't will be a true punishment to him : if an ordinary Prison will not hold him , clap him into the Dungeon . 



Aur.   O that Trivultio was here , to thank this good Cardinal . 



Hir.   Nay , Reverend Sir , let not so rude a fellow 
Enjoy my only Heir , his Fortune too , incertain . 


Triu.   I do not use to have Decrees so Canvased . 



Hir.   then , if I must consent to lose a Father's power , 
Let 'em inherit wrangling poverty . 
I 'll never bait her Misery with my Fortune . 


Cor.   He a rude fellow ? 't is false , Sir. ON my knowledge he 's as honest a young Man of his Body , as any 's within a hundred mile of his Head , though I say it , that should not . I have tried him , Sir if you go to that , and you too . Hold your prating , Hircanio : shall I tell all ? Puts his finger to his Nose . 



Hir.   Betrayed , and shamed ! 
Come , come , Sir , what 's this to his Fortune 


Cor.   't is thus much , Sir : I have enough for him , and for myself too ; and he shall have your Daughter , in spite of your teeth , if you go to that , lafoy ! say I told you so . 

Tara tang . Sings . 


Int.   This old gentleman 's much improved of late in his Parts and Elocution : He has been an unknown wise . Man these forty years . Heaven guard the State.  



Hir.   Was ever Man thus Hectored by a Priest and a Lunatic ! 



2 Sen.   How does your Eminence adjudge the Complices ? 



Triu.   Alas poor hirelings ! Let 'em all be pardoned . 



All Sen.   Excellent Sentence ! 



Doge .  Let all those Decrees be entered in the Journal . 



All Sen.   ay , I , I Great cry . 



Hir.   — No. Faintly , after all . 



1 Sen.   Do you observe the malicious feeble Negative ? 



Enter Cardinal Colonna , the Pope's Legat.  What another Cardinal ? 
2 Sen.   there 's never a Cardinal at Venice more ; 
But old Grimaldi , that lies Bedrid . 


1 Sen.   True. Cardinal Bragadino is at Rome , 
In his waiting upon his Holiness . 


2 Sen.   But 't is the same I think . 



3 Sen.   An Apparition ! 
Do my Eyes see double ? 
here 's another Cardinal Colonna ! 


4 Sen.   All old Cardinals look alike , as all old Women do . 



Card.   Ha! What do I see ? another in my place ! Comes forward . 
Honoured Senators , I come t' attend your pleasures . 


Doge .  What , a double Cardinal Colonna ! Many Senators rise up as frighted 
Sure this is some Impostor . 


Grim.   Rather a Spirit : one of the Devils Prelates . Trivultio rises up . 



1 Sen.   That he may be , and yet be Flesh and Blood . 



Int.   I knew it would not pass thus . 
I warrant you , wise Rome keeps a Counterpart 
Of every Cardinal she sends abroad . 


Triu.   Most worthy Sons of the Church ; 
I beg your Justice from the Holy Chair , 
Upon this Sacrilegious Impostor , 
For abusing our Sacred Habit Legatine . 


Card.   Why , Gentlemen , would you make me believe 
I am not myself ? 
Impudent Monster , thou 'rt a Cheat , 
An Anathema , to abuse the Church , 
And to usurp my Seat. If thou 'rt a Cardinal , 
thou art no Legate from his Holiness . Goes up to him furiously , as if he would pull him out . 


I will Dethrone thee . 
Triu.   Fathers , look to the Honour of the Christian Faith.  



1 Sen.   Right , Such violence becomes not his Profession . 



Doge .  Forbear to affronted his Eminence . 



3 Sen.   no rude action till the thing is known . 



Int.   These Cardinals are spies one upon another , and know it not . 



Doge .  Tip-staffe , Who was it that was sent to summon his Eminence ? 



Tip.   A fellow that 's without . 



Doge .  Call him in . Tip-staffe goes to the door , and brings in Circumstantio . 

What did you summon the Cardinal here ? Pointing to Trivultio . 


Cir.   With due submission to your Honour's Worship , 
And striking sail to your intellectual Gravity , 
And without offence be it spoken to his 
Cardinal's Worship , if I may take the boldness to say so , 
I did . 


Int.   My man entered into the grand Intrigue ! ON my word , he was always a hopeful fellow . 



Doge .  A very formal Coxcomb . Well then , turn about . 
Did you fetch this Cardinal too here ? Pointing to the Cardinal . 


Cir.   I marry did I , as I told you before , Looks at one , then at another , as if he were frighted . will you not believe me ? what are you skipped hither so soon ? 



Card.   Honest friend , did not you fetch me ? 



Cir.   ay , I 'm sure I fetched you , if you be the same with the other ; for I fetched but one : but if your Worships be two of you , I know not which I fetched . 



Card.   Why , dost thou not know me ? and didst thou not come to me , to my House in the Strada della Chiesa ? 



Cir.   ay , that I 'll be sworn I did , and I know your Worship very well : but , beshrew my heart , I think your worship 's a Astrologer , or a Negromonster , that can make two people of one . 



3 Sen.   Strange Labyrinth ? 



2 Sen.   The fellow himself cannot know it . 



Doge .  Nothing but circumstance of time and place , 
Can clear this doubt . Tip-staffe , did you employ this fellow ? 


Tip.   May it please your Highness , not I ; but he told me , that one of our fellows did , who should have gone himself . 



Doge .  This may be a Rogue , then . Come , come , sirrah , tell the whole story , with all the circumstances of it , how , where , and from whom you received your Message ; and how long since you delivered it , and where you met with the Cardinal , with other particulars . 



Cir.   I shall , Sir , tell you in short . Going to go this morning towards a Club we have kept these two years , as much as to say a merry meeting , as much as to say , at the Three Tuns in the Piazza dei Jardini , as fine a Sign as any 's in Venice , and as well Painted , by the same token , we had bespoke to Supper , a dish of stewed Chestnuts , five stumps of Capons Legs we had borrowed of our Masters , a Fricaceé of Frogs , and a dish of buttered Snails ; I had not gone half way , but as sure as my Grandfather was at Lepanto , who should I meet with by the way , but a great crowd of people with Halberds , and Staffs , carrying Thiefs or Traitors to prison . 



Int.   An excellent Narrative ! Little does the Senate know , by whose Precepts he was formed to this perfection . 



1 Sen.   A very impertinent fellow ! Aside , 



Cir.   So , I stepped aside into a Shop , to see 'em pass : the Shopkeeper asked me what I would buy ; But , intending my Money for other uses , out I went into the Street again ; and , as sure as my Grandfather was at Lepanto , the company was almost lost : yet I had a mind to follow 'em ; but , for all my haste , I was resolved to take a dram of the Bottle by the way . 



Card.   Honest friend , come to the point . You know where you found me , and what you found me doing , who was with me , and how I promised you to come presently , as soon as I had dispatched my business with the Canons of S. Mark , whom you saw there . 



Cir.   O Lord , Sir ! what are you mad , Sir ? — Scratches his Head.  Now have you clearly put me out , that I cannot remember one word more , if I were to be hanged for 't ; unless I begin again , word for word . 



Int.   Alas-a-day , his old infirmity ! 't may spoil his State-course . 



Doge .  So so : this is a made tale . 



1 Sen.   A mere juggle , and contrivance between ' 'em . 



2 Sen.   And the fellow makes himself simple , to be the lesle suspected . 



Cir.   Indeed , my Lords , what I speak is very true ; but I am a little out in may story , and the Lesson I learned of my Master . 



Doge .  So , so , he confesses the Master and the Scholar . 



1 Sen.   't is now as clear as day . 



4 Sen.   A mere studied Lesson , and the fellow could say no farther ; for he had it only by rote . 



Doge .  Away with the Mock-cardinal , and his Man : clap the Master and Scholar close in Irons , till farther order . 

The Tipstaffs seize ' 'em . 

3 Sen.   Disrobe and whip him . 



4 Sen.   no , let him be sent in this Habit to Rome , and there punished . 



2 Sen.   A most impious Act.  



4 Sen.   Profane . 



2 Sen.   Abominable . 



Card.   Is there no Justice here ? 
then I appeal unto the Holy Chair . 


1 Sen.   We allow no Appeals . Away with him . 



All Sen.   Away with him , away with him . 



Triu.   Most Honoured Fathers , I thank you for your Zeal 
To th' Holy Church ; but since this is a day 
Of general jollity , I freely here 
Forgive all the affronts done to myself , 
As Christian Charity commands , and humbly 
Beg your pardons for the Mock-cardinal . 


Doge .  O , Reverend Sir , you are too mortified ; 
Our Zeal to th' Holy Church cannot pass by 
So great a scandal . 


Triu.   I beg it once again , with earnest Prayers . 
And hope you will not envy me that meritorious Act.  


Doge ,  Well . Since your Eminence is pleased to be 
So merciful , we have no reason to 
Be more severe . 


3 Sen.   no , not at all . 



4 Sen.   't is a day 
Of public mirth : the Carnival time too . 


2 Sen.   Let him be pardoned , and confess his knavery . 



All Sen.   ay , I , I Trivultio pulls off his Disguise . 



Triu.   Great thanks , Illustrious Fathers , for your Gracious Pardon . 



Doge .  Is 't possible ? 



Cor.   Trivultio ! whough ! 



Int.   Look you there now ; I knew 't would end in this . But the poor fellow will be hanged . This comes of his capering and Dancing without design stil. This 't is to have the Bark of a Frenchman , but none of the Sap.  



1 Sen.   This was a Masterpiece , i'faith . Trivultio runs from his Seat , and falls upon his knees before the Cardinal . 



2 Sen.   Deserves Reward as well as Pardon . 



Hir.   A Cheat , a Cheat , a new Sentence : 



Triu.   Your Pardon , Reverend Sir.  



Card.   Bless me ! the wanton wag Trivultio ! 
I am beholding to the Impostor however , 
For his good Nature : Heaven forgive you . Cornanti snatches him away from before the Cardinal , and kisses him . 


Cor.   Ah , my dear Boy , have I found thee again ! 
thou haste more wit than the whole Senate . 


Hir.   How now , Sir ? 



Cor.   I marry has he , Sir , for all you , if you go to that . 



Doge .    please your Eminence to assume your Seat ? Cardinal goes up to his Seat.  



Hir.   The Sentence now is void , though the Impostor's pardoned . 



Card.   Pray , Sir , let 's hear the Case . 



Doge .  It is , in short , a Riot against our Laws , 
Though the intention reached no farther than 
Honourable Marriage ; and it pleased the Senate , 
In mitigation of their punishment , 
To leave 'em to the mercy of the Church : 
This Youth steps in disguised ; Ordains 'em Marriage ; 
And though the Fact was bold and illusory , 
Yet the whole Senate has approved the Judgement . 


All Sen.   ay , I , I  



Hir.   This will not pass . My Lord , we 're abused and cheated , And our Daughters ruined . 



3 Sen.   no , no , my Lord , 
't is mere malice : the Matches are suitable . 


Cor.   If you talk more , Hircanio , your Daughter shan't have him , if she would down on her knees to him . 



Card.   Shall I please one , or all ? 
As 't is the State's civility to give 
The Church this Power ; so 't is his Holiness' Order 
In all things , to comply with this Illustrious House , 
Where Reason or Religion do not suffer . 
I 'll not recede one tittle from the former Sentence , 
Though 't was irregular and monstrous ; 
Yet happy in the approbation of 
This most Judicious , Honourable Senate . 


All Sen.   Thanks to your Eminence , thanks , thanks . 



Doge .  Enrol the Judgement , and this day's transactions . 



Int.   Shallow proceedings ! if I would but appear now , I could turn the whole business again . 



Hir.   Baffled again ! Well , is not this business to be cured Aside to Satana . 



Sat.   Not possibly . 



Hir.   no quick in Law left ? Try , good Satana . 



Sat.   't is in vain , Sir.  



Hir.   Come , here 's your Fee.  



Sat.   By no means , Sir , 't is not for that . 



Hir.   Pray , Sir , take it . Presses him . 



Sat.   Not in this place , indeed Sir.  



Hir.   Well , well , then I 'll keep it for you . 



Sat.   Who would have thought he would have pocketed it again ! but I shall have it . Let me see 



Hir.   How this Fee works ! 



Sat.   I have found a most material objection . Hark you , Sir. Whisper together . 



Doge .  What means this Caballing in Court ? The Senate's ready to Adjourn . 



Hir.   Gentlemen , I humbly conceive this Sentence is voids For I conceive — 



1 Sen.   This Lawyer has infected him with their Dubious Salvo . 



Hir.   The Pope's Ordinary is not a Judge , but Minister of the Court ; and I desire the Records may be searched , to see if there were ever any Precedent of this Nature . 



Int.   how 's that ? 



3 Sen.   What power soever the Legate has , the Judgement has been confirmed by us . 



Doge .  Nevertheless , let us search the Records for his satisfaction . 



Int.   Now shall I be rewarded for this my inquisitive care of the State.  



Doge .  Clerk , make a search . 



2.  Sen.   ay , we cannot deny that . One of the Clerks opens the Trunk , and takes out Records . 



1 Clerk.   Bless me ! the Parchments move . 



2 Clerk.   If ever Book breathed in this World , here 's one . Another looking in . 



1 Sen.   What , are you mad ? 



1 Clerk.   A Spirit , a Spirit ? 



2 Sen.   Some Rat that stirs among the Papers . 



2 Clerk.   O Heavens ! a Ghost , in human shape ! 



Hir.   A miracle , a miracle ! The Lawgiver , 
Great Ordelafo , come himself in person , 
To vindicate his ancient Godlike Law.  


Sat.   If Earth be silent , see just Heaven will speak . 
no lesle a wonder than a Resurrection , 
A man laid in his Grave six hundred years 
Now rises up , to wake our drowsy Justice . 
Let us prepare t' adore the reverend Ghost , 
And welcome him unto his ancient Seat.  


1 Sen.   't is strange ! All the Senators seem afraid , and express nothing of contempt , but reverence 



2.  Sen.   What may this mean ? 



4 Sen.   A general Consternation ! 



Doge .  Strange fright ! 



Card.   What ever thou art , Ghost , Devil , Angel , 
What ever thy dreadful message is to Earth , 
IN th' name of Heaven arise . Intrigo puts up his Head a little , and his white Peruke appears . 


Sata .  See , see , his glorious Head ! 
So rises , by degrees , great Ordelafo , 
Like the all-piercing Phoebus from his Eastern Couch , 
To give us light in these most dark affairs . 
See how his hoary Hairs , grown white in the service of 
This Commonwealth , are perfect yet upon 
His watchful Temples . His Face as black as Mummy , Intrigo's Face appears a little . 
Yet firm and solid , and seems pensive . 
he 's pondering something for the public good . Intrigo starts upright in the Trunk . 


Int.   ay , that I am , grave Senator's . A general laughter . And , let me tell you , under the Rose . 't has been my sole employment for some years , though I have little thanks for 't : and , though I am not Ordelaso . 

Yet take my cautions as not lesle authentic ; 
Which are , to keep your Laws in violate . 


Doge .  Still in the right Intrigo : 
Wise , virtuous Intrigo , 
Those ills are fatal where no pain 's endured , 
The wiser sort of fools are never cured . 


Grim.   True ; he has such a politic Lethargy upon him , he cannot feel the Pricks and Lance of ill fortune . 

He has been listening here , to increase his prudence , 
Notwithstanding his late affronts at Signior 
Cornanti's . 


Corn.   Was there eversuch a fool as this fellow ? 
We natural fools are nothing to him . 


Triu.   Why do you thus eclipse so acquaint a Beauty ? [ To Intrigo . ] 
That radiant face ! Exit . 


Corn.   Sir , I perceive you 're a great Virtuoso ; 
Will you teach me the Receipt to get Blackamoor Children , 
That a man may know 'em to be his own ? 
All hail , great Ordelafo ! [ To Hircanio . ] 
If Earth be silent , see , just Heaven will speak . [ To Satana . ] 


Enter Trivultio , leading in Circumstantio . Triu.   Look , here 's your Master . 



Circle .  'Sfoot , I think it be . Makes three legs . 
With due submission to your horrible prudence , 
And striking sail to your infernal gravity , 
I am almost out of my little wits . 
To see your worship again . 


1 Sen.   So , so , here 's the lesson 
That deceived the Senate . 


Cryer .  Silence in the Court.  



Doge .  How came this fellow here ? 



Clerk.   an 't please your Highness , I can't imagine , unless he clapped the Keys in Clay , or bribed the Lock-smith . 



Doge .  Was there ever such a curious Coxcomb ! 
Clerk of the Precedents , how do you find the case ? 


2 Clerk.   The Ordinary in this case is Judge , 
From whom lies no appeal , but to the Pope : 
The Decimo tertio of Gradonico , 
And the Octavo of Andrea Grittio 


Doge .  Master Procurator , you see your remedy . 



Card.   Which will be worse than the disease : His Holiness 
Will trust the Senate , and myself in weightier matters . 


Hir.   Well , I submit . However , this marriage will take off 
Trivultio's edge from my Mistress Bellinganna , 
And the old fool Cornanti , may do something for him . 


Corn.   O Sir , is your stomach come down ? 
Did not I tell you , I would make you do 't ? 
Well , Sir , I 'll remember Trivultio in my Will ; 
But I don't intend to die these forty years yet . 


Hir.   Lawyer , this search was not worth a Fee.  



Sat.   I 'll take heed of being Meal-mouthed hereafter . 



4 Sen.   ( Clapping his hand on his breast gravely . ) In good sadness this was but a foolish trick 
For such a wise man as Signior Intrigo . 


1 Sen.   Why , there 's it ; every man knows him not . 
These invisible fools are the destruction 
Of private Families , as well as States . 
Nor are they easily to be prevented 
By wiser men , because their follies are 
Always in disguise . 


2 Sen.   Right . This sort of fools walk always with dark Lanterns ; and they aught more to be fined for wearing Vizors over their follies , than others over their faces . 



3 Sen.   I think , indeed , they ought to be as punishables 
By Law , as men that cover their Wells and Coal-pits 
With rotten Wood and Briars , not solid Board's , 
That will not keep men from falling in , but 
Decoy 'em to their ruin by security . 


Doge .  Gentlemen , 't is time to adjourn : There only rests , What punishment upon this grave offender ? 



Grim.   Troth , Gentlemen , my opinion is , That all extraordinary fools ought to have Pensions , instead of Punishments , especially those that bring up a new Mode of Folly. There is Honour due to Eminence in all things , and rewards for new inventions . 



2 Sen.   True ; if all men were wise , there would be none to make sport with . Fools serve for honest men to laugh at , as well as Knaves to prey upon . 



3 Sen.   If it were not for the amorous Foot in Tragedies , and the merry Fool in Comedies , what would become of the Players ? 



1 Sen.   ay , more than that ; if there were no Fools , there would be no Wits . Every new Fool begets a new Play ; either as the Subject , or the Composer . 



Doge .  no question but they are as necessary in a Commonwealth , as wiser men , for variety . 

Nothing so well Mankind's diversion Fits , 
As difference of Sexes , and of Wits . Exeunt omnes . 


EPILOGUE , As it was spoken by Mr. Haines . 

AS Charms are Nonsense , Nonsense seems a Charm , 
Which hearers of all Judgement does disarm ; 
For Songs and Scenes , a double Audience bring , 
And Doggrel takes , which Smiths in Satin sing . 
Now to Machine's , and a dull Mask you run , 
We find that wit 's the Monster you would eat , 
And by my troth 't is most discreetly done . 
For since , with Vice and Folly , Wit is fed , 
Through Mercy 't is , most of you are not dead . 
Players turn Puppets now at your desire , 
In their mouth 's Nonsense , in their Tails a Wire , 
They fly through Clouds of Clouts , and showers of Fire . 
A kind of losing Loadum is their Game , 
Where the worst Writer has the greatest Fame . 
To get vile Plays like theirs , shall be our care ; 
But of such awkard Actors we despair . 
False taught at first — 
Like Bowls ill biased , still the more they run , 
they 're further off , then when they first begun . 
In Comedy their unweighed Action mark , 
there 's one is such a dear familiar spark , 
He yawns , as if he were but half awake ; 
And fribling for free speaking , does mistake . 
False accent and neglectful Action too 
They have both so nigh good , yet neither true , 
That both together , like an ape 's mock face 
By near resembling Man , do Man disgrace . 
Through paced ill Actors , may perhaps be cured , 
Half Players like half Wits , can't be endured . 
Yet these are they , who durst expose the Age 
Of the great Wonder of our English Stage . 
Whom Nature seemed to form for your delight , 
And bid him speak , as she bid Shakespeare write . 
Those Blades indeed are Cripples in their Art 
Mimmick his Foot , but not his speaking part . 
Let them the Traitor or Volpone try , 
could they — 
Rage like Cethegus , or like Cassius die , 
They never had sent to Paris for such Fancies , 
As monster 's heads , and Merry Andrew's Dances . 
Withered perhaps , not perished we appear , 
But they were blighted , and never came to bear . 
th' old Poets dressed your Mistress Wit before , 
These draw you on with an old Painted Whore , 
And sell like Bawds , patched Plays for Maids twice over . 
Yet they may scorn our House and Actors too , 
Since they have swelled so high to hector you . 
They cry , Pox o these Covent Garden Men , 
Damn 'em , not one of them , but keeps out Ten. 
Were they once gone , we for those thundering Blades , 
Should have an Audience of substantial Trades , 
Who love our muzzled Boys , and tearing Fellows , 
My Lord great Neptune , and great Nephew Aeolus . 
O how the merry Citizen's in love 
With — 
Psyche , the Goddess of each Field and Grove . 
He cries i faith , methinks 't is well enough , 
But you roar out and cry , 't is all damned stuff . 
So to their House the graver Fops repair , 
While Men of Wit , find one another here . 
FINIS . 

