Philo & musus . 



THE Right Honourable , PORTRAYED . OR , THE VIZARD Taken off PRETENDERS . WITH Persuasive Reasons to allure the Will , and reduce men's Actions to obtain the Title . AS ALSO A set Boundary to the Honour of Saints departed . 

By Samuel Gilbert , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 

London : Printed by F. Clark , for Thomas Simmons at the Prince's Arms in Ludgate-street . 1682.  

To the Right Reverend Father in God , Henry , Lord Bishop of London , one of His Majesty's most Honourable Privy Council , etc.  

Your Lordship , Honourable by Birth , Breeding , Parts and Place , and Right Honourable by your Piety , Pains and Stability in the Church of England , a Blessing God hath bestowed upon her , as a sound Pillar for her Support , and a Saint Paul for a Preacher : attended with an experienced magnanimous Courage , and yet of a most affable , courteous and obliging Demeanour ; for all which famed and beloved by this and other Nations ; though envied and maligned by our Church's Enemies . 

To whom should this small Piece , concerning the Right Honourable , Address itself for Protection , but to yourself that is so , and an Encourager of all Means to make others deserve that Title . I therefore , without considering the vast disproportion between the Worthiness of the Person to whom I write , and the Meaness of what is Written on this Subject , as well as Obscurity of the Author ; presume ( yet with as much Humility as the Attempt can bear ) to beg your Lordship's Patronage thereof , against the Villifying of those persons that are only Honourable to the Eyes of the Vulgar . And that here your Lordship would be pleased to accept the Acknowledgement of Favours formerly extended towards me , though I believe both those and myself dropped out of your Memory ; but must ever be retained in mine . And whilst I live , make my daily Petitions to Heaven , ( for the whole Nations , as well as your Lordship's Interest ) that Safety , Health , Prosperity , and Honour , with length of Days , may be your Portion in this Life , and Eternal Happiness in the next . And conclude with one to yourself , that I may be accepted amongst the meanest of your Servants , which Title is with all humility assumed by 

S. G.  

TO THE READER . 

Many that Act the parts of persons of Quality on the present Stage of the Universe , thinks that Honour consists only in riches , Height , and strength of Parts , Worldly Preferments , the Cap and Knee , the Vogue of the Vulgar , etc. all which may be attained , and yet the Possessors not one Spark of true Honour in them , if not attended by Holiness , it 's inseparable Companion , to make this and their mistake perspicuous , to characterise the Right Honourable , and to persuade those that are o' th' ways well qualified thereto , is the only Design of this small priced Pocket Piece , without Reflections on any , but good Intentions to all , under what scandalous imposed Titles soever , Tories or Whiggs . 

Vale.  

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE . 

HONOUR is the world 's great Diana , the Idol whereunto it Sacrifices . 

There are none of such poor and pusillanimous Spirits , as would not say ( at least ) with Saul to Samuel , Honour me before the People . Every Man would have a good Name that desire's not a good Conscience , the Sinner being ashamed to be accounted what he is not ashamed to be : Absalon having no Virtues to eternize his Memory , erects a Pillar , and calls it after his own Name . The Heathens were so drunk with a giddy desire of Honour , that they would be content to exchange their Lives for a dead Statue . Empedocles will Sacrifice his Life to the Idol of Honour , and cast himself into the flames of Aetna ; In a word , there is no such flatness and poverty of Spirit , that hath not one spark of Ambition in him , to aspire to Honour : As there are none but desire it , so few that deserve it ; many , they would be great , they will not be good ; Glorious , but not Gracious ; they would be Honourable , but will not be Holy.  

Many would rise to Honour , but they quite mistake the Footstool ; And seek it rather any where than in Holiness ; nay , some think they cannot be Honourable enough , unless Godless . Holiness is posted over to Colleges and Hospitals , etc. and thought by some to be fit only for those , that are little better ( as they think ) than mere Posts , It is enough , say they , for dry Divines , Men of low and poor Spirits ( as they erroneously judge such ) of grave , subdued , mortified and retired Minds : it is not for them that stand upon their Punctilic's and Terms of Honour , height of Place , sublimity of Spirit , nobleness and generous Disposition : do not most Men glory in their Shame , as most ashamed of that which is the only Honour of a Christian his Crown and Garland ? It is Reason that makes us Men , but Holiness Christians ; and better no Men , if not Christians . 't is the Badge of Christianity that makes us Honourable , for that is the Livery of the King of Kings . The Honour the World bestows is but the Livery the worst sort of People generally give those that commonly pay dear for its trimming , must seem their Servants , nay indeed be real slaves to their humours that gets into popular applause or worldly preferments , which some think the greatest Dignity . But what says the Psalmist , that Kingly Prophet , inspired from above , This Honour have all his Saints , 



Holiness and Honour God hath ever knit together with a Chain of Adamant , a Bond of such inseparable and individual combination , as that the Oracle from Heaven hath pronounced it , Them that honour me I will honour . As shame of Sin , so Honour is the natural Offspring of Grace ; As the shadow of the Body to the light of the Sun , so Honour is always an inseparable attendant of Holiness , like some officious Serviteur still at his Master's Elbow . Holiness and Honour , like a pair of Turtle Doves , where you see the one , the other cannot be far ; or the two Cherubims upon the Mercy-seat , by a reciprocal and mutual prospect continually interview each other . The true Jacob's Ladder , or Stair of Ascent to Glory , is no other than Grace , and the high way to Honour , Holiness : no way to become great but by being good , nor truly honourable , but by being holy , yea even in God's stile , Optimus goes before Maximus , as if God himself , who is essentially great , could not be great , if not good , or not so great , if not so good , or not the greatest of all , if not the best of All.  

Only the truly Holy , are the truly Honourable : 

1.  Because Honour is nothing else but an attestation of the worth and worthiness that is in any Man ; whence Aristotle tells us , Honour est in honorante , non in honorato . 



He means the outward performance of such respective Ceremonies and Compliments of Honour , as the worth and quality of the person honoured deserveth . 

Now the Spirit of God , the best Herald that ever was , and therefore knows best how to give Names and Titles , never makes mention of the Saints but with Titles full of Honour and Grace ; as Abraham , the Father of the Faithful , and God's Friend ; Moses my Servant , faithful in all the House of God. David a Man after the model of God's own heart . Zachary a holy and just Man John Baptist a shining and burning Lamp : none greater than he born amongst Women . If Achilles were happy , because he had Homer to be the Trumpeter of his Praises , how much more they , that have God himself to be the Blazoner and Herald of their Honour . 

It is not unworthy observation how regardless God is of Greatness without Goodness , Honour without Holiness ; such an one was Dives in that Historical Parable in the Gospel shall go nameless ; the Spirit of God will not so much as vouchsafe him a Name ; there was a quidam , etc. a certain Man , etc.  So Jeconiah of the Seed-royal , and the last of the Kings that ever swayed the Sceptre of Judah , God will not do him the honour to give him the length of his Name , but instead of Jeconiah , he cuts off and curtails a piece of it , and calls him not Jeconiah , but in disdain , Coniah . But when God would grace and honour Abraham , as if Abram was not enough , he spins out his Name to the full length , and not willing to part with it too soon out of his Mouth , and calls him Abraham . Scripture tells us , that Saul Reigned only two years , and yet it is manifest by the Story that he Reigned more than two Years : what doth the Spirit of Truth mistake in matters of Chronology and Calculation of Times ? no , he takes notice of Saul's Reign no farther than he Reigned well ; and therefore Saul only Reigned two years , because two years well . The Tribe of Dan , both in Chronicles and Apocalypse , is not reckoned : amongst the Tribes : did the Spirit of God mistake his account therein ? No! but Dan was the first of all the Tribes , that fell to Idolatry , and therefore unworthy to be honoured with a Name in God's Register . 

The World indeed is a very unskilful Herald , and then ofttimes graceth when God dishonoureth , advanceth greatness without goodness : But God emblazoning the Coat of Arms of his honourable ones , only prizeth goodness without greatness , if they be his Saints they are honourable . All the Honour that comes from the World , is but like the reflection of a deceitful Looking-glass , that represents to the beholder's view , nothing lesle than the true proportion of the Face , yea happily to a distorted and deformed Countenance , giveth Grace and Beauty . But that is the true Honour indeed , without all stain or taint , that comes down from him , who alone is the God of honour , and therefore alone can give it ; He that is from Heaven is above all , and therefore his Testimony is so too ; not he who Commends himself is allowed , but he whom God Commends ; He is the true worth whose praise is not of Men , but of God : and therefore Honour si quaeratur , illic quaeratur , ubi nemo indignus honoratur . 

2.  Because they only are the most Royally descended , from the noblest Stock , the honourablest Blood that ever the Sun saw , sc . the Blood of Christ : hence it is that they have Styles given them so full of Honour by the exactest Herald , the Spirit of God ; for is it not an honourable preferment , only to serve him , whom to serve is to Reign ? Methinks , saith St. Jerome , when I hear St. Paul begin every Epistle with Paulus Apostolus servus Jesus Christi , he is more proud of this Title , than if he had said , Perfect us pretorii , aut exercitus Imperiatoris Tiberii ; Captain of the Guard , or General of Tiberius his Army . David , though a King , was ambitious of no greater Preferment in his Service , than to be a poor Doorkeeper : Here Solomon's Servants happy that stood in his presence , and not those that stand continually in God's presence ? who is a greater than Solomon ? but as if to be a Servant were not honourable enough , he makes us Friends . Thus Abraham is called God's friend . But as if to be a friend were not honour enough , they are not only admitted to God's Court , but to his Privy Council . Thus was Abraham God's Privy Counsellor . Shall I hide from Abraham the thing I mean to do . Surely the Lord God will do nothing but he revealeth his Secrets unto his Servants the Prophets . And the Secrets of the Lord are revealed to them that fear him . But as if here were not honour enough , he makes them all Sons and Daughters to himself , and what is it nothing to be Son and Daughter in Law to a King ? but as if to be Sons and Daughters were not honour enough , he makes them his Heirs , Coheirs with Christ , to share and divide the Inheritance with the natural Son of God , yea such an honour it is to be God's heir , that as each Son is an heir , so an heir to the whole inheritance , the whole Kingdom ; but as if all this were not yet honour enough he hath drawn us yet nearer to him by Marriage , he hath Married us to himself , with an everlasting Covenant . And in that day I will make a Covenant for them , etc.  

And I will betrothe thee unto me for ever , yea I will betrothe thee unto me in righteousness and in judgement , and in loving kindness and in mercy . 

I will even betrothe thee unto me in faithfulness , and thou shalt know the Lord  

And then the Rule is in Civil Law , Mulier fulget radiis mariti . 



The Wife shines with the Beams of her Husband , the Wife cannot be base where the Husband is honourable ; by this Marriage Knot he hath made them bone of his bone , and flesh of his flesh , nay parts and members of him , and if one member be had in honour , doth not every member share in it ; yea the honour that is done one , is done to each one , because all the members are but parts of and make up one body . 

Thus we see how full of honour holy men are , and what glorious things are spoken of them ; which made good Theodosius , one of the best of the Roman Emperors , count it greater honour to be Membrum Ecclesiae quam Caput Imperii , a Member of the Church than Head of the Empire . 

3.  Because their Attendance and Guard is honourable , no lesle than a Royal Guard of Angels , like so many heavenly Janissaries to keep them in their ways , that they dash not their feet against stones : so far doth God honour them , that he makes even his Angels themselves those glorious and excellent Spirits , to be ministering Spirits for their sakes that shall be heirs of their salvation . 

4.  Their Reward is honourable ; it is no petty Farm , or minor Cottage , nor inferior Office , nor vanishing dignity , but a Kingdom , and that a Kingdom of Glory , so called to kindle in us a more ardent desire after it : Glory being a thing whereof we are naturally ambitious ; what an honourable estate than is this , which is attended with such a glorious reward . It was an unjust Aspersion that those Hypocrites in Malachy went about to cast on the the Service of God : It is a vain thing to serve the Lord , and what profit ? What profit is there we can desire , that is not to be had in God's Service ? whoever served this Master and went not always away Royally rewarded ! other Masters take Servants , but it is as well for their own benefit as their Servants , but God takes his merely for the benefit and honour of those that serve him , to dignify them with special Honour . Hence is it we find such glorious things attributed to the Saints in Scripture ; they are called Kings and Priests , and Temples of the Living God , Judges of the World , yea Angels too : The Signet upon God's right hand : The Apple of his Eye : His Crown of Glory , and Diadem in God's right hand . O what glorious and goodly things are spoken of the Saints of God ? what a happy confluence of Honour attends them at every turn ? Such and such Honour have all his Saints . 

What is the most that an Earthly Monarch can bestow upon his Favourite and Minion , when he sets his Wits on work to honour him , why ! to clothe him in Purple and Royal Apparel , to set a Princely Diadem on his Head , to put a Chain of Gold about his Neck , a Ring upon his Finger , to set him in a Triumphant Chariot , with proclamation of the King's favour ; this is all that earthly Caesars can bestow upon their Favourites ; But what is this to the Honour of God's Saints , what is the shadow to the substance ? instead of fine Linen and Royal Apparel , they have the Royal Robes of Grace , the King's Daughter is all glorious within . They shall not have a fading , but a flourishing ; not a mortal , but an immortal Crown , not of Gold , but of Glory ; instead of a Chain of Gold , St. Peter's Chain of Heavenly Graces ; instead of a Ring they are planted as Rings and Signets on Christ's right hand . And thus shall it be done to the man whom God honour's . 

And thus 't is apparent that only the Holy ones are truly honourable , the only men that excel upon the Earth . They are more excellent than their Neighbours . They are the only men , the men of a thousand ; they are as David's Servants told him , worth thousands of others . And it must needs be so , for the Garland of true Honour is only twisted and woven of the Flowers of Spiritual Graces , that alone which makes us Holy , makes us Honourable , nothing mends the Name , but what mends the Conscience . A holy and a gracious Life hath a far fairer prospect in the Field of Honour , than all worldly advantages besides . 

A Field of Sincerity , charged with Deeds of Piety , cannot but be accomplished with a Crest of Glory . 

The Heathens themselves , that Lighted all their Divinity at Nature's Candle , whom Saint Peter calls purblind , that cannot see a far off , could say that Honour was the proper reward of Virtue . 

The Egyptians amongst their Mystical and Hierogliphical Emblems , painted Honour next to Humility , averring what Solomon hath since recorded , before Honour goes Humility . And the ancient Romans so contrived their Temple , that a Man must avoidable pass through the Temple of Virtue , before he touched the Stair of Honour . 

Thus it stands good both in God's and Man's account , that Grace is the Highway to Glory , and Holiness to Honour . And here I dare be bold to Challenge all Ages and Times , who ever was there , that honoured God , and was not honoured again . Yea even whilst the Saints live on earth , they want not honour , they are honoured by God himself , Angel , Good men , nay by Evil men . Holiness strikes an impression of Reverence , even into the hearts of those that hate it , that those that have not hearts to love it , are forced to admire it . Herod Reverenced John Baptist , not because a great or learned , but because a holy and just man ; holiness hath such a dazzling and sparkling Lustre , even in the Consciences of the worst of Men , that they cannot but in their own Bosoms give it an honourable Testimony . 

To what purpose then , doth the Wicked Man brag of his House , and Heraldry , derive his Line of Honour from never so noble Progenitors , since God honour's him not , he hath not one drop of honourable Blood in him , his Honour is but like some Pillar of Smoke , that vanishes and dissolves of itself , it is but like a blazing Star , the very Matter of it , is nothing else but a gross and Terrestrial Exhalation , that at last perishes with self-ruin . Well may he while he life's command the outward Ceremony , but never the honour of the heart : well may he make a blaze , and shine in the World while he life's , but when his Candle is out , he ends like a Snuff that cause's a Noisome Smell in the Nostrils both of God and Man ; when he dies , all his Honour is interred in the Dust , his Name and himself is buried together : and at his Funeral hath more in Black than in Mourning ; and never till then satisfied the living so well , as by his dying , they rejoice at his burying , but with this allay of grief , That it was no sooner ; never doing so good a deed to his Country before as to leave it . 

Hoc solum fecit nobile , quod periit . 
This only he did Nobly , that he died . 


At the Birth of such Men we ought to mourn rather than at their Funerals , were we but Astrologers good enough to Calculate the truth of their ensuing ill Conditions ; but not as the Thracians at the Birth of their Children , because they are born to misery , but because a misery is born to us , and rejoice at their death , not because they are taken from evil to come , but because an evil is taken from us , and those that are to come . 

Who then would not endeavour by their holiness to live the people's wish , and not by their wickedness their fear , and by their passing Bell to sadden , not rejoice them as for a deliverance . Nay , Jehoiakim , though a King , shall be buried with the burial of an Ass . Joash shall not have any honourable Sepulture amongst amongst the Kings of Judah , whereas Jehoiada , though a Priest , shall be buried amongst them , because he had done good to Israel and God's House , but Joash to neither , he had no care to honour God whilst he lived , and God will not honour him when he is dead . Not all the Balm of Gilead , nor the sweetest Arabian Odours , nor the costliest Spices of India , nor the richest Boxes of Spikenard , nor the most fragrant and delicate Perfumes , compounded of the rarest Ingredients , with all the Skill and Art of Apothecaries , or Embalmers , are able to preserve a wicked Man's Name from rottenness and putrefaction . Those that honour God shall be honoured , but those that despise him shall be despised . 

't is Goodness not Greatness that holdeth out to the last , and therefore Goodness more honoured than Greatness : When a wealth Merchant bragged to Lycon , a wise Philosopher , of the multitude of his great Ships and Furniture for Sea , being able to trade into all parts ; the wise man made this answer , I esteem not that to be Felicity which hangs upon Ropes and Cables . Thus when a man is at the last cast , it is Piety and true Godliness , the fear of God , the pleasant Echo sounding from that Murus Aheneus , Brazen wall of an upright Conscience : not Plenty and Prosperity , Earthly Honours ( which are but transitory ) that shall stand a man in stead . The Smoke of a great Man's Sacrifice smells never the sweeter before God , because he is clothed in Silk , or like the Bird of Paradise , adorned with Plumes and fine Feathers . No! it is the inside that God regards ; he looks on Man's Obedience , requires his Service , love's his Thankfulness , respects his Holiness , and will reward his Faithfulness . 

Alas ! what is the honour and greatness of worldly men , but empty vanity . It was told to Agrippina , Nero's Mother , that her Son should be Emperor , and that he should afterwards kill his own Mother , to which Agrippina replied , Occidat modo imperet . Let my Son be so , and then let him kill me and spare not : so Thirsty was she of Honour . 

Tell me what are swelling Titles , but as so many Rattles to still childish men's Ambitions ? And what is Honour and Greatness in the World ! Honour is like the Meteor that life's in the Air , so doth these in the breath of other men ; it is like a Gale of Wind which moves the Ship , sometimes Wind is down , a man hath lost his honour , and lives to see himself entombed ; sometimes this Wind is too high , how oft have many been blown to Hell , while they have been sailing with a brisk wind of Popular Applause ! So that Honour is but Magnum nihil , a glorious fancy , seemingly great , a real nothing , it doth not make a man really the better , but too often the worse : for a man swelled with Honour ( wanting Grace ) is like a man in a Dropsy , whose Bigness is his Disease . But Holiness is an excellent thing , the true Basis of right Honour . Alexander coming with his Army against Jerusalem , Jaddus the High Priest went out of the City to meet him , adorned with his Priestly Robes , an upper Garment of Purple embroidered with Gold , and a golden Plate on the fore side , wherein the Name of God was written ; the sight was so grave and solemn , that the Emperor fell to the ground , as Reverencing the Name that was inscribed thereon . Thus it is that in holiness there is such a sparkling Lustre , that whosoever beholds it , must needs be astonished at it : holiness is a beautiful thing , it carries a graceful Majesty along with it , wheresoever , or in whomsoever it is truly and sincerely professed , so that none but such are truly honourable . 

Than surely none shall ( or should ) be honoured , but those whom God honour's , and God honour's none but those that honour him , and none honour him but those that are holy ; if a man would be honourable indeed , let him tread the paths of the Lord , for they lead to lasting , everlasting honour : In the hands of wisdom is honour as well as wealth . 

The wise shall inherit glory , etc. be but so wise as to honour him in all the passages of his Worship , and you shall have his Word for your preferment ; true honour it comes neither from the East nor West , from South or North , but from above , and there rests where the God of honour placeth it ; therefore seek to be approved of him : who alone is able to set the Crown of true and lasting glory round your Temples : be but a Saint and you shall be honoured whilst you live , but when you are dead much more : Honour is compared to a shadow , which sometimes goes before and sometimes follows the Body : so the Hovour of the Saints , if it go not before them while they live , it shall be sure to follow them when they are dead . Those that die in the Lord , their works shall follow them . i e. To be rewarded with Glory in Heaven , and with Honour upon Earth , when even the Saints of God remove out of the room of this World , they leave a sweet perfume of a good Name behind them , that smells most graciously in the Nostrils both of God and Man : a good Man , though he die childless , yet leaves a good Name behind him , as his Heir ; a Name better than that of Son and Daughter . The memory of the just is blessed . Solomon says not Benedictio adest Capiti justi , in the Singular Number , a blessing , as if some single or scattered blessing only did befall him ; but Benedictiones , a Collection and Concurrence of Blessings ; and those Adsunt capiti , they are upon the Head ; put indeed by an usual , though figurative form of Speech , for the whole Man , yet importing , that these Blessings as they are manifold and various for Number , so are they for their Nature , Eminent and Conspicuous . Adsunt , he hath these blessings not in hope or reversion only , jus ad rem , but jus in re , blessings are upon the head of , etc. even in this life he stands or actually seized , or undoubtedly assured and ascertained of them : and one of the blessings that befalls a holy Man , is , that he shall leave a good Name behind him , and that is rather to be chosen , than to leave great riches behind him : a good Name is better than precious Ointment . The Woman in the Gospel that poured out the Ointment on our Saviour's Head , shall be spoken of where ever his Gospel is Preached , the smell of the costly Spikenard quickly perished in the Air , but the perfume of that gracious Action shall smell fresh and pleasantly for ever , as a good Poet concludes on the like subject : — the Actions of the just , 
Smell sweet and blossom in the dust . 


Not like Flowers which blossom from the Earth for a day or two , till the heat of the Sun dries up their moisture , ( which maintains their beauty ) and withers them again into the lap from whence they sprang , But their memory shall spread blossoming in sweet perfumes , which shall not lose , but increase their beauty and scent in open Air , which the Sun shall not wither , but make to smell the sweeter . 

God will never have any to be losers by him , but if they do him the least honour , he will be sure to requite it ; yea , they shall receive in this life an hundred fold , and in the life to come , an infinite , an ineffable recompense in Heaven . 

We see with what a great deal of eagerness Earthly Honours and Offices , rich Prizes and great Places , are sought and pursued after : Balaam's Ass never Gallops fast enough to fetch in Profit and Preferment ; set but a Wedge of Gold in sight , and Joshua that could stop the Course of the Sun , cannot stay Achan from courting and catching at it . And yet what are riches but the Golden Gives , the noble Miseries of this wretched life : and what do they that are set upon them ( with the neglect of holiness , heavenly honours , and the wealth of a better World ) but prefer the Onions of Egypt , before the Bread of Angels , paltry Pebbles , before precious Pearls , thick Clay before pure Gold , sergeant Coin before true Treasure . OH see and bewail this so great a folly in yourselves and others , and for the future learn to covet Spirituals , to be greedy of Grace , to practise holiness , without which none can be truly honourable . However , the holy ones of God here in this life receive many hard measures , yea , when they live best many times hear the worst . Therefore must we take Virtue with a sweet or sour Breath ; 't is naturally sweet , sour only through the corruption of the Air we live in , being putrified by the infected Lungs of those that are wicked despisers of her , and ignorant of her worth to take Virtue as she is naturally , with a sweet Breath , is pleasanter , though with a sour more meritorious : for Regium est male audire cum bene feceris : it is Kingly to be ill spoken of for good Deeds , and whilst we have our Actions warranted by the great seal of Virtue , we verify the saying of one constant to such . 

Conscia mens Recti , famae Mendacia ridens . 
An upright Breast , laughs at the abuses of report . 


A well grounded self justification scorns the dispraise of the Vulgar , whose commendation is not authentic enough to call persons or Actions good , such infamy hath its delight , and we must be just merely out of love to it , not for Glory by it , and be content to be ill spoken of for being so ; few know the pleasure of a well got ill report , but many the pains and pricks of Conscience for the ill getting a good report : That raising themselves by over witting , out reaching and fair promising others , never intending performance , not being set by God as Joseph , but setting themselves over their elder brethren . They that place Honour in honorante , honour in the bestower , exile it as well from our care as power . That passage through good and bad report , gone through by that great adventurer for Heaven , leads to a Haven of such inward rest , as fears not the blasts of misprision , nor the mire and dirt the wicked in their ragings cast up ; but can solace themselves in Saint Paul's words , Our rejoicing is this , the Testimony of our conscience ; that in simplicity , and godly sincerity , not with fleshly wisdom , but by the grace of God , we have had our conversation in the World. And this music surpasseth all the Jingles of Fame ; not that we should slight a good Report , but rather covet it , especially from the best sort of men , i e. good men ; To contemn Fame , is but a security of doing ill : He that would not be thought good , careth not for being so . Contemptu famae , contemni virtutes : He that contemneth a good report , despiseth the goodness deserving it ; yet if we miss it whilst our Actions are regulated by the square of Religion and Justice , it is not Arrogance , but well becoming Confidence , to scorn the injurious World , when it denyeth Merit its due : Let us not be good on the salary of its praise , nor suffer their scorn to spoil good purposes in their conception , by damping our resolutions , or by frights abortive their execution , or smother our joy at their birth . For when God hath once by the hand of Death drawn a Curtain between good men , and the eyes of the World , and removed them out of sight , then is every one ready to bless their Memories , and follow them to Heaven with a loud Peal of gratulatory Acclamations . After death , martyred Names , as well as Men , are Calendared , even to an unquestionable repute of merit , and that in those faithful Registers of Impartial History . The Living may be Tenants at will to reputation : but it is the possession of the dead , and when the Grave dust is flung on our Chronicles , envy itself cannot blur them . 

Animis hominum manet , in Aeternitate Temporum Fama rerum . While some are buried in oblivion , others in the memory of men survive even Posterity . This is the condition of us all , evil things we feel them before we fear them , but good things we loose them before we know them : De bonis judicamus a tergo ; 't is the want that commends the worth of a thing : even those we see by experience , that could not endure the Saints whilst they lived , yet when once gone , they never speak of them without a preface of reverence . 

Herein do the Saints of God resemble an excellent Picture , or a curious piece , or Cloth of Arras , that looks well when ye are near it , but fairer and smother when farther off . The wicked are compared to Hawks , of great esteem whilst living , but afterwards nothing worth ; but the Saints to tamer Fowls , ( often Prey to such Hawks ) that are hushed away , and little esteemed whilst living , but after death , brought to the Lords Table . God will look to their honour when they are dead , that so much looked to his while they lived . Rather than Moses should not be honoured , God himself will make his Funeral Sermon ; Josiah and Hezekiah , that honourable pair of Kings , how were they honoured by all Judah and Jerusalem at their death ; Such honour have all his Saints . 

And if they are so honourable , let us know how to prise them and give them their due ; Let us not fear to Imitate the Church in her Ancient Practice herein , the Celebration of our Annual and standing Festivals in the Honour of the Saints ; A Custom in the Church from time to time Traditionary , of so long a standing and Antiquity in the Church , that now even by prescription , 't is grown grey headed and venerable . Certainly God must lose a great deal of his Honour , if we bury the Honour of his Saints : Laudate Dominum , saith David , in Sanctis , if God be to be praised in all the Works of his Hands , from the Cedar to the Shrub , from the glorious Cherubin to the despicable Worm ; is he not to be honoured in the Saints , those whom he raised up to be horoical Instruments for the propagation of the Gospel . 

But as many things are good in the intent , which are not always so in the event , good in the Institution , not always in the Execution ; as there are many things excellent in their first birth and original , which in tract of time gather soil and rust , and so degenerate from the purity of their first Institution ; even so it is with the honour of the Saints , for whilst Men out of too strong a bent and overplus of inordinate affection towards the Saints , thought they could never honour them enough , at last they became flat Idolaters , turning Charity into Piety , Affection into Superstition , Veneration into Adoration . When the People first met together at the Monuments of the Martyrs , ( an Ancient and Yearly Custom of the Eastern Churches ) to praise God for his Martyrs , at last they forgot their Errand , and turned their Worship of God into the Worship of the Martyr ; at first their Relics were precious , at last they grew holy ; first the Saints were honoured , but after worshipped ; at first they but commend , but afterwards enshrined ; so hard it is to subsist in a Golden Mediocrity : we either shoot under , or over ; not do , or over do ; either not honour the Saints at all , or too much : being right Englishmen , ( too many in this point ) never think we mend the matter , till we mar it . God gave the Israelites an express inhibition , not to take his Name in vain , at last the Jews , out of a superstitious Reverence , durst not so much as name the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the Name Jehovah ; they ought not to name him in vain , therefore afterwards they would not name him at all : the Brazen Serpent at first erected by God's Institution , for Historical Commemoration , only of their delivery from fiery Serpents , at last from Historical Commemoration , it was translated to Religious Adoration ; so the Saints were first honoured out of Affection , at last worshipped out of Superstition . 

The Persians , in policy , ( as Xenophon tells the story ) taught their Children to lie and not to lie , but with this distinction , to lie to their Enemies , but to tell truth to their Friends : but Xenophon tells us the issue of this Persian Education , their Children forgot their distinction , and made bold even to lie to their best Friends . So the Roman Clergy teach the People to Worship the Saints , and not to Worship them , so long till they forget their distinction , and entitle the Saints themselves to the same honour that is due to God ; but welfare St. Austin , Sancti sunt honorandi propter immitationem , non adorandi propter Religionem . That is the truest honouring of the Saints which is a returning of their honour to God's greater honour . The Saints that are alone to be honoured in Deo , and propter Deum , must be honoured without impeachment and derogation of God's honour , to be a follower of the Saints , as they be ( or were ) of Christ , is the truest Worship of the Saints . 

It is most certain , that the Blessed Virgin receives not so much Indignity from her Enemies that deny her , as from such her Friends that Deify her ; it is a Sin to give the Saints more than their due , as it is to give them lesle : to deprive them of all honour , was the Error of Vigilantius , and many of this last Age ; to give them too much , was first the Error of the Collyridians' , and at this day of the Papists , whereby they do not so much honour the Saints , as dishonour God.  

The truth is , we honour the Saints triumphant in Heaven , but we give them only honour Charitatis , not honour Religionis ; we give them Veneration , but not Adoration ; we honour their Memories , but we erect no Idolatrous Shrine ; we honour them as fellow Servants now glorified , but not as demi Gods half deified ; we honour them as Patterns for imitation , not as Patrons for protection ; we know no Relics , but their Graces ; we observe their Festivals , by the Anniversary Revolutions of the Year , but we dedicate no Days to the Saints , but only to the God of the Saints . What is there no mean in giving honour to the Saints , but we must deny them , or deify them ? Is it not enough to Commend , but we must Adore them ? Is there no mean , but we must be either ungrateful or Idolatrous , or that we must make them either lesle than Saints , or little lesle than Gods ? Is it not a dangerous thing to obtrude that honour upon them , which must needs bring them into Emulation with God ; with aspiring Lucifer , to be similes Altissimo ? Hath not God solemnly protested ? saying , I am the Lord , that is my Name , and my Glory I will not give to another , neither my praise to graved Images . He that touches the least spark of God's Glory , does he not touch the Apple of his Eye ? Of all other things , God and the Throne brook no Corrivals . Is it not the general Voice of the Church , Non nobis Domine ? Not unto us , OH Lord Do not the Saints in the Apocalypses , cast down their Crowns at the feet of the Lamb ? And in their Doxology , ascribe all Honour , Glory , Praise , to him that sits upon the Throne ? So Religiously Tender are they in this Point , that they will not suffer the least of God's Honour to stick to their fingers , but still shake it off with a non nobis Domine . Let God have his due above all , and the Saints their due ; give unto God the things that are Gods ; and to the Saints the things that belong to them : Let the Saints have their due honour , but so that by a necessary reflex and resultance it redound to God's Honour ; for else it is no honour to the Saints , to share in their Maker's honour , whose chiefest honour it is with denying of their own , to bring Glory to God.  

Thus have we discovered the true Dignity of the Saints ; and if Saints , though in Rags , they are rich and honourable , how honourable then are Saints in Silks that are all glorious within and without too , both to Spiritual and Temporal Beholders ; that are rich in Graces , as well as Garments ; in inward worth , as well as outward wealth ; high in God's , as well as the King's favour ; where goodness and greatness join hands ; whose outsides belie not the furniture within ; that are not like rich Cabinets with empty Drawers , or rather filled with filth , or that which they are ashamed to own , though not to keep ; but are richer within than without , having their Caskets filled with the richest Rubies , drops of Christ's Blood , to adorn their Souls ; Repentance Tears shed for past Sins , turned into the rarest Pearls ; the sparkling Diamonds of Grace set in the Golden Lockets of pure and refined Hearts , having to their Faith , Virtue ; and to their Virtue , Knowledge ; and to Knowledge , Temperance ; to Temperance , Patience ; and to Patience , Godliness ; to Godliness , Brotherly-kindness ; and to Brotherly-kindness , Charity ; Saint Peter's choicest Collection of Heavenly Jewels , which none but a Saint can possess : those that have such Rarities within , ( which God himself is delighted in the beholding ) and encompassed with outward riches and Preferments too , are those whom only the Spirit of God can to the full declare how glorious and honourable they are , the finest Rhetoric too course to see their Beauty through , and will rather cloud than show their Lustre , which can never be truly inspected by mortal eye . 

But what shall we say to many of the Gallants of this Age , whose honour hath no other Basis but the Herald or Tailor , or some Office that gives them liberty to Rant and Swagger in the newest Terms and Mode , who make it their business , if possible , to unsaint others ( being such Devils themselves ) and bring Holiness into discredit , by scoffing at and deriding it ; but sure it takes with none but what are as of little credit as themselves , who race out Holiness and Saint out of the Titles of Honour , and instead thereof practice Drinking , Whoring , Swearing , Cursing and Scoffing at the Saints , as Qualities of a gentile stamp , and think the ascent of a pair of stairs in a Bawdy-house , as necessary and equivolent , as those of Virtue , to arrive at the Temple of Honour , and as Authentic , being Licenced by the Imprimatur of the Times . What shall I say ? why thus to such , That God hath blotted their Names out of the number of those that shall possess Eternal Honour , and marvel they are not ashamed to let them remain in the Church-register , so much to the disgrace of Christianity ; but where shames laid aside , no wonder they commit all manner of Sin with Greediness and Glory in their shame , brag of their Debaucheries , and would as fain stifle the Repute of Holiness , as they have done the Checks of their own Consciences , scorning that Men of their Parts and Knowledge should be prescribed Holiness by any , nay , even by God himself , being spiced with that Pride that was in Lucifer , and his fellow-aspiring Angels , that made the first Schism and Separation in the purest Church , even in Heaven itself , among the Angels that were wholly perfect : But let such know , a Dram of Holiness , is above a Talon of Parts ; a Drop of Grace , above a Sea of Knowledge : Though in Knowledge we are said to be as Angels of God , yet in Holiness , like God himself . Therefore so much as God is above an Angel , so much is Holiness above Knowledge , and the more so , because Knowledge may be without Holiness , but never Holiness without Knowledge : pluck therefore off the Plumes of your Pride and Self-conceitedness , the deplorable Error of most of our Separatists , and really is the Pest of the Church and Bane of Religion , which is best preserved in Unity and Humility . 

Who then is Wife , and would have his Name , Person and Estate flourish , let him purge himself from Original Corruption , Actual Transgression , by Faith in the Blood of Christ : Shame is the consequent of Sin , but Honour ever attends on Holiness ; wherefore acquaint yourselves with the Ways of Christ , follow his steps , walk as he walked , stamping your Actions in the Mint of Virtue , your Names shall be written in Heaven , and your Fame be Current , if not in this lower , in that upper Court of Honour , and had in everlasting Memory , while others are buried in Oblivion , yours shall survive even Posterity . If Honour be your Aim , and Holiness the Path that you tread towards it , you shall then indeed be right worshipful , right honourable ; when such as by their Purses purchase Titles , not by their Virtues , shall be base and ignoble . 

Would we have others that we esteem , that are near and dear to us , our Relations and Friends truly Honourable , endeavour we by our Example and Advice to make them truly Holy , doing as Zacharias and Elizabeth , They were both Righteous before God , walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless , endeavouring to Walk ( constantly ) in All the Commandments of God ( indifferently , ) before God ( sincerely , ) and as much as in us lieth , before Men , unblamably . 

Non sine peccato , sed sine querela . 
Teaching our Children the Trade of Holiness betimes , whilst they are Young , that they may not forget it when they are Old , resolving whatsoever others do , that we and our Houses will serve the Lord ; that they and us living holily here , may be truly honourable , and eternally happy hereafter . 

FINIS . 





1 Sam. 18 18.  

2 Sam. 18 18.  Cui servire est Regnare . Psal . 149. 9  1 Sam. 2. 30.  Heb. 3. 2.  1 Sam. 13. 14.  Jer. 22. 24 , & 28.  1 Sam. 13. 1.  2 Cor. 10. 18.  Rom. 2. 29.  St. Austin . Psal . 84. 10.  Joh. 15. 14.  Gen. 18. 17.  Amos 3. 7.  Psal . 25. 14.  Hosea 2. 18.  19  20.  Heb. 1. 7.  Mal. 3. 14.  1 Cor. 6. 3.  Hag. 2. 23  Jer. 22. 24.  Deut. 32. 10.  Zech. 2. 8.  Isa . 62 3.  Ps . 45. 13.  2 Pet. 1. 5 , 6 , 7 , 8.  Ps . 16. 3.  prov. 12. 26.  Job 33. 23.  prov. 15. 33. 18. 12.  Honour is like a Palace with a low Door , into which no man can enter but he must first stoop . As Ausonius of Otho . Jer. 22. 19  2 Chron. 1. 12.  prov. 3. last vers . rev. 14. 13.  prov. 10. 6.  prov. 22. 1.  Eccles . 7. 1.  Joshua 7. 21.  Ovid. 4. fast . 't is good for a man to have Praise when he deserves it ; but better to deserve Praise when he hath it . St. Paul  2 Cor. 1. 12.  Tac itus . Tacitus of Agricola . Isa . 42. 8.  2 Pet. 1. 5 , 6 , 7.  It is a base thing to erect Trophies of Honour to themselves , upon the ruins of another's Reputation . He that Sails by the Star of Virtue , shall in time land himself upon the Shore of Honour . Luke 1. 6.  