A modest confutation of a slanderous and scurrilous libel , entitled , animadversions upon the remonstrants Defense against Smectymnuus . 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

diog. apud Lucian . de hist. conser. 

Printed in the year m.dc.xlii . 

To the reader . 

Reader , 

If thou hast any general or particular concernment in the affairs of these times , or but natural curiosity , thou art acquainted with the late and hot bickerings between the prelates and smectumnuans : to make up the breaches of whose solemn scenes , ( It were too ominous to say tragical ) there is thrust forth upon the stage , as also to take the ear of the less intelligent , a scurrilous mime , a personated , and ( As himself thinks ) a grim , lowering , bitter fool . 

i have no further notice of him , than he hath been pleased , in his immodest and injurious libel to give of himself : and therefore , as our industrious critics for want of clearer evidence concerning the life and manners of some revived authors , must fetch his character from some scattered passages in his own writings . It seems he hath been initiated in the arts by Jack Seaton , and by Bishop Downam confirmed a logician : and as he says his companions did , it is like he spent his youth , in loitering , bezelling , and harlotting . thus being grown to an impostume in the breast of the university , he was at length vomited out thence into a suburb sink about London ; which , since his coming up , hath groaned under two ills , him , and the plague . where his morning haunts are i wist not ; but he that would find him after dinner , must search the playhouses , or the Bordelli , for there i have traced him ; [ among old cloaks , false beards , tires , cases , periwigs , Modona vizards , nightwalking-cudgellers , and salt lotion . ] many of late , since he was out of wit and clothes , as Stilpo merrily jeered the poor starveling * Crates , he is new clothed in serge , and confined to a parlour ; where he blasphemes God and the King , as ordinarily as erewhile he drank sack or swore . Hear him speak : [ our liturgy runs up and down like an English galloping nun , pag. 16.  While she pranks herself in the weeds of popish mass , she provokes the jealousy of God , no otherwise than a wife affecting whorish attire , pag. 22.  Liturgy a bait for them ( Papists ) to bite at , pag. 23.  A pharisaical and vainglorious project , ibid. God hath taught them ( the persons ) to detest your liturgy and prelacy , pag. 24.  Is liturgy good or evil ? Evil ? pag. 26.  A * meditation of yours observed at Lambeth from the archiepiscopal kittens , pag. 29.  The prelates would have saint Paul's words * ramp one over another , pag. 40. •et not those wretched fathers think they shall impoverish the church of willing and able supply , though they keep back their sordid sperm , begotten in the lustiness of their avarice , pag. 57  Lest thinking to offer them as a present to God , they dish them out for the devil , pag. 58.  Your confutation hath achieved nothing against it , ( the reply by Smectymnuus ) left nothing upon it , but a soul taste of your skillet foot ; and a more perfect and distinguishable odour of your socks than of your nightcap , pag. 67. ] Christian , dost thou like these passages ? or doth thy heart rise against such unseemly beastliness ? Nay , but take heed : [ this is nothing disagreeing from Christian meekness , pag. 2.  Not unauthorised from the moral precept of Solomon , — nor from the example of Christ , and all his followers , in all ages , ibid. ] Horrid blasphemy ! You that love Christ , and know this miscreant wretch , stone him to death , lest yourselves smart for his impunity . 

This is my adversary ; to encounter whom at his own weapons ( Which he voluntarily chose pag. 4. as Goliath his sword and spear , to defy the god and the host of Israel ) i am much too weak ; and must despair of victory , unless it May be gotten by the strength of a good cause , and a modest defence of it . I dare not say but there May be hide in my nature , as much venomous atheism and profanation as hath broken out at his lips ; ( Every one that is infected with the sickness , hath not the sores running upon him : ) of which should i be as lavish as he hath been , it Might be said of us , that we encountered one the other like a toad and a spider , and each died of the others poison : or while we would seem to fall out about some petty matters in religion ▪ we well enough agreed together to be eminently wicked . It is my prayer to God , that all those and the like scandals , with which he hath , and i May grieve the church , May be forgiven to him , and prevented in me : and that in his good time himself would undertake the curing of his church's wounds , which by the ignorance of some , and malice of others , are like to be but the worse for the plaster . 

Faerwell . 

The preface 

§. i.  

Is apologetical ; and well May it be so . satisfaction to tender consciences , is that which we look for , and that which you ought to give ; as having done violence through all your book to the person of an holy and religious prelate , the ears of all good Christians within our church , the established laws of the kingdom , the precious and dear name of our common Master and saviour Christ Jesus . 

We must suppose you have undertaken a religious cause : that is your pretended subject ; we shall examine the truth of it by and by ; we must now look to your manner of handling it : a suspicious way you think ; and so do i. here we agree . Your defence is , in such a cause , it is nothing disagreeing from Christian meekness , the moral precept of Solomon , the example of Christ . what ? to weary God and man , with lewd profanations , scurrilous jests , slanderous and reproachful calumni•ss ? What moral precept in Solomon countenances such language as this * [ scum , Lad•es , kitchen-physic . Brawn , beef , Kickeshaw and crambe-prayers , motley and patched incoherences . With hey pass , repass , and the mystical men of Sturbridge : your barber leading in Balaam's ass . Christ and his apostles , capon and white-broth in the same leaf . Esau's red pottage , and a spur-galled Galloway . Bastards and centaurs of spiritual fornications . A Christian ministers surplice , and an Egyptian priests frock in the same suds : your primero of piety , cogging of dice into heaven . Gleeking and bacchanalia , and flanks , and brickets , &c. ] Such language you should scarce hear from the mouths of canting beggars , at an heathen * altar ; much less was it looked for in a treatise of controversial theology , as yours Might have been thought , had you not thus prevented it . As for Christ's example , which you blasphemously urge , surely that holy mouth was never so foul , but then when it was spit upon : yet neither was that indignity so bad as this . 

Well , but what if the benefit of this kind of writing will make amends for the fault of it ? Shall we do evil that good May come thereof ? God forbid : not if the good which followed were far better than it is like to prove : for let us see , what does it promise ? [ even this vein of laughter , as i could produce out of grave authors , hath oft times a strong and sinewy force in teaching — ] doubtless you mean atheism . For what else it can teach i am as far to seek , as you are of those grave authors that defend it . I care not to know what your reading hath been ; and mine own is confessed small : yet * one i have met withal , who ( Till you confute him with a graver ) shall speak home to the purpose . to leave all reverend compassion towards evils , all religious indignation towards faults , to turn religion into a comedy or satyr , to rip up wounds with a laughing countenance , to intermix scripture and scurrility sometimes in one sentence , is a thing far from the devout reverence of a Christian , and scant beseeming the honest regard of a sober man . is this your noble jealousy , your dear love to the souls of weak Christians ! this your well-heated fervency ! for shame render not that holy fire of zeal , which burned as bright in our forefather's breasts , as it lies dead in ours , any further suspected to the world ; lest anon , men think it nothing but a name , an ignis fatuus , or the lying and false brag of some vainglorious fools . 

Again , it must be believed , you have done this not without a sad and unwilling anger , not without many hazards : and therefore we must pardon your endeavours ! Who put you upon the task ? who forced an unwilling , relenting man , to commit such insolences ? Little charity doth he deserve , who will choose to ask forgiveness , rather than not to * offend . 

§. ii  

Not to tarry longer in your preface ; the intent of it was , as of other passages in your book , rather to maintain and defend libelling , than to give any pretended satisfaction : yet at the same time you condemn it too : condemn it on the Bishop's side , defend it on your own . If any of their party ( For indeed thus the matter stands now ) do chance to write , than their writings are defaming * invectives ; if any of yours , than it is liberty of speaking , permission of free-writing : nothing more injurious , nothing more pinching , than the restraint of them to freeborn spirits , p. 8.  For my own part , i dislike them equally in both ; unless in you somewhat worse , than in all that in this kind have wrote before , because you stand up to justify it . That Lysimachus Nicanor , which you instance in , ( Is but one , and truly to my remembrance i have seen no more ; one of theirs to an hundred of yours is odds : ) i misliked and censured as much as any that i have read . But what have all the Bishops , on whom you so hotly charge it , to do with that ? nay what he , in whose dish you so enviously and maliciously lay it ? no more than you had sure with news from hell , or the protestation protested . before i answer your justification of these libels , i must tell you , you have wronged the noble ingenuity and fair memory of that wonder of our age , Sir Francis Bacon , whom you here bring in as a witness against the Bishops , he complains ( You say ) of the Bishops uneven hand over these kind of pamphlets . you say so : hear him . [ and here i do much esteem the wisdom a•d religion of that Bishop , which replied to the first pamphlet in this kind ; who remembered that a fool was to be answered , but not by becoming like unto him ; and considered the matter he handled , and not the person with whom he dealt . ] 

you will say perhaps , this was but one Bishop : hear him again in the name of them all . [ i hope assuredly that my Lords of the clergy have no intelligence with these other libellours , but do altogether disallow , that their dealing should be thus defended : for though i observe in him many Glo•eses , whereby the man would insinuate himself into their favour , yet i find too ordinary , that many pressing and fawning persons do misconjecture of men in authority ; and many times veneri immolant suem , they seek to gratify them with that they most dislike . ] — [ for i have great reason to satisfy myself touching the judgement of my Lords the Bishops in this matter , by that which was written by one of them , whom i mentioned before with honour . ] whom have you wronged most now ? your author , your reader , or the Bishops ? Believe me , who ever you are , such collusion as this is unchristian . 

i return to you again . this permission of free-writing ( so you are pleased to style the most bitter and atheistical libels ) were there no good else in it , yet at some time thus licenced , is such an unripping , &c.  

Let the good be what it will , i am sure it is the most unworthy way of procuring it that May be . What general , in whose breast there lived but one spark of noble valour , would first disarm the enemy , and then fight ! The just arms that they have who defend a good cause , is innocence , integrity , and repute ; which when they are deprived of , lays them open to such impotent nakedness , as inevitably brings their ruin . [ these courses ( Saith Master Sandys ) are base and beggarly , even when singleness of mind and truth do concur with them , and far unworthy of an ingenuous and noble spirit , which soareth up to the highest and purest paths of verity , disdaining to stand raking in these puddles of obscoenity , &c. ] When singleness of mind and verity concur ; both which are wanting here in your cause : no singleness of mind , because these corruptions in manners are urged by you as arguments to disprove a clear and divine truth , ( Which Sir Francis Bacon will tell you , is as well now a policy of the devils , as formerly pretended holiness was to raise errors . ) no truth , because though some corruptions , and those grievous ones , are confessed and lamented , yet not on his hand to whose person you lay them . Hear then my forecited author : [ but if to this baseness of discoveries , other baseness be also added ; if malice prefer them , if slight increase them , if falsehood and slander taint them , then do they not only abase men from the dignity of their nature , but even associate them with the foul enemy and calumniator thereof , whose name is the slanderous accuser of his brethren . 

The good that arises of these libels , ( As the Florentine informs me ) is , to incite the persons of fury and tumult , to breed hatred , findings , factions , ruin . [ and yet it is somewhat pinching among freeborn spirits , if this liberty be denied . ] Yea , some citizens have served themselves of these calumnies , and made them steps and helps to their ambitious ends . how ? by confirming the persons in an ill opinion of them that do oppose , thereby to get their votes and partage . and as it depresseth that scale wherein you put all the prelates , so it raiseth that as much , wherein you put yourselves . the ripping up with exceeding severity the faults of higher callings , begetteth a great good opinion of integrity , of zeal and holiness , to such constant reprovers of sin , as by likelihood would never be so much offended at that which is evil , were they not singularly good themselves . and further ( As you have used the matter , imputing personal faults to the government in general , of which i shall say somewhat anon ) it gets you the opinion of wise men too , that can see farther into ecclesiastical affairs , than either the founders or conservers of this established polity . Thus much of libels in general . I come now to yours . 

§. iii  

Nor would i have done you the injury to have called it so , were it not too too manifest . For that which even you professedly disavow ( Private and personal spleen , p. 3. lin. 18. ) is the greatest matter in your book ; the other business being handled but by the by , or not at all : and where it is , in such a wretched , loathsome manner , as once i did almost doubt me , whether or no you did not jeer at both sides , at religion , and God , and all . I shall first answer to those personal injuries , and then to the cause . Only first let me satisfy you concerning my engagements and dependency , which perhaps you May possibly think Might have wrought me to this vindication . I am free , as you , or any true subject May or need be : i have a fortune therefore good , because i am content with it : and therefore content with it , because it neither goes before , nor comes behind my merit . God hath given me a soul , eager in the search of truth ; and affections so equally tempered , that they neither too hastily adhere to the truth , before it be fully examined , nor too lazily afterward . Such excess fills the world with furious , hot-brained heretics , schismatics , &c. the defect , with cold speculative atheists . I have always resolved that neither person nor cause shall improper me , further than they are good ; and so far it is my duty to give evidence . 

§. iv.  

He that shall weed a field of corn , bind the weeds up in sheaves , and present them at once to the eye of a stranger , that is ignorant how much good wheat the field bears , beside those weeds , May very well be deceived in censuring that field ; especially if he which presents them hath put into the heap such weeds as came from elsewhere . Thus it fares with men , when the evil actions of the best are picked and culled out from their virtues , and all presented in gross together to the eye or ear of him who is otherwise ignorant of the persons whose vices or faults they are ; what monsters do they seem ! This and more have you done to our prelate : this , in pinning upon his sleeve the faults of others : more , in that those which you pretend faults are indeed virtues . what hath the remonstrant to answer for the * scorn that is by some thrown upon our martyrs ; while it is known to all , that will not be ignorant , that he doth both honour their memories , and tread in their steps ; and that he doth not , as they did , in an holy zeal sacrifice his blood to his God , is not that he is backward to it , but that it is not yet required at his hands . God is my witness , i do not , neither can i flatter him : he that so patiently hath offered up his fame , his civil life , to be torn by the teeth and fangs of calumny , how shall i think he will love his blood better than that ? I know what it is that hath rendered many martyrs and their stories so suspected as they are , to wary and uncredulous men : sometime a * wrong cause ; when traitors shall engage God in a conspiracy , and then being detected and brought to execution , die for it no less undauntedly than if it were for the dearest truth ; unhappily priding themselves in that , for which they ought rather to have repent . What glory is it , if when ye are buffeted for your faults ye take it patiently ? Sometimes the seeking their own deaths in a good cause , out of ambition of obtaining that honour , which those first times of the church had set upon martyrdom . Whence i should think it as discommendable for men to seek thus over-eagerly their own deaths , banishments , confiscations of goods , stigmatizings , as the philosopher did the seeking of * preferments : neither shall i ever esteem either their names or memories who shall thus gather sticks for their own several piles ; and as if God knew not what honour was sit for them , be their own carvers : so May the same thorns which Christ wore as the crown of humility , be upon their heads the crown of pride . otherwhiles the ignorant or malicious unfaithfulness of the martyrologers , in transmitting to us those church-stories , big-swollen with untrue legends , as so many invincible arguments of the truth of that cause , which those martyrs sealed with their blood . I have seen beyond sea what the Jesuits of our own nation have carped at Master Fox his history ; which made me think , though i durst not say , that they injured them no less now than formerly : and if any one of ours shall do the like , i shall think he wisheth no better to the Protestant cause than they do . 

§. v.  

After you have born the persons in hand , that our remonstrant hath defamed the old ones , it is an easy thing to persuade them that he hath made new . So you do ; [ haled some into the gehenna at Lambeth , strappadoed others with an oath ex officio — ] if that court hath been illegal , either in the constitution of it , or in its proceedings , it is more than i know : but if so , the remonstrant is as guiltless of such illegalities , as i am ignorant : and a fault committed there can no more prejudice him , than the divine right of episcopacy . Though your bowmen here were quick in the delivery of their arrows , yet they were wide of the mark . 

§. vi . 

If you missed before , now you will be sure to hit him , [ you love toothless satyrs ; let me inform you , a toothless satire is as improper as atoothed sleek-stone , and as bullish . ] I wonder you go no lower ; perhaps his cradle Might have yielded you some worthy observation : it was reckoned amongst saint Augustine's faults , faults , that in his infancy he did morosiùs flere . such a note had not been amiss here ; but vixit is enough for that ; an happy time , that you cannot invent a slander to fix upon . You begin therefore with his youth ; the sport and leisure of his youth , even that must be raked up out of the dust , and cited to witness against him , as it were to disparage the holiness of his age and calling . [ when my early sins are done away as a morning cloud , they shall never obscure or darken my setting sun : God will never impute them to me , man May ] hath been the comfort of many a dying saint , in the day of evil , when the iniquity of their heels have encompassed them ; many , whose first years have been as famous for * debauchedness , as their latter for devotion : while this remonstrant no sooner came to be capable of the more violent impressions of sin , but his nature and it fell foul ; and because he had overcome vices in himself , he took liberty to whip them in others . Which timely zeal , as it did not misbecome his youth , so can it not disparage his * prelacy ; no , not as Poesic , not as satyr : the first you cannot condemn ; and the latter i will maintain , against greater critics than you would dare boast to have been conversant with : only if i appeal to such , my fear is , i shall have no adversary . 

To let pass therefore your simile of the sleek-stone ( Which shows that you can be as bold with a prelate , as familiar with your laundress , ) why , in the name of philology , is a toothless satyr improper ? why bullish ? 

Euge novam satyram , satyrum sine cornibus euge ! 
Monstra , nout monstri , haec ; & Satyri & Satyrae ! 


The author himself furnished you with the exception : and had you had but so much life or quickness in your pallet , as to have tasted an epigram , you Might have understood he speaks there in the person of such carping poetasters as you , and your now-despised tribe , are : they say , they are monsters ; you , that they are bulls : you mean , i suppose , chimeras ; absurd and ridiculous compositions of words , inconsistible with sense . Let us therefore , if you will , take them in pieces , and see where the incongruity lies . Satyra signified anciently any kind of miscellaneous writing , which we now term * essays ; whence Varro entitled many of his books of divers subjects , * Satyras suas : whence there was also a law called metaphorically * lex Satyra , when by one and the same vote , divers things were enacted . Last of all , it came to be restrained to such kind of writings , as contained the vices of the times , whether in verse or prose ; more commonly now of later times in verse . dens or dentatus you cannot think should come here into composition with a satire , in the primitive or proper signification of it , so as to make Satyra dentata as we say it of a child , after its teeth are grown , or before , that he hath teeth , or is toothless : we must seek then some other sense for it ; where i find teeth and horns to signify strength , used to defence or injury . Nothing is more familiar in scripture , than horn for strength : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , he hath raised up an horn of salvation ; a strong salvation . So also for injurious strength , foenum habet in cornu is a common proverb . The word , matth. 10. 16. which we translate simple , or harmless , is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , ab {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} cornu . thus martial lib. 13. ep. 91.  

Dente timentur apri , defendunt cornua tauros : 
Imbelles damae , nil nisi praeda sumus . 


So vinum edentulum was used by the ancients for small wines , such as we say in plain English , will do a man no hurt : vinum edentulum , hoc est nullarum virium , vel saltem perexiguarum . Salmuth . ex gualth . Tit. 25. p. 84.  In the same sense Horace speaks of the effects of strong wines : Tu spem reducis mentibus anxiis , 
Viresque , & addis cornua pauperi . 


makes a man bold or injurious : and in this sense ( Unless these authors are improper , it is no bull to say a toothless satyr , i. e. an harmless poem , that doth parcere personis , dicere de vitiis ; 

spare the person , but strike the vice : for such should a true satirist be , 

— asper 
incolumi gravitate . 


horat. de art. poet . 

Satyrae incolumes are harmless ( More elegantly ) toothless satyrs ; in opposition to Satyrae mordaces , biting or toothed satyrs ; such as for their loose insolences were by law forbidden to the ancients . 

quid refert dictis ignoscat * Mutius anon ? 

To which decorum our author professes himself to have had respect , virgidem . lib. 3. in prol.  

For look how far the ancients comedy 
Past former satyrs in her liberty , 
So far must mine yield unto them of old , 
't is better to be bad than to be bold . 


And Sir David Lindsey in his satyr in prol.  

Prudent peopill i pray ȝow all 
Take na man grief in special , 
For we shall speik in general 
For pastime and for play : 


thairfoir till all our rimis be rung , &c.  

Though what was , and is denied the stage , is got up into the pulpit : much as the manner was with Chaucer's pardoner . 

Then wool i sting him with my tongue smert 
In preaching , so that he shall not assert 
To been diffamed falsely , if that he 
Hath trespassed to my brethren or me : 
For though i tell not his proper name , 
Men shall well know it is the same 
By signs or by other circumstances , 
Thus quite i folk that doth us displeasances , 
Thus put i out my venym under hue 
Of holiness , to semen holy and true . 


As you have censured the Remonstrants' poesy , so in like manner you have justified a slip in the Smectymnuans philology ; i mean , so weakly , not so maliciously , they mistake a bench for a judge ; or rather the place for the men : areopagi for Areopagitas ; and you make it good : how ? [ if in dealing with an outlandish name they thought it best not to screw the English mouth to an harsh foreign termination , they did no more than the elegantest authors among the Greeks , Romans , Italians , &c.  ] Every country , i know , takes and gives that leave in the use of foreign words , to fit them to their own easiest pronunciation and best liking : sometimes out of necessity , sometimes of choice and pleasure only . The Greeks when they met with words terminated in any of these letters , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , because such terminations were unknown to them , usually changed them . As Polybius for {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} writes {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . And Suetonius ( As some will have it ) tells us how the Romans used the old German word ( a rutters ) which they still use to signify horsemen in war . And so perhaps our English word ( meat ) is but Mattya fashioned to our dialect : Dives & ex omni posita est extructa macello 
Coena tibi ; sed te b Mattya sola juvat . 


mart. lib. 10.  Ep. 59  



So the Italian Inciostro from the Latin word c encaustum , as likewise our English word ( ink . ) 

Encaustes d Phaeton tabula tibi pictus in hac est , 
Quid tibi vis , dypyron qui Phaetonta facis ? 


mart lib. 4. epig. 47.  



[ our learned Chaucer did not stick to do so . ] 

True . 

— There was a King 
That hyght Ceys , and had a wife , 
The beast tha Might bear life , 
And this Queen hyght alcione . 


fol. 267.  

Semiramus , Candace and Hercules , 
Byblys , Dido , tyshe and piramu• . 
fol. 275.  

Ne like the pytte of pegace 
Under Pernaso where the poet• slept . 
( fol. 301.  



What is all this to the purpose ? Chaucer hath mollified a termination , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} quod valet {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} in {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} : he hath not metamorphosed the name of a place into the name of a man : or if he had , it were one of those faults which ought to be forgiven ( Not imitated ) in so reverend antiquity . the old Latins wrote in for eum , joure for jure , nox and noctu for nocte , diequinte for die quinto : would you do so now ? Yes , yes , any thing , rather than acknowledge the least error : for either you are as disingenuous in matters of grammar as of religion ; in both , purposing therefore to maintain a thing , because you have said it ; or else perhaps you have a design to innovate as well upon our language as upon our church-government . If you be remembered , you set Afranius in Lucian to laugh at the Bishops ; to return you an innocent jest , i will set Demonax upon you . this Demonax asked one a question , who answered him in old obsolete affected words ; prithee fellow ( Saith he ) where are thy wits ? I ask thee a question now , and thou answerest 400. years ago . i ask in the sixteenth of King Charles , and you answer in the first of King John . for your Aula & olla , that you say is the same in old Latin , i could clap you on the shoulder with a Greek proverb as old , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , children and •oolss , &c.  

Senex avarus vix sibi credens Euclio , 
Domi suae defossam multis cum opibus 
aulam invenit . 


plaut. aulular . 

But for your application of it in plain English [ Aula and hall ] i must tell you it was an observation as unchristian & flanderous in that particular , as in the general a superstitious . 

§. vii . 

Next you impugn his logic : the remonstrant had said , da - civil polity in general notion is variable and arbitrary ; you subsume , but 
ri - the polity of our kingdom is civil polity : ergo , 
i.  the polity of our kingdom is variable , &c.  


and thereupon you cry , treason ! and want of logic ! in the first you are uncharitable ; in the last , irrational , only guilty of that failing which you impute to the remonstrant . For look upon your syllogism ; there is in the major proposition , fallacia ad plures interrogationes : for either we ask , what is possible only ; or what is possible and lawful . The remonstrant answers ; it is possible civil polity May vary ; or , it is in the general notion left of God to a various administration ; subject to divers forms , monarchy , aristocracy , democracy . You answer ; it May be lawfully done at any time , or by any what ever undertakers : for so much is inferred in your conclusion . 

Civil polity is at any time , or by any undertakers variable and subject to a lawful alteration : 
But the polity of England , etc ergo , 
It is at any time , by any undertakers , &c.  


This makes the treason , this you must and do infer , or else you charge him with treason unjustly . In this sense , as lawful , and , at any time , and , by any undertakers , the remonstrant denies the particular to be inferred upon his general . But in his own he grants it , viz. that it is possible , subject to a condition of variation , though it be treason against the highest majesty of heaven , whose substitute the King is , in him or them who do attempt a change . And in this saying he says no more , than all statesmen of the general , and Sir Francis Bacon of our particular , had said before him . [ all civil governments are restrained from God unto the general grounds of justice and manners , but the policies and forms of them are left free ; ] free , and to the arbitrement of a persons , met together and consenting by the secret impression and instinct of God , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , arist. lib. 3. pol. cap. 6. to take what form of government they please : which being settled according to the general rules of justice , and particular rules of the best advancement of public good , is so immediately ratified by God , by his infusion of sovereignty into him or them , who by the joint consent of all is advanced to the helm ; as also ( To us Christians ) by laying so many injunctions upon the persons , to obey and honour all those in authority , not for wrath , but for conscience sake ; that it is a •inne of the highest degree , only but in thought to meditate an alteration . 

The apostles distinction , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , shows us what is the Kings hold , and what is our duty . the King's hold is divine ; he hath a deputed sovereignty , which works upon the conscience , either willing or refusing to submit , in just lawful and indifferent things : our duty is , in these things , willingly to obey : and in case of substraction of our obedience , to know that he hath {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a compulsory power , without which God had put the sword into his hands in vain ; that is , made him like a George on horseback , with his hand and sword lift up , but not able to strike . 

In this point i suppose both they that labour for and against episcopacy , do agree jointly . 

§. viii . 

Envy is a makebate , always doing ill offices : if it cannot compass its own ends one way , it will another . You , not having any thing to accuse the remonstrant to the King , do it to the parliament . [ gladly you say , we believe you , as gladly as your faction wished for the assembling of this parliament . — whether this reflect not with •cont••ely upon the parliament . — ] let the thief or murderer dread the judge ; let fear dwell where it ought , in guilty bosoms . Doubtless the remonstrant ; and those which you esteem hi• faction , are as glad of , and wish as well to this honourable assembly , as you and yours do . It is not the parliament they make head against , but you and your furious complices , who between soft flattery towards some of that house , and rough violence to others ( Witness your libels against so many of them , as their consciences made vote contrary to some proceedings ) are like to over-turn all . They know , and so do i , that the sun looks not upon a braver , nobler convocation , than is that of King , peers , and Commons ; whose equal justice , and wise moderation , shall eternally triumph , in that they have hitherto deferred to do , what the sour exorbitancies on one hand , and eager solicitations on the other , not permitting them to consult with reason , would have prompted them to : who know how to ponder wise and grave a sentences , not from the number , but the worth of them that propound them . Among whom , even the youngest and unskilfullest May stand a pattern and example to future times , teaching state-novices , rather to inform their judgments to the good of the next assembly , than to use them to the b prejudice of this present . The gravest and most experienced , to be what they are thought , and to deserve all that praise , with which the persons c load them . So to satisfy their desires as they are just , not as they are d vehement : considering that the multitude crave only out of the sense of evils ; of which so long they will have a sense , as they are willing to obey . All conspiring unanimously , so to advance the pure religion of our dearest saviour , that it be not dispirited on one hand by gaudy ceremonious formalists ; nor lost on the other amids a crowd of sullen and ignorant sectaries : and after that ( To which it is an honour for him to submit ) the divine sovereignty and royal immunities of our most gracious Master . 

§. ix . 

We must go higher yet ▪ and if we will , May believe the remonstrant to be [ a notorious enemy to truth , pag. 2. a false prophet , pag. 3. a belly-god , proud and covetous , pag. 5 squeezed to a wretched , cold , and hollow-hearted confession of some prelatical riots , pag. 15. whose understanding nothing will cure but kitchen-physic , pag. 17. a Laodicean , pag. 24. a dissembling Joab , pag. 28. a dauber with untempered mortar , pag , 62. ] Good God thou that hast promised to direct the steps of the humble , and to be with those that are of a meek heart , instruct me how to choose some other path to walk in towards my eternity ; for this my soul hates ! Let me for ever be shut out of that heaven , that is the reward of such black calumny , such malicious and devilish slanders ! And , oh you my dear brethren , who are disaffected towards the prelate , look upon and give evidence to the man ! How is he an enemy to the truth , unless the gospel of Christ be a lie ! How is he a false prophet , unless yourselves who profess the same faith be impostors ? View well that heap of age and reverence , and say whether that clear and healthful constitution , those fresh cheeks and quick eyes , that round tongue , agile hand , nimble invention , s•ayed delivery , quiet calm and happy bosom , be the effects of threescore years' surfeits and * gluttony . What time could he steal to bestow upon Mammon , the god of this world , who hath given us so large an account of his idlest a minutes ? whose whole life hath been nothing but a laborious search after human and divine truths , which having picked out , ( As that little miracle of nature doth honey ) from weeds and flowers , he did not improper to himself , but liberally dealt them to the b good of the public ; his toil being impleasanted to himself , in that he loved the work he went about ; and accepted of the world , because they knew he dished out nothing to them , but what he tasted of himself ; penned nothing but what first he practised . How could he be lazy and idle , whose volumes are so many , whose preaching so frequent , whose studies so early and late ; so that it is only questionable whether his lips did drink in more grace than they distilled ? I commend not , but vindicate . Must he be therefore lukewarm , because his zeal burns not as hot as hell ? must his conscience be therefore cauterised and seared , because he brands not every Christian out of the church of England with the marks of reprobation ? writes not the dreadful doom of God in the forehead of all popishly given , in France , Spain , Italy , Germany ? Sends not all Russian , Abassine , Grecian , Armenian , Aethiopic churches , which all the day have flown different ways , and laboriously culled ( With the bee ) such sweets as they could light upon , in the evening swarming to hell ; or presently sets not fire on their hives ? Alas ! how long hath this been the doctrine of the church of England ? and i cannot yet believe it . Shall i ever think , with that foolish anchorite , that the sun shines nowhere but into my cell ? Or can i not enough enjoy and bless God for the warmth of his great light , unless i confidently affirm , that at no time , in no measure it shines beyond our Tropic . Let who will confine the mercies of God in Christ to so narrow limits ; i dare not . 

Brethren , hath he forsaken the faith , that is so far an enemy to the Pope , as the Pope is an enemy to Christ ? Is it come to this now , that he must be bid part from the rest of his brethren , that holds not episcopacy to be Antichristian ; all forms of prayers and liturgies to be quenching of the spirit , evil ( quatenus ipsum ; ) an equality of ministers , living upon niggard contributions ; demolishing of churches and all kind of sacrilege lawful ? That calls not the royal , noble , and devout munificence of our ancestors , who received , cherished , and transmitted our religion to us , the price of their damnation ? Doth that good spirit of God dwell nowhere but in dry or marishy constitutions ? Will grace mix with nothing but adust choler , or lowering morose peevishness ? Cannot grace and nature consist ? When we deny ourselves , must we deny humanity ? Doth God's spirit now inspire Christians , as the devil did his priests of old , by putting them out of their wits ? Is conversion nothing but a turning about to this man's opinion , or that man's novelties ? A slavish imitation of some foreign church abroad , or doting upon some great Masters at home ? Why else cannot a sober , modest , humble , orthodox prelate go for a Christian among us ? Why are we weary of him , if we be not so of our religion ? him , who had been as holy , wise , learned , temperate , bountiful , sincere a Protestant , as any this day in our church , had he but been of your opinion in matters of discipline ? How almost a saint , how altogether a devil ? No preaching , no care of the peace of the church , no learned volumes writ , no hospitality , no poor fed , no holiness of life , no church , no salvation , but in the presbytery ? Worthy you of your chains and faggots , oh ye martyrs , that commended this government unto us ; perish and rot the memories of those famous assemblies , that confirmed it , and bound us to the maintenance of superstition and Antichristianism ! And now that i find them so ungrateful to the dead , it lessens my wonder , though not their impiety , that they are so to the living . Away with those cheap as numerous leaves , that image forth to us his ravished and devout thoughts ; away with the clear and bright mirror of a dispassioned soul , a rectified understanding , a liberal and Christian charity ; with that sweet and heavenly * eloquence that prepares a way for the spirit of God ; that opens our ears , the gates of our souls , that the King of glory May enter in , and dwell there ; that awakens our understandings to arise and be ready to entertain that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the engrafted word , which is able to save our souls ; yea and away with it from the earth , lest it upbraid to future ages , the tyrannous malice and affected barbarisms of these present times . Blind men ! that will not see our own good ; that shut our eyes , and then complain that we want the sun ! If you will not look upon his works , which testify of him , ask his great Master , or his noble retinue at court , whether this confession of the riots and disorders of courts , officers , palaces , city , country , were now squeezed from him ? Whether it came not then from his lips as freely as now ? Whether his reproofs seemed cold , wretched , or heartless ? Or if there lurked hidden evils which he saw not , or those which he saw were not reform , why doth he suffer as a countenancer , as a contriver ? It was a word fell from the boldest and most undaunted spirit that Rome ever saw , * i would , but the times would not . zeal must have discretion as well as knowledge . He that pressed too hard upon the enemy and lost himself , was in the old discipline of war accounted as infamous as he that fled . He that regulates his actions by a good conscience , rather than popular fame , however they hear abroad , finds ever the content and reward of them at home . 

But in good earnest , what should he do to please you ? what way , besides abjuring his prelacy , or being as wicked as you would make him , is there left for him to content you ? If he write controversies , than he is a swashbuckler against the Pope ; then he careers with spear in rest , and thunders upon the steel cap of Bellarmine : if he preaches , than he sermonizes and daubs with untempered mortar : if he contemplates or meditates , than he plays with •ambeth kittens : if at court , he is crowding for preferme•t , or accusing the persons to the King : if at home , he is a belly-god , &c.  Oh the love , and charity , and reverence of these times , to so holy , so deserving a Bishop ! May ye stay for such another glorious light of the church , till ye can deserve him ! and never enjoy the benefit of this , till ye have made him amends for these injuries ! * had former times shown him , or foreign churches nourished him , he that is now your scorn had been your wonder : happy had that man been that could have dressed a sermon in his grave and weighty sentences , or his study with his picture : only now we wanton at the full breast , and because we are at springhead , rather puddle the clear stream with our foot , than slake our thirst . Froward spite , that makes us therefore hate , because we cannot love enough ; therefore revile , because we cannot sufficiently praise . But go on , revile , slander , belie holy men ; yourselves can give us the best and truest character of what ye are : neither in this point would i ever have condemned ye , had i not heard it from your own mouths . And you , reverend Sir , stand up ; the disadvantage of your old age , your spent and decayed strength , that would naturally shrink under such pressures , makes but grace more eminent in you : we can never better see how the foundation bears the weight of the building , than when the props be removed . How can any one say , lo this man leans to an arm of flesh , when he sees it withered ? The evil days of a man are the best of a Christian : now May grace borrow her Master's chariot , and triumph , saying , i have •rod the winepress alone , and of the persons ( Fear , hope , boldness , glory ) there was none with me . And to thee , oh God , be the praise of this exercise of his Christian fortitude ; it is thou that hast shown ( As the last and most glorious blaze of this dying light ) that he that could deserve all praise , could suffer all injury . 

§. x.  

The scraps and offal that remain of your libel , concern liturgy and episcopacy ; both which you have handled , as you esteem of them , unworthily and basely . Forsooth you would give the world to know these two things ; first , that you are no Bishop : secondly , that you can pray ex tempore . surely a man of strong parts , and a mortified ambition ! It was thought of old , that the philosophers did therefore contemn and speak ill of riches and pleasures and high places , because they were never born to them ; as the fox cursed the grapes that were out of his reach . But we will not think so uncharitably of you ; a rich widow , or a lecture , or both , contents you . 

To the first you make way , by a long , tedious , theatrical , big-mouthed , astounding prayer , put up in the name of the three kingdoms ; not so much either to please God , or benefit the weal-public by it , as to intimate your own good abilities to her that is your rich hopes . 

Petit Gemellus nuptias maronillae , 
Et cupit , & instat , & precatur . 


Because you shall never say i am envions , and go about to disgrace you , i will give this testimony of your orisons , that there wanted but one petition to make them complete , which was , that God would forgive you the profanation of the rest of your book . 

To the second you make way ( A very compendious way in this age , if as honest as compendious ) by flattery and railing : at both which you are old excellent , or as your own expression is , sufficiently tried . how you can perform the first hath been already heard ; now let us hear the second . Speak out , the parish is big . [ our great clerks think these men , because they have a trade , as Christ himself and s. Paul had , cannot therefore attain to some measure of knowledge , and to a reason of their actions , p. 13. ] as Christ had ; Christ preached , ergo sam.  How May . Take heed friend , you border upon blasphemy . our great clerks think , &c.  truly , small clerk , you know but little of those men's minds : i will ensure you they do not think so . But why should you plead this ? Methinks it were much better for you , and more conducible to your ends if it were so : for could they not attain to a reason of their actions , there were great hopes they would choose you to be their minister . But i know not how unluckily you have spoilt your own market ; if that be true which you elsewhere affirm of them [ that they are competent judges of a ministers abilities , as it will not be denied that he May be the competent judge of a neat picture or elegant poem , that cannot limne the like , ] unless in your simile you recover yourself and abuse them : for who ever accounted an ignorant gull a sufficient and competent judge of a terse poem ? 

— Versus reprehend•t inertes ? 
Culpabit duros ? Incomptis allinet atrum 
Transverso calamo signum ? Ambitiosa recidet 
Ornamenta ? Parum claris lucem dare coget ? 
Arguit ambiguè dictum ? Mutanda notabit ? 
Fiet Aristarchus ? — 


All which is the office of a critic . Who but you thinks an inspired cobbler May judge of Apelles his workmanship ? {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , synes epist. 1.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , arist. pol. 8. c. 3.  ut de pictore , fictore , sculptore , nisi artifex judicare , ita nisi sapiens non potest perspicere sapientem , plin. lib 1. epist. 10.  ( These authors testimonies , i hope Sir , May be considerable against your insolent affirmation . ) Who but you , against the command of God himself , dare bring not the congregation only , but the very beasts of the persons , within the borders of the mount ? Sober and wise Christians , i doubt not but they know where to stay ; neither will they follow such ringleaders as you , to their own destruction : such men will acquit our great clerks well enough , of any or all your pretended slanders ; and besides tell you , ( That though against all sense and reason they make them not judges of their abilities , and against all antiquity and custom of the church , above what ever is written or practised in scripture , they receive not their ordination from them ; ) yet they both encourage them in , and bless God for their safe knowledge , and becoming actions . Go you then to your mutinous rabble , and if you can appease their furies , enthrone their sage wisdoms upon some stall or bench , and cite before them the clerks of either university : those competent judges , i guess , will do like themselves , reject one as unsufficient ( So as they the horse which Polygnotus had tightly painted , damned the whole piece , because contrary to the nature of that beast , he had made him with hairs on his nether eyelids , ) only for that he hath too little hair on his upper lip , or too much upon his forehead ; because he useth not to wear wrought nightcaps , or mastic patches . In the mean while another ( As the goodwife in Plutarch judged of Philopoemen ) shall be thought fit to •leave blocks than divide a text , because he hath a sour or crabbed countenance ; because either his learning is too much , or that little he hath lodges , as their prentices do , in an ugly garret : while a third shall be deeply suspected of Arminianism , because he hath a squint-eye , or is of the Archbishop's college . Briefly all those glorious lights , and bright stars of eminence and lustre in either horizon , shall be no better esteemed of , than Tyro in Gellius observes the Hyades were , which by his clownish ancestors were taken for so many sucking-pigs ; and perhaps under that name shall be driven to Hogs-norton to pipe upon the organs ( If they be yet standing . ) But i leave these grave censors , these areopagi , if you will , to their own discretion ; lest while i am busied in observing of theirs , i forfeit mine : and this paragraph be taxed for that fault of your whole discourse , which in the easiest censurers mouth is but levity and digression . 

§. xi . 

Of liturgy first . into which that distinction of saint Paul's shall lead the way : all things are lawful , but all things are not expedient . a thing in its own nature indifferent , and so lawful , doth sometimes {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} become inexpedient , and so unlawful . By this rule we will examine the point in hand . For that set forms of prayer are in themselves at least indifferent , the precept and practice of Christ confirms , and no man in his right wits ever denied . [ some set forms of prayer , by some men , in some cases May be lawfully used . ] The question is therefore of the expediency , not of the lawfulness of such prayers , viz. whether a set form of prayers , this in particular to which the church of England hath been , and is laudibly as piously accustomed , May {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , expediently be used , and enjoined by all to be used , in a national church , as ours is . 

To the clearing of which point , there are two things of necessity to be done : 1.  The conveniencies and inconveniences of such prayers in the general , must be weighed . 
2.  The blemishes with which this of ours in particular is charged must be examined 
according as we find which , for or against , our conclusion must be made . 

1.  It suits to , and agrees best with God's own proceedings in the government of his church . In which it hath pleased his divine wisdom so to order the matter , that ( Since all men are not alike capable of knowledge , nor have the same abilities , ) his providence should as it were conform itself to this unequal condition of men : whence it is , he hath made choice of some to teach others , and pray for others ; chose some to be apostles , some ministers , pastors , teachers ; whereas had he not had respect to this , and purposed to go along with this weakness of man's nature , he could as well have infused abilities ( I mean supernatural ) into the breast and brain of the most ignorant despicable member of the church , sufficient without other teachings or helps , to have raised him to converse with God here , and possess God hereafter , as ever he did into the ablest of the apostles . 

And now having thus ordered the matter ; ( For thus it is , was , and ever will be , let men dream never so long , torture and rack scripture , to make it roar out an imaginary lying perfection ) God looks that those some which he hath chose , endued , set apart to teaching and praying , and all other offices of ministerial function , as they are public men , so should have a public care of that church wherein they are : so drive , as the church May go like a flock together , a due respect had to the lambs and ewes big with young , to the weary , faint , and lame : — Hanc aegram vix tytere duco : 

which always are the most considerable number . 

Yea , come we to the shepherds themselves : how many laborious , painful , conscionable men are there , that if these helps May not be allowed them , must either tempt God , fail in the performance of their duties , or give them quite up , as not sufficient for these things ? and if it come to this once , how many souls , ( Every one , for aught we can say of this or that particular , being to God alike precious , ) will here be desperately , irrecoverably lost ! For what help ? will our land afford enough such ex tempore men ? no nor the much magnified Amsterdam , with Geneva and New-england to boot . hope is a brave , heroic , sublimed Christian virtue , but it is of things which make us not ashamed . 

2.  Such liturgies and set forms are most expedient , if we look to the nature of prayers ( Public prayers . ) 

Prayer in itself considered , is the proper act of the soul , of the will and understanding , and May be completely and perfectly offered up to God , without those subsidiary helps of invention , disposition , memory , language ; these , when we speak of private prayer , are but the vain pomp of it : when of public , the necessary adjuncts . 

i will pray with the spirit , and i will pray with understanding , 1 cor. 14. 15.  This often misapplied text is to be understood of public prayer , as you May see by comparing it with the second verse , he that speaketh or prayeth in an unknown tongue , speaketh or prayeth not unto men , but unto God . by spirit is meant ( Not as our vain humourists would have it ) an extemporal faculty of wording it , but that gift of the spirit which saint Paul mentions vers. 5 , 6 , &c. viz. the miraculous gift of tongues , or faculty of speaking divers languages : by understanding is meant the understanding of the persons ; for he that prayeth in an unknown tongue , prayeth not unto men , that is , not to their understanding . That which i gather from hence is this ; that those public prayers are most expedient to be used , which are most accommodated to the capacity of the persons . Herein i known you will agree with me . I go on . But a set form is most accommodate , ergo . this proposition is easily proved : i make it good thus . 

1.  The understanding is prae-acquainted with , and the subject otherwise difficult is thus made obvious and easy . 2.  The matter is the same , not at the will , or passion , or ignorance , or negligence of him that prayeth to be varied : by reason of which , sometime the persons cannot , sometime dare not go along with their minister . 3.  Though the language be not in itself unknown , yet the harshness of it in some , the length and tediousness of stile in others , the affected height of forced allegories and tropes , not to say the nonsense and ridiculously absurd variations of many pretenders to the faculty , render• it altogether as unintelligible , as it were Latin or Greek . If were to make good this assertion by a particular in •ance , i would go no farther than your prayer you have given us , pag ▪ 6 , 37 , 38. which infinite of honest and simple Christians would no more know how to understand , than they would do a scene out of Johnsons' Catiline . 

But what command in scripture is there for it ? Where is conceived prayer mentioned ! what such virtue is there in the extemporal wording of a prayer , that for the giving it such undoubted liberty we must run all these hazards ? The soul May be as much inflamed that prays in a set form , as that which doth not : and that May be as cold that prays extempore . will you say , that every one that hath the gift , hath also affections answerable ? you dare not . That then May be belied , and we shall admire the spirit where it is not : what is this , but to warm ourselves at a painted fire ? For indeed it is not the volubility or roundness of tongue , that is the work of God's spirit primarily in him that hath this gift of prayer , but the enkindling of the affections : i say primarily ; for where the spirit of grace , which is as fire in the heart , finds such abilities , such natural abilities , either actual or potential , it doth catch hold of them , and make fuel as it were of them , whereby the soul burns the more ardently : but where it finds them not , God never infuseth them , ( This is mere Anabaptism ) otherwise no such abilities , no grace , no extemporal expressions , no prayer . And this being thus , doth it make a prayer ever the more acceptable to God , that it is extemporal ? Doth it make a prayer unacceptable , that it is not so ? In truth , no : but this is it , there is more of the man in the extemporal prayer , and that makes us dote so much upon it ; as the fond mother commonly loves that child best , whose face is most like her , though perhaps of worst conditions . You cannot but know , that there are of the holiest men , and most able ministers about London , and elsewhere , that both use our liturgy , and accustom themselves to a set form of their own ; wisely considering as i said before , that they are public men , and are bound to do not what they could more to their own benefit , but what they must , to the peoples . Yea , those that do use extemporal expressions , i would ask them , how far they are from a set form : is not yesterday's , to days , tomorrows , and every day's prayer alike , in the frame , economy , or disposition of the matter ? Is not the matter the same ? do they not preface , petition , conclude always alike ? Not in the same words , you will say . Well , but s. Paul did so in all his epistles in the very same words ; and it is more than probable did so in all his prayers . If there be new emergent occasions , do not those men insert into their own ? doth not the church insert into the commonprayer book such petitions as are needful for those occasions ? Consider then in what things their prayers come near yours , and yours come near theirs , and where 's the difference ? why is the world distracted about nothing ? either you are exorbitant , or both May agree . 

3.  Most expedient to attain the end such worship drives at ; order , unity , piety , and the best advancement of God's glory : whereas an unbounded liberty in extemporal and fanatical prayers , brings forth the quite contrary ; disorder , disunion of affections between man and man , impiety , atheism , and anarchy . ex ungue leonem . what lewd demeanours , what insolent and irreligious behaviours , both towards the book of common-prayers , and the men that use them , hath this lawless time shown ? now , while the laws are still in force that authorize them . The King and parliament devoutly use them , religious persons morning and evening frequent them ; now some to spurn and tear them , others spit at them , you to call them superstitious , evil , a cramb , a kickshoe , an hotchpotch , a drench , &c.  If this be not the highest degree of profanation , nothing is . Surely , if we do not repent for this , our posterity will ; and besides that , blush when ever they shall be upbraided by such prodigiously atheistical ancestors . But to proceed : what order can ever be expected ? what uniformity looked for ? what consent and harmony betwixt church and church , when every one shall differ in that which should make them truly one ? A communion of saints , even their community of prayers ? How , while some are starved , shall others be pampered ? and than what likeness ? Tell me not , that they that will shall use the churches set forms ; for either they will be wholly neglected , where others cannot be had , being so discountenanced , if left arbitrary ; discountenanced , i say , by public authority , & depraved , condemned , damned , by private persons ; or else , while both are in use , it will nourish a continual enmity betwixt the users of each . It is a requisite in the church of Christ , that the particular congregations which are the members of that mystical body , be of one heart and one mind , especially in their prayers to , and praises of God ; more especially in public meetings , at public deliverances , in public dangers : how shall we be so , when we shall not know what one another's hearts and minds are ? No , but the design of your dear friend , the author of the protestation protested , and some since him , is , to have the church at length sifted and winnowed , and the grain laid apart by itself , that is your faction ; and for the chaff , all else , let them do or be what they will , it matters not . If the King's state will maintain the faith of Christ , well and good , they shall have your fair leave : if not , they shall have your leave too ; so you May enjoy your consciences you are indifferent . This is the common good that is cried up , though indeed the public woe : and thus you tread a fair way to it : you shall have the hold of the hearts of the persons , the surest hold that May be , of their consciences , of all their religiousest actions , their prayers , supplications &c. and the state shall have none of you : not command you to pray for the King , that you say is time spent in flattery ; not for Bishops , they are Antichristian ; not for his subjects , that they May live godly and peaceable lives u•der him , they are dogs , shut out of the gate of the new city ▪ howling . 

Immortal odium , & nunquam sanabile vulnus 
Ardet adhuc ombos & Tentyra — 


What can the end of these proceedings be , but an irreconcilable distance between party and party ; then jealousies , than provocations , than wars , than ruin ! I doubt not , but if Christ had been pleased to have converted to his faith but one King and his whole state , and for to have ordered a national church , and have given over to us that order as a pattern , surely it should not have been any such independent anarchical government as your platform is , nay will be if we can tell when ; for as yet the whelp is not licked into any fashion . You say that set forms of prayers are quenching the spirit ; whether it be so or no , i am sure your extemporal will set such a fire on your spirits , that they will need quenching , or the whole kingdom will burn with them . Weigh these circumstances , and you will see that there is an expediency of set forms in a national church . 

2.  Of set forms some of ye will grant , but not of these that are . Your reason ? 

[ the form of your liturgy is fantastic and superstitious , and the end sinister , the imposition violent , pag. 2• . ] 

Fantastic ? Like enough they Might think so , that saw or heard you read them ; sed malè dum recitas , &c.  but then the fault was not in the prayers , but your officiating . If ever you were present at a synagogue in Amsterdam , and saw how the Jews with voice and ge•ure read a section of the law , or one of David's psalms , you Might justly say the men were fantastic , yet the matter was good . 

But the form is so . Wherein i pray ? I suppose you mean the same thing , with those importunate triflers in Queen Elizabeth's days , who were offended at the short cuts or shreddings , at the intermingling of praying and reading in it , in such manner , as if supplicants should use the same to a mortal Prince in proposing their suits , all the world would think them mad . If thus , the answer is , where you had the objection ; i have turned down the leaf , pray save me the labour of transcribing , and look it yourself : only the close is this ; our case were miserable , if that wherewith we most endeavour to please God , were in his sight so vile and despicable , as men's disdainful speeches would make it . 

Though you borrow your arrows ( Your objections ) from their quiver , yet what with being new feathered with the people's discontents , perhaps flying with the wind ; and lastly , their heads being poisoned with the gall of asps , they pierce deeper now than formerly : then our prayers were but ridiculous , now superstitious . were they always so ? Yes . Belike it was beyond the skill of those holy men to refine a scorpion into a fish , pag. 14.  Where then was their error in transmitting over this superstition to us ? Was it malice , or ignorance , or both ? that when we asked them bread , would give us a stone ; when we asked a fish , would give us a serpent ? [ it bribed their judgements with worldly engagements , pag. 16. ] Oh the inconsiderateness of eager and headlong ambition ! that men , who but now were , some returned from banishment , others drawn out of prison , should in an instant be so turned about , that they would forfeit their religion , their wisdoms , their credits , yea their souls , in obtruding upon a church superstitious and damnable rules for devotion ; and all this to get a narrow incompetent bishopric . If they had minded preferment , why looked they not abroad , where sacrilege and misdevotion had not so straightened their walks , nor demolished their goodly prospects , nor washed out their gilded titles ? they could not have been worse there , if they were superstitious at home . I wonder not now to hear them so traduced by the Papists , when ourselves do thus uncharitably misreport them . Martin Mar-prelate ( As Master Sandys can tell you ) is in the disgrace of our clergy cited by the Papists , as a grave unquestionable author : and what place your animadversions May once have in the Vatican , is yet dubious ; though it be certain that those spiders of Rome cannot have a fit subject from whence to draw poison . But is it certain they are superstitious now ? Will your Smectymnuans affirm so much ? Truly than they are as deeply concerned in it , as any of the rest of their brethren , who before the unhappy distaste of the late convocation , could alike swallow so much popery . However ; where is the superstition ? In this , this , or this prayer , or any of the rest ? If not in any of the parts , not in the whole . Oh but [ it symbolizeth with the mass , and pranks itself in popish weeds , and goes too garish upon holy-days , p. 22. ] They have anthems , and organs , and copes , and surplices in the church of Rome : true ; and when all this is away , still they have prayers : and if you will wholly abolish them because symbolical , Antichrist will symbolize with ye {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , in his creed in spite of your teeth , unless you mean to have no other but the Christian belief concerning Bishops . that soul that can soar aloft upon the strength of his own wings , or hath its flagging pinions completely ymped with feathers from the dove , the spirit of God , shall little need such advantages as are these things which we speak of ; ( For advantages they are , and but advantages ; ) only take you heed you do not , icarus-like , over-dare , and give all the Christian world else leave to acknowledge and remedy as they May , their almost irremediable weaknesses . This outward state and glory ( Says my forecited author ) being well disposed , doth engender , quicken , increase and nourish the inward reverence and respectful devotion , due to so sovereign , so awful a power : which , those whom the use thereof cannot persuade so , would easily by the want of it be caused to confess . 

Next , [ the end is sinister : a bait for Papists to bite at . ] Saving your scorn Sir , such baits are laid by his direction , that made his apostles fishers of men . But what would that do ? bring them to our churches ? Yes , and did : alas , what was that you will say ? I will tell you ; it was a shame to such recusant Protestant's as you are , that will not only not bite , but not so much as nibble . But you have answered yourself : it was [ a greedy desire of winning of proselytes , by conforming to them unlawfully . ] I will confess with you , that there was a greedy desire of winning proselytes , and is still ; but no unlawful means used , till you have proved that those things , with which our church and the church of Rome do symbolize , are either in their own nature , or due use , superstitious . If you know what is the meaning of that passionate entreaty of s. Paul , destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died : or of that which he allegeth as his own example ; to the weak became i as weak , that i Might gain the weak ; i am made all things to all men , that i Might by all means save some : ] you would not call it , as you do , a vainglorious and pha•isaicall project ; unless you think that a Papist cannot have a tender conscience ; or if he hath , that he ought not for his satisfaction to be yielded unto in things indifferent . Neither is this end ( A respect indeed it is , that was and is had in having such forms , though not the main and ultimate ) frustrate if they do not come ; for it keeps as many Protestant's at church now , as it did Papists at first ( Till they were upon other reasons diverted ; ) many of which by so unsufferable a scandal , would either abstain from the worship of God altogether , or go where they Might have it nearest to their ancient manner . 

In the last place , you say the imposition is violent : you mean this in respect to yourselves , who have resolved never but by force to submit to any thing , how just soever : otherwise i s•e not how you can possibly call it so , since the authority is lawful and just ; the thing in itself indifferent , and in the circumstances expedient , the extent of the imposition no farther than as it May stand together with prayers of our own framing , whether as private m•n or as public . To conclude thi• section , you and i Might hav• b•n far better busied in using those pious forms , than •n thus d•sputing them either of the one side o• the other . 

§. xii . 

I was glad at my heart when i heard you cry out [ s•t the grave counsels upon their shelves , string them hard , ] for from such your slighting of them , i conjectured your ignorance in that ki•d of learning to be , though not so ingenuously confessed , yet altogether as much and great as mine . And see , my conjecture proves true ; where my fear was most , i find lea• cause why to fear : you have shown that episcopacy , as it cannot be upheld but by well-grounded reason , and diligently searched antiquity , ( The scripture in this , as in a less material point , being less clear : ) yet it May be beaten down both by the clubs of the base rabble , and the rude fist of your false logic . For what is all your conf•tation of that holy order , but insinuative and cheating inconsequences , or spiteful and malicious railing ; as if you intended so only to triumph over the cause , ( As lately ye did over the person of a prelate ) by throwing dirt in his face ? Though your bright and new-varnisht Modona vizard ( Under which you so hansome•y play the hypocrite ) have deceived the persons , yet ( non omnes fallis — ) others there be will know it to be but a vizard , especially wh•n i shall have rendered it more ugly , by scraping off the paint . In doing which i must follow you some what more close than formerly . 

animad. it had been hapty for this land , if your priests had been but only wooden ; all England knows they have been to this island not wood but wormwood , that have infected the third part of our waters , like that apostate . etc pag. 53.  

confut. it is an unhappy , though necessary misery , that doth accompany the church of Christ ; that not only the persons , but the guides of those persons are subject to corruptions and depravations , as well in manners as doctrine : and it i• yet a more unhappy misery , that those corruptions have a farther mischief , viz. that too too often advantage is taken by and upon them , to discountenance , yea to ruin many truths . As here ; a Bishop is incestuous or bestial , ambitious , or tyrannical , or heretical , or ps•udodoxe , therefore the calling is Antichristian : one is so : therefore all are so . What could make rational men swallow such absurdities , but offence taken at those personal faults and misdemeanours ? confess with you , that there is nothing more intolerable , more justly abominable in the eyes of God and man , than a lewd , vicious , or lying prophet ; that there is nor higher nor lower among them , nor priest nor prelate , but some of them hath been and is so : what , shall we therefore have no more ministers ? Is it the office , or the man , that bears this cursed fruit ? you say the office . I ask of prelacy only : why is it then that the inferior clergy is most faulty ? how can they be so lewd , if no prelates ? or if lewd , why is not their order abolished ? Hath prelacy some ill quality in it , that makes good men bad ? why are not all the prelates alike vicious ? why are there so many good men amongst them ? Or look again ; were not they which have misbehaved themselves in that office , bad men before they were in it ? or those that were good before , did they not continue so ? It is the man then , the sinful corrupt nature of man , that yields these bitter fruits , not episcopacy . 

animad. what should i te• you how the universities ( That men look should be fountains of learning and knowledge ) have been poisoned and choked under your governance , &c.  

confut. fair and pure May those living streams ever flow , both Isis and Chame ! but who , iwis , hath troubled them ? yea , who goes about to dry them up ? if either they fail , or be pudled , you cannot blame episcopacy for either . If some Bishops be Arminians , and some scholars at either university , that infection came from beyond sea , though not in the same ship with your presbytery . Was Arminius a Bishop ? surely no more than mr Calvin : why then should that be objected to them or the cause ? Or pray tell me , do you think if you have pulled down ! piscopacy that those opinions will die ? Alas , never till you can kill depraved and curious reason , which hath the start of grace in these two things ; namely , that it is sooner •p at , and better cherished and heartened in its operations than she commonly is ; it being as natural to man to love the one , as to hate the other . What other choking you should mean , i• not this , i can no more conceive , than i can how it concerns the business in hand . 

animad. and if to be wooden be to be base , where could there be found among all the reform churches , nay in the church of Rome itself , a base brood of flattering or time-serving priests ? etc 

confut. to recriminate is so poor a way of justification , that i should think he wants all other excuses that flies to that ; therefore though you and your faction lie open nowhere more than on this part , i purposely spare you ; yet so , as i will show you the advantage i had you at . For observe me ; what is that which you call flattery ? standing up by the King . Is it not their duty ? and yours too , were ye not so great patrons of popularity ? If the King's sovereignty be inviolable , May it not lawfully be published ? May not a minister dare preach it ? yea , and if your parlour orators have defamed , May not the pulpit vindicate ? There is difference , i hope , between a libel clapped upon whitehallgates , and a panygirick at Paul's : in my opinion those flatterers shall do very ill to be silent , till either their Prince be less virtuous , or you less malicious . 

animad. and as for your young scholars , that petition for bishoprics and deaneries to encourage them in their studies , and that many gentlemen else will not put their sons to learning , &c.  that which they allege for their encouragement , should be cut away forthwith , as the very bait of pride and ambition , the very garbage that draws together all the fowls of prey , &c.  

confut. it is one of those young scholars that asks your eldership , whether there were not birds and beasts of prey , that did devour the flock , before ere the church were so much beholding to the bounty of Princes and nobles as now she is ? Whether the devil can allure never a cobbler from his awl and last under a fat prebendary ? Whether a widow's house be not as tempting as a Bishop's palace ? or there be not of those degenerate sort of men , who will desire the priesthood for a morsel of bread ? If so , how are we , or shall we be then more safe than now ? Poor soul ! how envy and anger befools thee ! Bethink yourself better ; are not parsonages , vicarages , and lectures prey too ? and do we not see halt and dumb too often possess the former , and crazed men the latter ? away with them then by any means . No , but away with those fowls and beasts rather , and then that prey will be meat for honest and able preachers ; or i doubt not else but sacrilege Hook and his neighbour gentlemen will make many a pleasant meal on it . But in good earnest Sir , for bishoprics and denaries , they are in too wise a dispensers' hands to be given to vultures ; had it been otherwise , perhaps yours and your fellows mouths ere this had been stopped . 

anim the heathen philosophers thought , virtue was for its own sake inestimable , and the greatest gain of a teacher to make a soul virtuous . Was moral virtue so lovely or so alluring , and heathen men so enamoured of her , as to teach and study her , with greatest neglect and contempt of worldly profit and advancement : and is Christian piety so homely and unpleasant , and Christian men so cloyed with her , as that none will study and teach her but for lucre and preferment ! Oh stale-grown piety ! Oh gospel rated as cheap as thy Master ! &c. pag. 54.  

confut. now i see you know somewhat : and were i not assured that other passions distracted you , i could easily be inclined to think that this volley of expressions proceeded from a love of goodness : indeed so much the more easily inclined , by how much i would fain have it so . For were there no guile in them , as i do continually nourish such thoughts , so would i never desire to have them better clothed : if at any time a flood of eloquence becomes us , it is when we express such a love , or such an indignation ! But it is one thing that you say , and another thing that you prove : the means is often times rested and taken up in stead of the end ; therefore the means is not the means ; or therefore the means cannot be looked at as the means : illogical and absurd ! A philosopher loves virtue ; and a Christian loves him that is the fountain of that virtue ; what then ? The philosopher , you say , loved virtue for itself ; so doth a Christian love God much more . But he did it with neglect of others things , wealth , honours , &c.  He came then so much short of his own philosophical perfection : they that stood a begging in the streets , Might ( If it had pleased them ) have been as liberal as their best Masters ; and that philosopher that flung his gold into the sea , Might have been perhaps less an infidel , if he had provided for himself and his family with it ; i am sure Might have been more magnificent . But that offends you , that our church should use the same means to entice men to the pure service of God , that were used to tempt our saviour to the service of the devil . Those means were neither in themselves ▪ nor as enticemen•ss , any way dangerous ; but so far as they were tendered by him , from whom it was a sin to receive them to him , who could make no use of them ; for such an e•d , as it had been a sin to accept them o•herwise how could God entice the children of Israel with the promise of Canaan ; or Solomon , with riches and honours and all kind of abundance ? But these desires mix . as subordinate they May : the holy ghost witnesseth of mose• that he had an eye to the reward ; i ask whether in that Moses sinned yea , God himself hearteneth on the church of Smy•na , be thou faithful unto the death , and i will give thee a crown of life . Du Moulin whose tractates you would seem to be acquainted with ) in a discourse of the love of God , tells us , the most imperfect and incomplete degree of this love is , to love God for the good we receive from him : thus children ( Saith he ) say grace , that they May go to breakfast . Indeed a childish love . The perfectest is , to love him and nothing else ; a love only the glorified saints are capable of : betwixt which two he placeth a third , a mixed love ; which is , when we love God with other things ; yet so , as that we love those things for God's sake ; that is , as helps and furtherances of our own piety and his glory . Either you wilfully oversee much truth , or are very ignorant . 

Animad. a true pastor of Christ's sending hath this especial mark , that for greatest labours and greate• merits in the church , he requires either nothing , if he could so subsist ; or a very common and reasonable supply of human necessaries . We cannot do better therefore than to leave this care of ours to Good ; he can easily send labourers into his harvest . — he can stir up rich fathers to bestow exquisite education upon their children and so dedicated them to the service of the gospel , he can make the sons of nobles his ministers , etc pag. 56.  animad. no man doubts of what God can do ; but we May well doubt he will not do what we would have him , while we are thus froward and unthankful ; while we are under persecution , poor , wretched , and despicable , fed but from hand to mouth , ( As we say ) while God leads his church through a desert or wilderness : if we expect our drink to drop out of a flint , or from the shivers of a barren and dry rock ; if we spread our table to a miracle , or every morning and evening look out for a raven to feed us , it becomes our condition , and therefore God answers our expectation : but if when he hath brought his church into a land that flows with milk and honey ; when he hath made Kings our nursing fathers , and Queens our nursing mothers , we will then overlook all that bounty , and say God can do thus and thus , can raise out of these stone• children unto Abraham , and bring up those children to his own work , at his own miraculous expenses ; this is but to tempt his providence . God can do this and more , but his ways are his own . He can rain manna into our mouths , as well as due upon the earth . Shall we be angry , because we have our corn at the second hand ? he could have sent us into the world with our clothes on ; is it not as well that he sets the worm to the wheel to spin it for us ? doth he not show a work of providence in preparing both for us , as well as in giving them to us ? so no doubt he could have immediately from himself supplied the necessities of his ministers ; is it not as well that he doth it by others ? doth he not make a virtue out of what we have , in their hands through which it passeth ? is it not liberality , is it not munificence in them that give it ? why should we envy good men their piety ? or are these virtues out of date , were they only ceremonial ? hath God impropriated all the riches of the earth for the use of the laymen only ? are not glergy-men members of the body of Christ , why should not each member thrive alike ? if these must be poor and naked , so let the rest be ; and though there be in this but little wisdom , yet will there be some indifferency . 

But you will say , it is too much , and ill placed ▪ any thing is so that is ill used : single out the man , and if you can make better use of it than he , i wish you had the preferment . But for church livings in general , a judicious surveyor once said , ( And i dare say they have not been much bettered since ) that they were insufficient for the churchmen : and that all the parliaments since 27. h. 8. who gave away impropriations from the church , seemed to him to stand in some sort obnoxious and obliged to God in conscience to do somewhat for the church ( He did not mean to rob it ) to reduce the patrimony thereof to a competency . 

animad. can a man thus employed ( In preaching , &c. ) find himself discontented or dishonoured , for want of admittance to have a pragmatical vote at sessions , — or be discouraged though me• call him not Lord : — would he tug for a barony , to sit and vote in parliament ? pag. 57  

confut. yes marry , what else ? That man that was and could have still been content without those honours , will be very loath now to let them go ; yet not so much that he loves the honours or means that accompany them , as that he would not have his country made guilty of so shameful a depriving him of them . Why should sacrilege and injustice triumph over God's cause , while he hath tongue or pen to defend it ? yea , why should he or any the rest of that sacred function forsake their great Master in it ? Me thinks if all other arguments failed , it were sufficient proof of the goodness of it , that it hath him to be its defender that is defender of the faith : a Prince , who if for nothing else , will therefore keep the munificence of his predecessors inviolate , that he May teach succeeding ages a reverence to his own : which indeed is so much the more estimable , in that it is exercised in so perverse an age of the world , as is so far from giving it its just value , that it searce allows it * pardonable . alas ! what an heap of disorder and ruins had this church even now been , had not God sent it so gracious a governor ! but if , notwithstanding what divine and human laws , what the King and all good men vote to the contrary , such a desolation must come , May the curse which hath always been wont •o accompany such desperate robbery , be to this land turned into a blessing ; and May it never fall any whit below that happiness , which in God's extraordinary supply of new means is and May be imagined . 

Finis . 





pag. 10.  pag. 13.  post pra• dia callirboendo . pers sat 1. pag. 8.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} la e  lib. 2. in vita stilp•n . bish. hath occa• . Med• . * in•u• vices sub•unt , & 〈◊〉 teste moventur . iuv. sat. 6.  

* see more of the same hotchp•tch in the Episile . * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . arist. eth.  4. c. 8.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} latinis scurra dicitur , sumtâ metaphorâ à mendicantibus , qui ad arras & templa deum sedebant & jacebant , & à sacrificantibus stipem mendicabant . Inter•a autem seipsos multis jocis & scommatis vexabant , & interdum praetereunte• conviti•s pr•scquebantur . À {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ara , & {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} jaceo seu accubo . vid. mag. co••• eth. arist. * Sir fr. Bacon . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Vid. mer. casaub. in Praesat ad med.  Mar. aur. anton.  * nae tu , awl , nimium nugatores , cùm maluisti culpam deprecari quàm culpâ carere : — te oro , qu•t perpulit ut id committeres , quod priusquam faceres , peteres uti ignosceretur . Cato apud macrob i• pr•fat ▪ ad Saturn . 

ask your Lysimachus Nicanor what d•faming inve•tiveses &c. p. 7.  pag. 7.  militum virtute non hostium imbecillite , potentia quaeri debet . them•st . apud iust. Spec. europae p. •4 . lond. 1632.  Sandys spec. e•rop . mach. discourses upon Livy , lib. 1. c. 8.  vide Hooker eccl. pol. in praefat.  

Foxian . Confess . p. 14.  vide Donne's pseudom . 1 pet. 2. 20.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Arist. pol. 2. c. 7.  

pag 12.  

ger. M•ringus in vita sancti August . primam 〈◊〉 tis par•em •e quaera• , in coe no perdidit .  . de s. aug.  * non corrumpuntur in deterius quae aliquando etiam à malis , s•d hon•sta ma•e•t . quae saepius à bonis fiunt . p•in . l. 5. ep. 3. arist. apolog. pro suis l•dic . i• . epig. ad suas Satyras . farrage libelli iuv. sat. 1.  I••ge •ell . Mosellanus ad gell.   . 1. c. 17.  luk. 1. 69.  Hebraeis familiar est ( Keren ) id est cornu , pro vi & •obore usurpare , sumpta metaphora ab animalibus cornupetis . Beza ad •oc . * quis il•• mut••s ? is qui damnavit eum qui carmine lusisset nomine expresso , l. Dorleans nov.  Cogit . 〈◊〉 ••rnel . Tacit.  pag. 6.  a nam parum abfuit cuin à bructero quod•m occideretur . suet in T•b . som• readings for •ruct•ro have ructe•o : •orrentius his manuscript hath Rut•ro . b Mattyae seu macteae sunt bellaria , graecis {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , omne mensae secundae genus . c ex purpurâ atramenti genus conficiebatur , qu•d encaustum nominabatur : h•c soli imperatores privil & literis subscribendis ••ebantur . — unde & Inchiostro postea derivatum credo , Guido Pancirollus rerum memorab tit encaust p 10.  d {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . ab {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} uro . lege cl. Salmas . in Pl•v . Vopisc . p. 393.  Ceys for Ceyx . Sir ph. Sidney Defense of Poes' . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Luc. Demo•ax . pag. 66.  a omina quaedam occultiora sumpta sunt ex rebus , locis , nominibus , vestibus . vide isa. pont. in Collectan . ad macrobium . ex nominibus , roma quasi {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , robur . roma , non Romula , ne male ominaretur diminutivum . ne mihi damn•m in epidamn• duas . Plaut. in me•• ch. omen , non à loci aliquâ incommoditate , sed à nomine tantùm . item , s•te emem , lucridem fore confido 〈◊〉 in pers. vnde à d•s plerunque auspieata nomina : a love , Diocles , Diogenes , diom•des : a junone , Heraclides , Heraclitus : a sole , Helius , H••od•rus , &c.  Hugo Grotius in februis ad mart. Capell . Sa yricon . 

considerations touching the church of England . rom. 3. 5.  

pag 6.  pag 13.  a numerantur sententiae , non pondera•tur : nihil est tam inaequale , quàm aequalitas ip•a : nam c•m sit impar prudentia , par omnium jus est . p•in . l. 3. epist. 12.  b Rudes nos & imperitos reducta libertas deprehendit , cujus duleedine accensi , cogimur quaedam sac•re antequam nosse . idem l. 3. ep. 14.  c senatus , humano g•ne ireverendus , o•bis terrae consilium , asylum mundi , fid•m & al•um reipublicae pectus . vide fil•sac•m l. 3. s•lect . T. t. sen•otus ven. sen. §. 4 , 5 , &c.  d non considerandem est quid vir opt•mus in present â 〈◊〉 , sed quid semper sit probaturus . plin. l. b.  . ep. 7.  Sunt quae non dare , sed nega•e , beneficium est . Poscit aeger frigidam , ira•us serrum , &c. exorari in pernitiem rega•tium , saeva est 〈◊〉 . sen. de b•nef . 

* apponitur coena non minus 〈◊〉 q•àm frugi , 〈◊〉 dele•ratur , 〈◊〉 afficitur ; •nd 〈◊〉 post •7 〈◊〉 ,  ••rumque vigor integer , ind•agile & vi•idum cor•us , •olaque ex•e•ecture prudentia . pl n. l b 3. epist 1.  a occasio•all medit.  b non •ibi , sed operi bibunt . Quint decla . 13.  Ape's paupe is . see shepherds sincere conver• . Christ an m•der . 1 ex 〈◊〉 . p. 70.  pag. 18.  * vellem mihi , etsi non qualis in Marco Tullio fuit , aliquam tamen proximam •loquentiae contingere facultatem . lactan. l. 3. div. inst c. 1.  Veri•as licet possit sine eloquenti• defendi , tamen claritate & nitore sermonis illustranda est , ut potentius in animos influat . idem . quid igitur ? anon adfuit paulo sua {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ? certè adfuit , quanta nulli unquam obtigit ; sed coelestis , non humana . Beza ad 1. cor. 1. 17.  — {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . naz. 1. in lul. — {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . idem orat. 20. in funere Basil . * animus mihi certè nunquam defuit , tempora defuerunt . ul 4.  Philip . non prosequi , non fugere . * at si intereos quos nunquam vidimus floruisset , non solum 〈◊〉 e•us , orum etiam imagines conqui•eremus : ejusdom nunc honor praesentis & gr•tia quasi satietate langues•it : at hoc pravum malig•umq•e est , •on admirari homine• admira ione dignissimum , quia videre , audire , alloqui , c•mplecti , n••  verum etiam amare contingit . plin. lib. 1 epist. 16.  •ccls 12. 1•  esa 63. 3.  

fr. I•n•us de p•ct . vet l. 3  ingenium Galbae mal• habitat . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} suculae dictae . a. gell. l 13. c. 9  

1 cor. 10. 23.  A re ringend•m est {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman}  •gtur , sc. indiff . Lord Viscoun• Say and seal in his answer to the Archbishop .  cor. 2. 16.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Rom. 5. 5.  see Perkins cases of consc. of set forms of prayer . Hooker eccl. pol. p. 241.  •pee . Europe . rom. 14. 15  1 cor. 9 22.  

pag. 19  heb. 11. 29  rev. 2 10.  vide Hooker in praes•t . Eccl. p•l . B•cons' consi• . * as 〈◊〉 the King's gift , regal bounty May be excusable in giving . p. 59  





























































































































