THE JACOBITES HUDIBRAS , CONTAINING The Late KING'S DECLARATION IN TRAVESTY . 

LONDON , Printed for Abel Roper at the Mitre near Temple-bar . 1692.  

TO THE READER . 

TO Triumph over Ruin and Misery , is but an unmanly fort of Insult ; and in the Case of Princes , possibly , it may bear a vet harder Name . And therefore this following piece of Burlesque will , perhaps ▪ be liable to fall under some Censure on that Account . We confess indeed that Charge at first glance may seem to lie against us , had we not this Justification on our side ▪ viz. That the late King's Declaration , the Subject of our grinning Meeter , is a Piece so disingenuous ( to give it no severer an Epithet ) that the coursest Doggerel is a Style fit for it . For not to mention any other notorious Weaknesses in it , ( as being somewhat more pardonable ) the utter silence throughout it in the least Excuse or Apology for the Misgovernment through his whole Four Years Reign , not so much as one shadow of the least Error acknowledg`d , appears so hardened an Original of Popish Bigotry and Confidence , that the coursest Treatment is the best it deserves . 

From this Honest Vindication we have adventured to expose that sometimes High Jacobite , but at present , Fallen Dagon , in a little plain Raillery , as indeed the suitablest Dress for it . For truly the whole Declaration , if designed for that Great End , viz. The Sweetening and Softening three Kingdoms into his Restoration ; certainly the Penmen and Compilers of it could never be in Earnest ; for considering how they have managed their Arguments that way , the whole Piece take it quite through , must undoubtedly be intended for a Jest . As such therefore , to use the old course Proverb , Like to like , quo ' the Devil to the Collier , We have very pertinently Rigged it up in this Comical Travesty . 

THE PREFACE . 

JAMES R.  

AS late near Port of Grace de Haure , 
By Providence Before or Backside Favor , 
With our Old Irish Troops encamped , 
Those thin-worn Under-souls new vamped ; 
By Aid of French Dragoons recruited ; 
The Famous Dear Apostles Booted , 
Monsieur and Teague a loving Couplet , 
Our ever faithful Dogs in Doublet , 
Opening full mouthed to Jacobite Whistle , 
And linked as close as Rose and Thistle ; 
We lay expecting Wind and Tide , 
Cross Herring-pond to make a stride , 
For the late Grand Descent Ding Dung , 
no lesle than Thirty thousand strong ; 
All Loyal Hands for the Great Work , 
Monsieur true Steel to James and Turk ; 
And Teague , resolved by this bold ●lim Trick , 
To patch up his lost Fame at Lim'rick ; 
To 〈◊〉 the William 〈◊〉 Sons of Who●●● , 
And pay the Running Boyne old Scores . 
Whilst thus Grand Fleet at Breast Equipping , 
With lesser Fry of Transport Shipping , 
Well Manned and Rigged from Star to Larboard , 
Waiting we lay in mouth of Harbour ; 
To pave and smooth our way before us , 
And tune all sweetly into Chorus , 
Wisely to cheer our Subjects Loyal , 
We published Declaration Royal , 
Their puling Stomaches to prepare 
For their expected Bill of Fare : 
This Learned Piece , Penned , let me tell ye , 
By Reverend Bishops Ellis , E. - y● , 
To their Immortal Zeal's Applause , 
Joint Brother Champions of our Cause ; 
For Jacobite Conveyance printed , 
And for our Royal Standard minted . 
But ( to our Grief of Heart be 't spoken ) 
Our Wind-bound Cause and Measures broken , 
Our Great Intriqus ( alas ) unravelled , 
And all our Councils stuck and gravelled ; 
( For mighty Hopes too oft fall short all , 
And Great Designs are things but Mortal , ) 
We hear some Miscreants Malcontented , 
Have our great Edict mispresented ; 
Traduced our high Imperial Scribble , 
With the hard Names of Dull and Feeble , 
Filled up with Quibble , Crack and Flaw , 
As weak as Heretic Cobw●b Law ; 
Our Declaration , called by some 
Sour Meat , by others Sugar-plumb . 
Nay , some whose Tongues we wish Besh — n , 
Stick not to say 't was only written 
To tickle Trout , and Bait for Gudgeon , 
And all to soften Popish Dudgeon . 
In fi●e , a Hocus Pocus Tool ; 
What not ! all turned to Ridicule ! 
But to unmask the whole Delusion , 
Both for our Justice , their Confusion : 
Since so many Clod-pates , God knows , 
Can make no Sense of it in Prose : 
We have thought fit , for more effectual 
Enlightening British Intellectual , 
To troll the glibber and the sweeter , 
To have it softened into Meeter ; 
Resolved to try , if it can chime 
more Sense and Reason tagged with Rhyme . 
Besides sublimer Charms invite us 
To choose this Glorious way to right us . 
As Poetry's exalted Quality 
T'heroick Fame gives Immortality ▪ 
Our Declaration to rehearse 
In lofty Monumental Verse ; 
How can we fill a nobler Journal , 
T'enstall our Memory Eternal . 
Given at our Rising Camp near Haure the Grace , in the last Year of our Reign . Melfort . 

Declaration . 

Whereas Our ever Dearest Joy , 
Lewis that Tory Rory Boy , 
Lewis the Great and Absolute , 
( Our own beloved Attribute ! 
An Attribute , that Darling Dearing , 
As cost us once Three Crowns the wearing ) 
Our kindest and almost Twin-brother 
( So like you 'll scarce know one from tother ) 
Has lent us his kind Help most Christian 
Against the Williamite Philistian ; 
To maul their Orange-tree , and try a 
Touch with their little great Goliath ; 
In mutual Link like Thong and Buckle , 
To bring our Enemies to Truckle , 
Supplied us all our Tools and Tackle 
Our Friends t' untie , and Foes to s●a●k●e . 
Accordingly with Force t'equip us , 
And Fleet a Thousand strong to Ship us , 
For Three Apostate Crowns Subjection , 
And Triple Diadem's Resurrection ; 
We are resolved with Cause most hopeful , 
With Arm Puissant , Heart brim Pope-full , 
To give the Heretics Bastinado ; 
With Army French , and French Armada , 
Recover Kingdoms Renegado . 
These Forces lent us to Restore us , 
And fairly drive the World before us , 
more we could borrow , if need were , 
For Lewis has enough to spare . 
But for good Reasons why and wherefore 
These shall be all we want , or care for . 
And now for cheering Subjects loving , 
Wisely and prudently removing 
All Jealousy from French Invasion ▪ 
( As God-wot   but small occasion ; ) 
Besides the Honour we have about us , 
And the no Cause they have to doubt us , 
We promise when we readvance 
To English Throne by Power of France , 
Those Champions for our Jus Divinum , 
Helped by our Friends above to join'em , 
The worthy Heroes Dead , and gone all , 
St. Ruth , St. Coleman , St. Tyrconnel , 
Those Saints in our great Truth departed , 
And still in Heaven t ▪ our Cause truehearted , 
Those Fight , and these Interceding , 
Have brought home Dame and Master Reading : 
When Fleur the liss has humbled Lion , 
And raised the Walls of our fallen Zion : 
we 'll send back every Mother's Son : 
These Monsieurs when our Work is done 
Upon Our Royal Word be 't spoken , 
( That Faith , you know , was never broken ) 
With nimble Vade , presto , hocus , 
One Puff shall sweep the Trooping Locusts . 
Nay to ensure our Word yet faster , 
Lewis himself , Our Lord and Master , 
Shall kindly condescend to be 
Our honourable Guarrantee . 
Him w' have engaged by Oath and Vow ; 
( Bonds which he never kept till now ; ) 
But we have power to tie him more 
Than all Mankind could do before . 
What though you know his Hopes do fly 
At Universal Monarchy ; 
( That blessed Work well-nigh gone through 
Had we but held our Throne till now . ) 
Which highest Pinnacle of Glory 
When you shall see him perch before ye , 
And which , when we remount our Seat , 
Our helping Hand shall soon complete ; 
( Our least Return for Crown Restored , 
To lend him ours , who lent his Sword ; ) 
In that great Day , that finishing Struck , 
When France all Christendom shall Yoke : 
What though all Europe go to Po● , 
England's alone th'excepted Spot : 
We and our Heirs the Throne shall sit on . 
He means no Harm to little Britain , 
So far from the least thought to Shackle us , 
( Believe it spoken with Voice Oraculous ) 
Britain sleeps safe , no Chains upon her , 
Secured by Lewis Guardian Honor. 
then safely trust what Sacred true is ; 
Nor doubt your Faithful James nor Lewis . 
But why ( as if our Cause could droop ) 
Do we descend so low , to stoop 
To Arguing , or Cases stating ? 
It looks like poor Capitulating . 
Our Friends t'indear , and Foes to Fright , 
We bring that thundering Title Right . 
Right , which whenever it please to shine , 
With that huge Attribute , Divine , 
Can say all , do all , and defy all ; 
And no Body must ask it , why all ? 
What is 't it can't do , great things , small things , 
Make Subjects nothing , Monarches all things ? 
Besides we come with Zeal Inspirant , 
To free you from the Yoke of Tyrant : 
To ease you from your Shackle-bearing , 
For our true Orient Bracelets wearing . 
That worse than Nero in Possession , 
th' usurpers Reign all vile Oppression , 
All Cloven Foot ; the Nations Curse 
Too great , and will be ten times worse . 
Poor Cheated and Deluded Nation ! 
Nothing in th' Orange Declaration , 
So far from the least Good Intent , 
Either performed , or ever meant , 
But false , all Lies in every Article , 
Line , Syllable , each part and Particle ; 
But how or where ! so poor a thing 's 
Below the Cognizance of Kings . 
However for authentic proof , 
We say 't's all False , and that 's enough : 
And what we say ! is Demonstration 
As clear as Transubstantiation . 
We must confess we once run from ye , 
And turned our Royal Bum upon ye , 
That Bum which to have made us come again , 
You should have kissed t' have brought us home again . 
What though at that abrupt Departure , 
We broke up House , and threw up Charter ; 
Stripped all our own Regalia ; nay , 
Threw even our own Great Seal away : 
But what of that ! what if we had gone 
As far as honest Presto John ; 
Or to the farthest Turkish Town ; 
And left you all to hang or drown ? 
( To Turkish Town ! Yes , welcome there 
For Lewis sake , we had met good Cheer . ) 
't is true , indeed , our scamp'ring Dance 
Was only into sweet dear France : 
To Monsieur bound with Oaths most godly , 
With th' rest o'th'world we stood so oddly , 
That troth , for private Reasons told us 
France was the only place could hold us . 
But what if we had run to th' Devil ! 
What then ! must you be so uncivil ! 
't is not alas , our running Saunter , 
Nor all your Abdication Banter , 
That can excuse a Fault so spiteful 
As dispossessing Prince so Rightful . 
  read of old of Bloody Work 
Betwixt House of Lancaster and York . 
And what if for some unknown Crime , 
Heaven , angry Heaven , in Our life time , 
no doubt , to Scourge ungrateful Nation , 
Shall not ordain our Restoration . 
( Three undone Kingdoms Loss irreparable 
With all its Train of Woes inseparable ! ) 
However if We fail ( pray mind us ! ) 
We leave our little Wales behind us . 
Besides , as Matron wise have telled her , 
Our Queen has got a York in K●lder . 
A York unless ( what Heaven forbid ) 
Our loss should make her lose her Kid. 
Think OH what dangers then you run ye 
With th' endless Plagues entailed upon ye , 
When Wales , young Sprig , betwixt Rose and Thistle , 
Shall once grow up its Thorns to bristle . 
But now t' allay our Subjects Frights , 
And set their little Wits to rights ; 
From all their dread of Hemp to chear'em , 
( Nor fear their friends when   none near'em ) 
We issue forth our General Pardon 
So large , the like was never heard on : 
Mercy so vast and so unbounded , 
That but to hear the Fame on 't sounded 
Our Enemies shall be all confounded . 
Only some Rods in Piss are kept 
For these few following we Except . 
As first Lords , Prelates , Peers , ( what not , ) 
All Eyesores to our Cause , ( God wot , ) 
Mounting to Thirty four in number , 
All to rid off for useless Lumber ; 
Excluded for substantial Reason , 
Some for Estates , and some for Treason . 
This List with Dukes and Lords i'th'van 
Ends with poor Hunt the Fisherman . 
For we have sworn on Virgin Psalter , 
With the same consecrated Halter , 
To truss our little Man of Fish up , 
Hanged cheek by joul with great Archbishop . 
Next we except a sort of Vermin , 
In Hood and Scarlet , Coif and Ermine : 
The very next up Holborn Trudges 
Those Butchering Jurymen and Judges ; 
All hands in Cross and Ashton's Murder 
We have sworn to troop to th' devil and further . 
Nay th' Hick's-hall Dons must have a rally 
For some Old-bailey Scores on Tally : 
Whom we 'll make bold to call t' account 
For giving of our Friends a Mount ; 
For trussing Burghlers , noosing Pads , 
Those honest Abdicated Lads ; 
Who in Allegiance firm and duteous , 
To keep good Conscience sound , and true t' us , 
To drink our Health , and Damn the Dutch , 
Perhaps have taken a Cup too much : 
Or forced , for daily Bread and Clotheses , 
To take Purse t' escape taking Oaths . 
But Woe that Criminal Wretch so tardy , 
Whose crying Gild has been so hardy , 
To dare to Try , Condemn , or hang , 
Our best best Friends , our Dear-joy Gang ; 
Our Rapparee and Teague-land Breed , 
Of our own true Shalvation Creed ; 
Be 't doomed with Vengeance Magisterial , 
That Sin ' 'gainst Majesty Imperial , 
That Sin our heaviest Rods shall handle , 
Damned trebly , by Bell Book and Candle . 
In short , th' whole Long-robed Mouths of Law , 
Must take their Turns at hang and Draw ; 
When for these Capital Black Sins 
We've stripped our Dons in Coney-skins , 
Our next uncasing work , Good Sirs , 
Is mauling of Mechanic Furs : 
All Sparks in Office , Town or City , 
Sheriffs , Bailiffs , all shut out from Pity ; 
Mayors , Aldermen , the Kingdom through , 
From London Great , to small Queenborough ; 
Who , when we first set Foot in Nation , 
Shall not in ample Acclamation , 
With Bells , Huzzahs , and Bonfires Greet us , 
Burn Caps , and run stark Mad to meet us : 
Nay even that Hour we step from Water , 
( What though they venture Necks , no matter ! ) 
Immediately by Proclamation 
Publish this Royal Declaration ; 
All such from hopes of Grace we Bilk , 
And Damn as black as Buttermilk ; 
That is , by civil Computation , 
Just all the Magistrates i' th' Nation . 
Yes , and for Reasons strong and ample ; 
For making , by this wise Example , 
Whole Corporations Tyburn Martyrs , 
Is th'easiest way to Forfeit Charters . 
Our Mercy of Gigantic Size , 
So Great , forgives our very Spies : 
All who our Councils have betrayed , 
Or Royal Secrets open laid : 
Be it a Sin so great ( suppose it ) 
Peeping in Father Petres Closet : 
Nay , Crime so bold as to tell Tales 
Of our Sweet Babe the Prince of Wales . 
These and worse Sins all pardoned stand , 
Provided when our Forces Land , 
That Grace to merit from our Hand , 
They purchase our kind Smiles and Favour , 
According to their Good Behaviour . 
For Instance some such Service do us , 
As bring a Ship of War over to us ; 
Betray some Town or Fort ; or Charm ye 
Some Troop over from th'usurper's Army . 
Do this , and our Good Graces reap ; 
And well they buy their Necks so cheap . 
Nay , for a Spill more and above , 
we 'll pay half Money , not all Love , 
Resolving to Regain our Crowns , 
As Lewis Buys his Conquered Towns.  
And lastly , we Exclude all those 
( A Small Exception 't is , God knows ) 
From the first Minute of our Landing , 
All General Pardon notwithstanding , 
Shall dare do any Act or Thing 
T' oppose Restoring of your King. 
This Lash the Black-coat Tribe shall Scourge ye , 
For this last Swoop takes all the Clergy ; 
From Haughty Mitred Prelate , down 
To plain Sir John in tattered Gown , 
Poor Parson , who ring's in the People 
With Candlestiks in Country Steeple ; 
All that in Heretic Prayers shall dare ye 
To Pray-success to William and Mary . 
Nor shall this maul the Pastor's Hide 
Alone , but Fleece the Sheep beside . 
For woe to all their smarting Backs , 
Shall dare to pay one Penny Tax ; 
For that , you 're told in Declaration , 
Is to Abet the Usurpation . 
Thus take the Kingdom round , Poor Soul , 
He Forfeits Head that Pays but Poll. 
To sum up all , when we begin , 
( Our Mild Forgiving Hand once in , ) 
Our tenderhearted Inclination , 
Excepts no more than All the Nation , 
As bound by Romish Oath Religious , 
To act with Mercy thus Prodigious . 
And now our Church of England Greeting , 
With some few Honey-words at meeting ; 
Some small Civility Complimental ; 
Nor with least Reservation Mental , 
To talk Romantickly , or fright ye 
With Boasted Wonders over-mighty , 
Intended by us to Protect it : 
Because we 'd have you not expect it . 
Know then with the same Word Most Royal , 
Of which already   had Trial , 
Your Heretic Rights maintained devoutly , 
we 'll act your Church's Champion stoutly . 
( To speak in Style some call Ironic ) 
we 'll it with Orthodox Canonic ▪ 
Secured in all their Privileges ▪ 
And this we vouch in Verbo Regis . 
But as to either School or College , 
Or Academy ; we acknowledge , 
Our Declaration ( Mum ! ) says naught . 
And why , because with Wise forethought , 
Forth'old Substantial Maudlin Breed , 
( Under the Ro●e ) we have decreed 
To make Them Nurs'ries , to supply us 
With Father Teagues and Obadiahs . 
Now You , th' Heroic Men o th' Blade , 
Professors of the Martial Trade , 
With Hearts most stout , and Brains most shallow , 
And so more fit for present swallow , 
To quit th' Usurper we exhort all ; 
th' Usurper whom we hate most mortal . 
And why , because he takes delight in 
Our natural Abhorrence , ●ighting ▪ 
Who ever shall the Tyrant shame , 
And come to Gentle I — s the Lamb ; 
Besides our unknown Favours showed 'em , 
we 'll pay 'em all th' Usurper owed 'em : 
Their whole Arrears , each Doit that 's due . 
Aye and pay Lewis Army too ▪ 
A pretty Score , when both Counts meet , 
His some odd Pounds for Land and Fleet : 
A lumping roaring thundering Sum , 
And Reck'ning-day must one day come : 
But with our dear sweet Face to enlighten ye , 
Let not that paltry Trifle frighten ye . 
Nay and considering what heap 
Of Blessings from our Reign you 'll reap , 
It is a pennyworth dog cheap ; 
Which you 'll , no doubt , pay every Farthing 
And find you 're Saviours by the bargain . 
And lastly , for a smart Conclusion , 
For all our snarling Foes Confusion ; 
One parting , home , dead doing Blow , 
As all Objections shall o'erthrow ; 
We promise you , ( and mark us rightly , 
A Vow to which we 'll hold most tightly ) 
By our old Model , stamp and Charter 
To Reign , no flincher and no starter , 
In Church and State , Our Wi●e and 〈◊〉 ▪ 
Our last remaining Thread shall be 
All of a piece with our first Spinning , 
As we designed from the Beginning . 
If this Plaindealing will not win ye , 
In troth , I think , the devil 's in ye . 
FINIS . 





 Whereas the most Christian King in pursuance of the many obliging Promises he has made Us , of giving Us his Effectual Assistance for the recovering of our Kingdoms , and in order to it , has lent Us so many of his Troops , as may be abundantly sufficient to untie the hands of our Subjects , and make it safe for them to return to their Duty .  And has notwithstanding for the present , according to our desire , purposely declined sending over Forces so Numerous , as might raise any jealousy in the Minds of our Good Subjects . All which Foreign Troops , as soon as we shall be fully settled in the quiet and peaceable Possession of our Kingdoms , We do hereby promise to send back .  Thomas an Affair of this Nature speaks for itself , nor do We think Ourselves at all obliged to say any thing more upon this occasion , than , That We come to Assert our Just Rights , and to Deliver our People from the Oppression they lie under ; yet when we consider how Miserably many of Our Subjects were cheated into the late Revolution by the Art of Ill Men , and particularly by the Prince of Orange's Declaration , which was taken upon Trust , and easily believed then but since appear● notoriously False in all the parts of it , consisting no lesle of Assertions that have been evidently disproved , than of Promises that were never intended to be performed . To prevent the like Delusions for the time to come , etc.   And doubtless from the Observation of the Temper and Complexion , the Methods and Maxims of the present Usurper , from the Steps he has already taken , when it was most necessary for him to give no distaste to the People , as well as from the Nature of all Usurpation , which can never be supported , but by the same ways of Fraud and Violence by which it was set up , there is all the reason in the World to believe , that the beginning of this Tyranny , like the five first Years of Nero , is like to prove the mildest part of it ; and all they have yet suffered , is but the beginning of the Miseries which those very Men , who were the great Promoters of the Revolution , may yet live to see and feel , etc.   Our arrival in France , the only part in Europe to which we could retire with safety ,  For all wise Men ought , and all good Men will take care of their Posterity ; and therefore it is to be remembered , that if it should please Almighty God , as one of the severest Judgements upon these Kingdoms , for the many Rebellions and Perjuries they have been guilty of , so far to permit the Continuation of the present Usurpation , that we should not be restored during our Life time , yet an indisputable Title to the Crown will survive in the Person of our dearest Son the Prince of Wales , our present Heir apparent , and his Issue , and for default of that , in the Issue of such other Sons as we have great reason to hope ( the Queen being now with Child , ) we may yet leave behind us : And what the Consequences of that is like to be , may easily be understood by all that are not strangers to the long and bloody Contentions between the two Houses of York and Lancaster :  Except the persons following , viz. Duke of Ormond , Marquis of Winchest . Earl of Sund. Earl of , etc. Dr. Tillotson Dean of Cant. Dr. etc. — Hunt Fisherman .  Except also all persons who as Judges or Jurymen , or otherwise had a hand in the Barbarous Murder of Mr. John Ashton , and Mr. Cross , or of any others who have been illegally Condemned and Executed for their Loyalty to us :  Provided always , That all Magistrates who expect any Benefit of Our Gracious Pardon , shall immediately after Notice of our Landing , make some Public Manifestation of their Allegiance to Us , and of their Submission to Our Authority ; and also Publish and cause to be Proclaimed this our Declaration as ●oon as it shall come to their Hands , etc.   And all Spies , and such as have berrayed Our Councils during our late Absence from England , that by an early return to their Duties , and by any Signal Mark of it , as by Seizing to Our Use , or Delivering into our Hands any of Our Forts , or by bringing over to Us any Ships of War , or Troops in the Usurper's Army , or any new raised and Armed by themselves , or by any other Eminent Good Service , according to their several Opportunities and Capacities , shall manifest the Sincerity of their Repentance , shall not only have their respective Pardons immediately passed under the Great Seal of England , but shall otherwise be Considered and Rewarded by Us , as the Merit of their Case shall require .  And We do hereby strictly Forewarn and Prohibit any of Our Subjects whatsoever , either by Collecting or Paying any of the Illegal Taxes lately imposed upon the Nation , or any part of Our Revenue , or by any other ways to Abet or Support the present Usurpation .  And We do hereby further Declare and promise , That We will Protect and Maintain the Church of England , as it is now by Law established , in all their Rights , Privileges and Possessions : And that upon all Vacancies of Bishoprics and other Dignities and Benefices within our Disposal , care shall be taken to have them filled with the most Worthy of their own Communion .  And we do hereby farther declare ▪ That all Officers or Soldiers by Sea or Land , now engaged in the Usurper's Service , who shall after notice of our Landing , at any time before they engage in any Fight ▪ or Battle against our Forces , quit the said Illegal Service , and return to their Duty , shall not only have their respective Pardons , but shall likewise be fully satisfied and paid all the Arrears due to them from the Usurper and that even the Foreigeers themselves , etc.   And generally we shall delight to spend the remainder of our Reign , [ as we have always designed since we came to the Crown ] in studying to do every thing that may contribute to the Re-establishment of the Greatness of the English Monarchy upon its old and true Foundation , etc.  