THE OLD TROOP : OR , Monsieur Raggou . 

As it was Acted at the THEATRE-ROYAL . 

By john Lacie , Gent.  

LONDON , Printed for William Crook and Thomas Dring , at the Green Dragon without Temple-bar , and at the White-lyon next Chancery-lane end in Fleetstreet . 1672.  

TO The young PRINCE GEORGE , Third Son to her GRACE , THE Duchess of CLEVELAND . 

SIR , 

I Acknowledge , that I am no lesle unworthy to appear before you , than I was before your Elder Brother , having in me the same duty and reverence for your high Blood , and the same equal regard for your Person : Yet I come with confidence to you ; for having found so affable and sweet a Reception from your dear Brother , I ought not at all to doubt of yours : since his Great Blood runs in your veins , you must also retain his Virtues ; and in you they are justly called so , yet they are not so in all men ; for if slaves , and servants , and meaner men , prove affable and humble , it is not Virtue in them , because it is their duty : but in you , being adorned with all your Greatness , it shows so rich a Goodness in you , that all men are obliged to return you honour for it , which I do with my heart , and all my faculties . I also present you , Sir , with a poor Frenchman , Monsieur Raggou , being party perpale Trooper , and Cook : I tender him to you in his own Equipage just as he landed , with not so much as a shirt to his back : But that is no new thing to the English Nation ; therefore , Sir , receive him as an object to exercise your Charity upon ; being naked cloth him ; let him but wear your Livery , and he will not only be received , but be made welcome to all men : Lay your protecting hand upon him , and he is safe from the malice of his Enemies : And , Sir , as I am bound , so I pray , that you may want no one Virtue that may make you up a Miracle : May your Great Blood appoint you to cut your own fortune out , and may you do it with such success and valour , that all men of courage may honour you , and the rest of the World fear you . 

And this , Sir , shall always be the prayer of your obliged and most obedient Servant , john Lacy.  

THE EPISTLE To the READER . 

Epistles ( 't is true ) are customary , but I think as unnecessary as Funeral Sermons , for they must either insinuate and flatter grossly , or else say nothing to the purpose : For my part I cannot imagine , Reader , what to say to thee , unless like a raw Preacher I swerve from my Text ; and instead of a modest Apology for my bold printings , tell thee a Tale of Maestricht being taken , or the Dutch banged at Sea ; and to do that were to rob the Gazette , and so be called in question for Intrenchments . What then shall I say ? shall I praise my Play to thee ? no , that were to be a vain glorious Ass ; and in thy power , Reader , to prove me so : What then , shall I decry it ? no , that were to break the Stationer , that perhaps has paid too dear for it : What then , shall I discover the Plot and Intrigue of the Play to thee ? no , to speak of the Plot in the Epistle , were to forestall the reading of the Play , and so damn the sail of it . Instead then of an ingenious Epistle to divert , I beg a crafty Boon , Reader , that some one eminent leading Voice amongst you , will be for once so kind , as to give an excellent Character to the World of this my Play ; and by that decoy people may be drawn in to buy it off : so that , as I have cozened the Stationer , by this means the Stationer may overreach you ; and in so doing , Reader , you will 

Most highly oblige Your humble servant , john Lacy.  

PROLOGUE . 

TO you that judges are i' th' public street , 
Of Ballad without sense , or even feet ; 
To you that laugh aloud with wide mouthed grace , 
To see Jack Puddings Custard thrown in 's face , 
To you I do address ; for you I write , 
From you I hope protection here to night . 
Defend me , OH friends , of th' upper Region , 
From the hard censure of this lower Legion . 
I was in hope , that I should only see , 
My worthy Crew of th' upper Gallery . 
What made you Wits so spitefully to come ? 
To tell you true , I 'd rather had your room : 
Order there was , and that most strictly gi'n 
To keep out all that looked like Gentlemen ; 
You have even bribed the Doorkeepers I doubt , 
Or else I 'm sure they would have kept you out : 
You must , nor censure Poet , nor his Play , 
For that 's the work o' th' upper house to day . 
Deal you , Sirs , with your Match , your Dryden wit , 
Your Poet Laureate both to Box and Pit. 
It is some conquest for to censure him ▪ 
that 's filled with Wit , and judgement to the brim ▪ 
He is for your censure , and I 'm for theirs , 
Pray therefore meddle with your own affairs . 
Let Wits , and Poets , keep their own stations ; 
He writes to th' Terms , and I to th' long Vacations . 
The persons Names . 

Captain of the Troop . 
Lieutenant of the Troop . 
Cornet of the Troop . 
Tom Telltruth . 
Raggou . 
Flay-flint , Plunder-master General . 
Captain Ferret-farm . 
Quartermaster Burndorp . 
Biddy , the Cornets Boy . 
Dol Troop . 
Troopers . 
Constables . 
Painter . 
Carpenter . 
Servants . 
Women and Children in abundance . 
Roundheads . 

Governor of a Garrison . 
Captain Hold-forth . 
Captain Tubtext ; and , his two Holy Sisters . 
AN OLD TROOP : OR , Monsieur Raggou . 

ACTUS I SCENA I  

Telltruth and Dol Troop . Dol.   I Have heard your story , and much pity you ; but , in truth , I am a wicked , very wicked woman : for I never did one good deed in all my life ; and I doubt you 're unlucky , that your fate directs you to me . 



Tell.   I find you have opportunity to do good , and will to serve me ; and for reward , if that — 



Dol.   Nay , y' are liberal enough , you understand the world ; for money creates good and evil : and I , that never thought of doing good , will now heartily endeavour it . Go to my quarters , for I have a great deal of roguery to act for myself , besides the good I am to do for you . 



Tell.   Inquire all you can into the last thing you spoke of , for I confess that trouble's me : if she proves but honest , I 'll forgive her wildness . 



Dol.   I 'll do it , with all the craft I can . Exeunt . 



Enter Lieutenant , Flea-flint , Ferret , and Burndorp . Flea .  Good morrow , good morrow Lieutenant . 



Lieut.   Precious Rogues ! what brave Honours and Titles you have arrived at in the Wars , Rascals ! Plunder-master General Flea-flint ! what Prince can give thee so great a Title ? a great credit for my Colonel , Rogue . then , here 's Captain Ferret-farm , an honourable Gentleman ; for always , when we are fight , you are ferreting the Farms , and searching the women for Letters of intelligence , you damned Rogue . then , here 's the Quartermaster Burndorp , a Rogue that , when we have brave large quarters assigned , you sell half of 'em , and then truss us up nine or ten in one house together . A pox on you , Rascal . 



Burn.   But why are you thus cruel , Lieutenant ? 



Lieut.   hang you dogs ; did not I know you at first to be three tattered Musquetiers , and by plundering a Mault-mill of three blind horses , you then turned Dragooners , and so quartering in a Farm where a good team was , you changed your blind horses for better , and then you commenced Troopers at Oxford , and when you had plundered yourselves into good clotheses , you impudently called yourselves Mayor , and Captain , and Quartermaster , and then you ran away from your own Troop , and I entertained you for Reformado-ofcers ? you know I know this , and yet , you dull ungrateful rascals , you will not know why I am angry . 



Ferret .  Why are you angry ? 



Flea .  Why ? I 'll tell thee why : He wants twenty pounds , and a good gelding , Coxcomb ; he must have it too , I know him well enough . 



Burn.   Is that it ? he shall have it , and thank him too . Pray accept of this twenty pound , Lieutenant . 



Ferret .  And we have a good gelding for you , Lieutenant , as ever you laid leg over . 



Lieut.   Why so ? Why will you put me to 't to give you ill language ? cannot you understand me without scurvy usage ? 



Ferret .  I did not understand you , by my troth , Lieutenant . 



Lieut.   Pray understand me hereafter . Now are you three as honest , harmless fellows ! how dost thou do ? who dares say that thou wilt flay a flint ? or he search for Letters in a wench's Placket ? or the Quartermaster burn a Town ? I 'll set 'em by the heels that say it . Honest Robin , Tom and Dick , when shall we drink a tub of Ale together ? 



Burn.   When you please , worthy Lieutenant . 



Lieut.   Get a Tub at one of your quarters , and I 'll come to you . And pray understand me thoroughly hereafter : I believe I shall be very angry within this week again ; therefore pray take care to prevent it . Exit . 



Flea .  It were a good deed never to plunder more . 



Burn.   Why , prithee ? 



Flea .  no thriving on 't for these damned Officers . To put Excise and Custom upon Plundering ! to put Toll upon flaying a Flint ! I hold my own quarters to be my lawful Inheritance as much as any man's Land or Office , that is held by old Custom , and Time out of mind . 



Terret .  Nay , I hold my quarters to be so much my own , that the Wife , the Daughter , and Maidservants , aught to be in my occupation . 



Burn.   I deny that ; for the man of the house ought to have his wife himself , in case he have a daughter to furnish you . Nay , the strictness of the Statute of Plundering says , that in case he has but barely a Maidservant , you ought not to meddle with his wife , or indeed his daughter . 



Flea .  I am of the opinion of the Gentleman that spoke last ; for I am ( in my own quarter ) Lord of the Manor , and all Wefts and Strays are mine . 



Burn.   I 'll say that for thee , a Maid cannot go a milking but thou mak'st a Weft or a Stray of her . 



Enter Cornet . Corn.   here 's the faithful fraternity , a league of Knaves that 's never to be broke . It is a joyful thing when brethren plunder together in unity . How d' ye , Plunder-master General ? 



Flea .  We have all arrived at excellent nicknames ; to say truth , according to our several degrees and ways of Plundering : but you , Cornet , have a name that 's proper for all Cornets to be called by ; for they are all Beardless boys in our Army : for the most part of our Horse were raised thus , The honest Country Gentleman raises the Troop at his own charge , than he gets a Low-country Lieutenant to fight his Troop safely , then sends for his son from School to be his Cornet , and he puts off his Child's coat to put on a Buffcoat ; and this is the constitution of our Army : So I salute you , Cornet Beardless . thou art called Ferret-farm , because thou art so terrible valiant amongst the Country-bumpkins , and Aspen because thou shakest and tremblest in a day of Battle . 



Ferret .  Who pox , this is absolute malice . 



Corn.   There thou art out ; for this is neither malice nor anger , but downright truth . 



Flea .  You abuse him i'faith . I have seen him up to the chin in blood . 



Corn.   'T was in a Saw-pit then : yet when the Armies meet ( I 'll say that for him ) he will draw up as confidently , as if he would take a General by the Beard ; and he will as confidently ride out of the Army before the Battle joins : and if any man ask him whither he goes , he says he is sent for Orders , so you hear of him no more ; and the next day you find him as sure in a Saw-pit . 



Ferret .  Pray let the Saw-pit alone , and provoke me not : good men have done the like ; therefore be not too bold with your betters . 



Flea .  Provoke him not ; for he 's a Devil at a Sword , though he tremble at a Gun.  



Ferret .  A Gun , I confess , is as terrible to me as Thunder and Lightning , they 're out of my Element . Well , but leave this discourse , and so you do not laugh at me , I 'll tell you a story . 



Flea .  What is 't ? 



Ferret .  Why , faith our Dol's with child , and lays it to me . 



Burn.   Pox on her , she was with me this morning , and I compounded with her , for five pound . 



Terret .  The whore had seven of me , by this light . 



Corn.   An excellent cunning quean ! She knows the family of the Flea-flints are ever the moneyed men of a Troop . I 'll make use of my time too : give me ten pound to keep counsel , or I 'll make you the laughingstock o' th' Army . 



Flea .  thou wilt not turn treacherous Rogue now sure . 



Corn.   't is no treachery . Show me a Soldier that will not take advantage . 



Flea .  ay , of the enemy . 



Corn.   For ten pound any man 's my enemy or friend : there 's another principle for you , and very fit for the Flea-flints to make use of . 



Burn.   We scorn to compound ; but we will lend you so much money , if you will mortgage the next fresh Quarters . 



Corn.   I 'll do 't . 



Burn.   then there 's your ten pound . 



Corn.   Now are you men of Inheritance , now you have a good title to every man's goods and chattels ; and for ten pound more I 'll help you to a Lawyer shall pled it , and make it good to you and your Heirs for ever . 



Enter Telltruth . Tell.   God give you good morn , Sirs : I pray you which of you is the Captain Commander ? 



Flea .  Why , friend , we have never a Captain here , he lies Leaguer at Oxford , to give the King intelligence when his Troop beats or is beaten . 



Corn.   There y' are a scandalous rascal : some Captains , I confess , have that trick ; but our Captain always fights his Troop himself : but we have a good Lieutenant here , if that will serve your turn . 



Burn.   ay , he 's too good for us , I would the Devil had him . 



Corn.   what 's thy business ? 



Tell.   I 'd be a Trooper . 



Ferret .  And canst thou fight ? 



Tell.   wilt thou try ? 



Ferret .  no , faith , friend , I believe thee . wast wast ever a Soldier ? 



Tell.   ay , a Parliament one . 



Flea .  What , and didst thou run away ? 



Tell.   no , I walked this pace : I scorn to run . 



Burn.   I believe this fellow 's a Spy.  



Tell.   You lie ; I am very honest . Now dare you fight ? 



Burn.   no , by my troth , not with thee . 



Tell.   then remember , if any body want the lie , you had it last . 



Flea .  This is such a fellow as I never met with . Yet why didst thou leave the Parliament ? 



Tell.   For the same cause that I believe I shall leave you . 



Flea .  what 's that ? 



Tell.   Because I liked 'em not . 



Ferret .  Who was thy Captain ? 



Tell.   One Captain Verily Rett . 



Ferret .  Of what Profession was he ? 



Tell.   Of every one's Profession , I think . 



Ferret .  what 's that ? 



Tell.   An Hypocrite . 



Burn.   And dost thou come out of love to the King ? 



Tell.   no ; I come to see fashions . 



Burn.   But why didst thou leave thy Captain ? 



Tell.   Because he is an Hypocrite , a yea and nay knave ; he cannot endure to plunder , but ( in a godly manner ) he will take all he can lay his hands on . 



Corn.   But wilt thou fight for the King out of stark love and kindness . 



Tell.   no ; I 'll fight for him as all men fight for Kings , partly for love , partly for my own ends . I 'll fight bravely for a Battle or two ; then beg an old house to make a Garrison of , grow rich , consequently a coward , and then let the Dog bite the Bear , or the Bear the Dog , I 'll make my own peace , I warrant you ; and , in short , this is my business hither . 



Enter Lieutenant . Lieut.   Where are you , Sirs ? the Captain has brought Orders to march , but whither I know not ; and better news than that , he has brought pay , Boys . 



Flea .  I hope you are not angry , Lieutenant . 



Lieut.   I am not yet ; but I shall be very suddenly , therefore provide against it : the next fresh quarter you will have advantage enough . I hope we understand of all hands . 



Flea .  't is sufficient , Lieutenant . 



Corn.   But here 's the strangest fellow come to be a Trooper . 



Lieut.   He is welcome . Hast thou a good Horse , friend ? 



Tell.   no , but i  a bridle , and if you 'll entertain me , I shall quickly have a horse . Are you the Captain ? 



Lieut.   I am but Lieutenant , friend . 



Tell.   Ho , I thought you had all been Captains , I 'm sure you are all called so . 



Enter Captain . Lieut.   But here comes one that is so : this is a very Captain . 



Tell.   I tell thee that 's very much . what 's his name ? 



Lieut.   Captain Honor.  



Tell.   I ? have you such a thing as Honour amongst you ? 



Capt.   Lieutenant , get your Corporals together , and give 'em Orders to make ready for a march ; and be sure you charge 'em to see every Horse in their Squadrons shod , otherwise we shall have 'em lie behind drinking and plundering , and then pretend they stay to shoe their Horses : let me hear no more on 't . 



Tell.   't is possible a very Captain may be honest . 



Lieut.   But , Sir , before you do any thing , talk with this fellow : he would fain be a Trooper . 



Capt.   Now , friend , wouldst thou be a Soldier ? 



Tell.   Yes , if I could light of a good side : a right cause , and good men to manage it . 



Capt.   On my word , that 's shrewdly put . Well , I 'll promise thee a good cause , and some good men : in multitudes all are not virtuous , nor valiant . 



Tell.   that 's well said : I think I shall begin to take a liking to you . But , Captain , I hear a man may learn to flay a flint amongst you , to drink and plunder . 



Capt.   d' ye hear that rascals ? But where didst thou hear this report of us ? 



Tell.   In a London-pulpit : but another sort of people told me , they preached Interest more than Gospel ; so that a man knows not which side to take . 



Capt.   Nay , upon my word , thou art come to the right side . 



Tell.   I guess as much ; for you talk worse than you do , and they do worse than they talk . 



Capt.   This is an odd kind of fellow , and I believe a dangerous . Friend , withdraw , while I read my Orders to my Officers . 



Tell.   A word in your ear first , are you wonderful honest ? 



Capt.   thou art a strange blunt fellow : yes , I am honest . 



Tell.   But are you wise too ? for else the want of wit to manage your honesty , may make you a knave . I know 't is some men's cases . 



Capt.   thou dost surprise me : sure thou hast more business than to be a Trooper . 



Tell.   I have so ; but I must ask you another question ere you know it . Are you staunch enough to keep a secret ? Be not angry ; many of your party cannot hold : for tell you news , and you fly , like lightning , to the next man to disgorge it , and so it goes round till it comes to the Enemy ; and thus you betray your business , and intent it not neither . 



Capt.   I have not heard so dangerous a man Pray , friend , think me worthy to know your business . 



Tell.   You shall . And to show you that I have business , I know what your Orders are . 



Capt.   Why , 't is impossible . 



Tell.   Nothing impossible : you are to remove your Troop to Cilstow , there quarter till further Orders , but not to go to bed , for you are within three miles of a little house called Thieves-den Garrison , and you are to expect a company of Foot to quarter with you : is this your Orders ? 



Capt.   You amaze me ! how came you by this intelligence ? 



Tell.   It came to Thieves-den house this morning , and so to me ; I am their Confidant , and would fain be yours . 



Capt.   Do you not know who sent it ? 



Tell.   no , nor they neither ; there 's the subtle carriage of the thing . 



Capt.   But pray , Sir , let me ask you who you are ? 



Tell.   I am a plain , honest-meaning man , a neighbour to that Garrison of Thieves-den , and one that has dived into the bottom of both your parties , and find that you have faults , but the other great wickedness . 



Flea .  I do not like this fellow , he had a sling against drink . 



Ferret .  And plundering ; but twenty to one he hath paid for 't . 



Flea .  He had a plaguy jerk at flaying of flints too . 



Capt.   What if you went to Oxford with me ? 



Tell.   So I may be hanged when I come home again ; for they will know it as sure . Pray let me eat , and refresh myself , and then conclude of something . Exeunt . 



Enter Dol , and calls Lieutenant back . Dol.   Lieutenant , I 'd speak with you . 



Lieut.   Dol , I 'll come to thee presently . Exit . 



Dol.   I cannot say I am with child , but with children ; for here has been all Nations , and all Languages to boot : if the several Tongues should work upwards now , and I speak all Languages ? why , I am not the first learned woman ; but I believe the first that ever came by her learning that way . If I should have for every man that has been dealing here a child , and if the children should be born with every one a Back and Breast on , as they were got ? Bless me , what hard labour should I have ! But , for all this , I hope I do not go with above a Squadron of children . But to my business . I mean to lay this great belly to every man that has but touched my Apron-strings . I thank the Law , 't is very favourable in this point ; for when I have played the whore , the Law gives me leave to play the rogue , and lay it to whom I william  



Enter Lieutenant . Lieut.   Why how now Dol ? how go matters with you , good Dol ? 



Dol.   I desire you stand my friend , Sir , you see my condition . 



Lieut.   thou wilt not lay thy child to my charge , I hope . 



Dol.   no , Sir , I have more wit ; my drift is to lay it to more than one man , or one Squadron : Sir , I understand there 's a months pay in your hands ; and I am resolved to lay this great belly to every man round the Troop ; some I have struck already , and they have very fairly compounded with me ; some , I suppose , may bustle and stand out , but if you will countenance me , than they must compound at our rates . 



Lieut.   But Dol , what benefit is this to me ? for I profess no friendship , but follow the general principle of mankind , Dol ; which is to pick the money out of thy pocket to put it into mine . So , Dol , in plain terms what will you give me ? 



Dol.   Why , Lieutenant , you shall go snips . 



Lieut.   Why , Dol , we are agreed : but after we have struck the Troop round , who dost thou pitch upon to father it ? 



Dol.   Why , faith , I did design to marry Monsieur Raggou , the French Cook , that rides in your Troop . 



Lieut.   thou wilt never endure to live with him , 't is such a nasty slovenly rogue . 



Dol.   't is no matter for living with him ; I want a husband . 



Lieut.   He stinks above ground : he has not had a shirt on 's back time out of mind . 



Dol.   That makes it a fit match ; for , by my troth , I do not deserve a man that 's worth a shirt . 



Lieut.   Well , Dol , upon the aforesaid terms , you 're sure of me , play your game with all confidence . 



Dol.   Well , I 'll to work amongst 'em presently : or if I might gain you to advance my greater desires , which is my Cornet's Boy that waits on him ; I am foolish , for I love him strangely , desperately . A hundred pounds , in plain terms , make him mine . 



Lieut.   But , Dol , where is this hundred pound ? 



Dol.   I have sharked these four years , and made a shift to scrape four hundred pounds together . 



Lieut.   Still I say you 're sure of me , with ready money . 

Enter Monsieur Raggou and his Landlady . Well , Dol , away ; here comes Monsieur Raggou , step aside . 



Dol.   OH let him have his money : if our Cornets Boy fail , I 'll have him , or he shall certainly keep the child . Exit . 



Rag.   Landlady , come , take a my Pistol and lock in your Trunk very safe . 



land   Yes , Sir.  



Rag.   Take heed , for begar you will be hang if my Pistol run away . 



land   OH Lord , I 'll take no charge on 't . 



Rag.   You roundhead whore , lock it up , or me will kill you , begar . 



land   I 'll take all the care I can on 't , Sir. Exit . 



Rag.   So , me will steal my Pistol from her trunk , and say she carry it to the Enemy , and den me will so plundra de dam whore . 

Enter Bumpkin . Stand ; who are you for , Bumpkin ? 



Bum.   OH Lord , Sir , I am for no body . 



Rag.   You Dog , be you for de King , or de Parliamenta ? 



Bum.   Why I am for — pray , Sir , who are you for ? 



Rag.   Thank you for dat . Begar you be very full wid cunning : you will be of my a side , if me name myself first . Speak , you damn Dog , who be you for ? 



Bum.   In truth it is not good manners to say who I am for : your worship ought to speak first . 



Rag.   Pox take you , me be for de Parliament , you Dog.  



Bum.   OH the Lord bless your worship , I am for the good Parliament too . 



Rag.   Je'rny , I am for de King , you roundhead Dog : begar me will plundra you soul and body . 



Bum.   OH good Sir , spare me ; I am for the King.  



Rag.   Diable , me will plundra you for being jack of both sides . Diantie , he have but one filling about his soul and bodee . Get you gone , you Dog.  Exit Bumpkin . Begar , me have no luck , zoun me plundra every day dis tre years , and begar me never get but one filling or one six pen , begar . Ha! Monsieur Lieutenant , me hear very brave thing of you . 



Lieut.   what 's that ? 



Rag.   Me hear you have some Largion for Monsieur La Soldier : pray how much will come to Monsieur Moy ? 



Lieut.   Faith , Monsieur , some three pounds . 



Rag.   How , tre pone ? whar be the tre pone ? how much be tre pone ? 



Lieut.   Why , here 't is , Monsieur , so much as you see . 



Rag.   Begar , sure you mock a de moy ; begar me never see so much money together in my life . Me will lie down and tumble in my money like de Dog dat tumbla in de carrion , it is so sweet . OH brave Captain , OH brave Lieutenant , Gad a bless de King of England , and the King of France too , when he give me tre pone . Lieutenant , be to be mad a dangerous thing ? 



Lieut.   OH , very dangerous . 



Rag.   Begar dear be your tre pone again , it will make a me tark a mad ; me no know vat me shall do with all does money : begar me admire tre pone of all thing in dis varle ; it vill make the great Turk de Christian , or de Christian de Turk , better den all de argument in de varle . Pray , Lieutenant , keep does money for me one two tre year , till me take counsel of all my friend in France vat me shall do wid dat . 



Lieut.   Go to Oxford , and buy some necessaries with it ; you are so nasty , no body is able to come near you : buy some shirts , to keep you sweet and clean . 



Rag.   Buy some 'sheart ? Me love you very well , Lieutenant , but you no understand : for vat shall me have some 'sheart ? 



Lieut.   To keep yourself sweet , and from being lousy . 



Rag.   Who can see my 'sheart ? here be my doublet come close , my coat come over all that , den who the devil see my 'sheart ? For vat shall me have a 'sheart , when no body see my 'sheart ? 



Lieut.   But than you want stockings , and twenty necessaries . 



Rag.   Me pull up my boot , who see me have a stocking ? you vill have a littel English tricka , and never understand : for vat vill you have more thing about you , den vat vill make a show in de varle , and every body can see ? Pray let me lay out my money to please my own fancee . 



Lieut.   With all my heart . 



Rag.   Den me vill lay it out for my honour , and for the honour of the King , and my Lieutenant : So adieu . Buy 'sheart ? who see my 'sheart ? Exit . 



Enter Dol.  Dol.   Faith , Lieutenant , I 'll at him , and some of the rest presently ; therefore leave me to work : I am ashamed , I am such a fool to dote on a Boy , but no remedy : remember , therefore , and about it . 



Lieut.   Do you remember the hundred pound ; I 'll work him , fear not . Exeunt severally . 



ACTUS II SCAENA I  

Enter Dol Troop . Dol.   Now to my business . My Flint-flayer compounded with me very civilly , that I did fear would have out-witted me : I am afraid of nothing but an impudent rogue that has no shame in him , that will father the child rather than part with his money , and so spoil my compounding with the rest of the Troop . I 'll be as wise as I can ; so have among ' 'em . 



Enter a Trooper . Troop .  What a pox makes she here ? 



Dol.   How d' ye , Mr. William ? I 'm come to tell you I am gone half my time , that you may provide ; for I am quick . 



Troop .  Art thou ? faith , I 'll be as quick as thou art , for I 'll be in Nolland ( if the wind serve ) to morrow . Exit . 



Dol.   ' 'Slife , if they should all boggle thus , I should make a thin Troop on 't . 



Enter Raggou . Rag.   OH , Madam Dol ! OH dee , OH dee ? 



Dol.   You see how I do : I am near my time , I desire you to provide . You swore a thousand oaths to me you would keep the child . 



Rag.   But me did but swear in French , Madam Dol , and that vill no stand good in English Law , Madam Dol.  



Dol.   Come , Sir , come , I 'll make you father my child , or I 'll make you do worse : will you compound ? 



Rag.   Me scorn to compone , and scorn to fader your shield ; you be a dam whore , Madam Dol.  



Dol.   You are a Rascal , Mr. Monsieur , and I 'll make you father the child in spite of your French teeth . 



Rag.   Begar , Madam Dol , you be the great whore de Babylon ; begar , me vill make appear noting can get you wid child but the Maypole in de Strana : and den me can make appear , by good vitteness , that me have no Maypole abouta me . So adieu , Madam Babylon : Pox take you , me fader your dam son of a whore shield ! Exit . 



Dol.   You fickle Frenchman , I shall be revenged on thee : I 'll marry thee , but I 'll be revenged on thee . 

Enter Cornet , Lieutenant and Biddy . But here comes my Cornet and his Boy , and the Lieutenant : I see he is mindful of my business . Exit . 



Lieut.   Cornet , I have an earnest and ( by my troth ) a most pleasant suit to you . 



Cor.   You cannot miss the grant of it . What is 't ? 



Lieut.   But first , do you love money ? 



Cor.   By my troth , I know not ; for I never had a sum worth loving in my life yet . 



Lieut.   Will fifty pound do any hurt ? 



Cor.   But what must I do for it ? betray the Troop to the enemy , or some Garrison ? for under that I cannot deserve fifty pound . 



Lieut.   Towns are not so cheap yet : though Treason be plentiful , 't is not grown a Drug . But to my suit : you are to know that our Dol is desperately in love , and with whom . 



Cor.   Not with me ? I find I must earn this fifty pound . 



Lieut.   no such matter : you have too great a conceit of your good face . 



Bid.   Indeed you lie , Lieutenant : for he can never think too well of that face . Aside . 



Cer.   Who is it she is in love with ? 



Lieut.   By my troth with thy Boy here : desperately in love with thy Boy . 



Bid.   The Devil take her for her pains . But why do I curse her , that am so desperately in love myself ? Aside . 



Cor.   Why , this story is very pleasant , if you knew all . 



Bid.   OH Lord , you will not tell him what I am , I hope ? 



Cor.   Lieutenant , I must deny your suit , for it must not be a match ; for the Boy is , in plain terms , a Girl . 



Bid.   The Devil take you for telling him . 



Cor.   Why so ? my Lieutenant's very faithful . 



Lieut.   A Girl ? Let me see your face . 



Bid.   OH you unworthy man ! Good Sir , forgive me , for I am even ready to scold . 



Lieut.   This is the pretty young daughter that belonged to your Winter Quarters , and so came away for love ? 



Bid.   Yes , Sir ; but if your Cornet had been true , I had been past Love by this time : I had been married . 



Lieut.   Why , are all married people past love ? 



Bid.   Yes , Sir , of the men's side especially : but , Sir , I am naturally very merry , and shall be , if you will but do me the favour to think me very honest . 



Lieut.   I shall do you a great favour , if I do , for I never thought any body so yet ; but if it please you , I 'll try your honesty , and then I 'll give you my opinion . 



Bid.   Be not rude when you try me , if you be , you were better venture on a Maiden-cat at midnight , for I shall scratch worse , and so mark you , not for my humble servant , but my humble Catterwauler . 



Lieut.   I could meet such a creature o' th' house top , at any hour , and scratch , and squeak , and tumble down together , and get the prettyest Kitlings as we fall . 



Bid.   I am glad to see you merry , Sir ; for merry people are likely honest . 



Lieut.   Well , we 'll try ; but , if you love mirth , consent to marry with this Dol : there 's money for us all . Exit . 



Bid.   Content , i'faith . 'T will be excellent sport to marry her , for I love roguery well enough ; but , the devil 's in 't , she 'll know me to be a Girl . 



Enter Dol , aloof . Cor.   no , no ; she shall not come near you , nor touch you , till she 's brought to bed ; then two to one but the Troop marches away , and leaves her behind ; then I 'm sure the Country-bumpkins will knock her o' th' head . 



Dol.   there 's a Cornet in grain , i'faith . 



Bid.   Troth , you are very charitable . Well , since my hand 's in at wearing Breeches , I 'll do all the Offices of a man : I would I had wherewithal to perform ; for , by my troth , I am weary of our own Sex.  



Dol.   She cries , i'faith : I like that well . 



Cor.   You little fool , you do not cry , I hope ? 



Bid.   no , faith , that was but a tear by chance . You made me leave my friends ( you know ) when you talked of marriage to me ; but not one word on 't now you have made me your Be-de-boy . 



Dol.   I know not what to say to that . 



Cor.   we 'll talk of those things when we are settled . 



Bid.   By my troth , you have put me in such a gog of marriage , that it will not out of my head : and yet I scorn to ask you to marry me , and I scorn to crack a commandment with you : was not that basely done of you to tempt me ? but I shall scold , which is a thing I hate . OH base fellow ! you would be going o' th' score with me , for my Virginity ? Faith , Sir , I 'd have you know 't is worth ready money at any time ; and faith , I 'll swear , it shall never go under Matrimony . 



Dol.   She is honest , i'faith : I love a virtuous woman , though I am none myself ; like him that loved the sound of Greek , though he understood it not . She is right honest , i'faith . 



Bid.   Mary me , and then halloo Dog for thy Silver collar ; but till then , I 'll gnaw my under-sheet to the bed-cord , before you shall have your will of me . I am sometimes mad when I think how I left my friends : sometimes I could scold , and sometimes I could cry , and the Devil take that good face of yours , I can do neither for it . 



Cor.   Come , come , you trust your person with me , and why not your virginity ? How long do you think you can hold out at this staunch rate . 



Bid.   Faith , Sir , I can hold out till it 's fit for no body : till I 'm past the use of man , before thou shalt have it , shameless wretch . 



Dol.   She is certainly honest , and that 's half our work done . 



Cor.   Come , prithee let 's think of our mock-marriage with Dol , and after we 'll be serious . 



Bid.   Why , I 'm for that too ; but yet I cannot choose but cry to see how false you are , and how they talk at home of me , she 's run away with a Soldier , and that rascal will not marry her . OH the Devil take you , I shall never recover that credit again ! 



Cor.   Come , we 'll cozen 'em all at last . 



Bid.   Nay , I believe thou 'lt cozen more than me ; for what woman can forbear running away with thee , that sees those leering eyes , thou bewitching Devil , thou ! 



Cor.   OH remember you hate scolding , Biddy . 



Bid.   I had forgot that , indeed . 



Cor.   Nay , Prithee no more of this story . 



Bid.   Well , I will not : but truly I grow weary of your unkindness ; and I am served well enough , for scorning a man that doted on me . 



Dol.   A ha ! I marry , that 's somewhat indeed . 



Bid.   But I see , a Cornet with his flying Colours , and his word , Have at all , goes a great way with a virgin : who can resist it ? Exeunt . 



Enter Captain , Lieutenant and Telltruth . Capt.   Lieutenant , stay and receive Orders . But , Sir , how many companies are there in Thieves-den Garrison ? 



Tell.   Never a Company ; for not one of 'em will be called Captain of a Company , but Captain of a Congregation . One is called Captain Holdforth , another , Captain Tubtext ; Rogues marked at the Font for Rebellion . 



Capt.   Rebellion is the first point of Reformation always . 



Tell.   They are formed to a new stamp of villainy , the last Impression ; that which put the Devil into a cold sweat : take the wickedest and worst-reputed men you have , and turn 'em lose to Plunder , and I defy 'em to make the Tithe o' th' spoil these hypocrites have done . 



Capt.   You are very bitter . 



Tell.   Malice cannot lay 'em open : they Lecture it thrice a week , and summon the Country to come in : they that refuse , they take their goods , and leave 'em never a groat ; and then they say , They took but their own , for the good creature is the inheritance of the people of Gad.  



Capt.   It seems , every Captain is a Teacher , and his own Company is his Congregation ; so that they hang and drag Religion among themselves . no doubt most blasphemous villains . 



Tell.   Well , Sir , I 'll home to night ; march your Troop to Lavel to morrow ; stay till I come to you : So fare you well ; and I wish a blessing upon your good meaning . Exit . 



Capt.   Lieutenant , be careful how you march to morrow , and take heed , I hear of no complaint . I 'll to Oxford in the morning , to give an account of this fellow . 



Lieut.   I hope you 'll allow us our old harmless Drolleries . 



Cap.   ay , most freely . Exit . 



Enter Cornet . Cor.   Lieutenant , half the Troop will be gone : Dol has laid her child to 'em all , and they 're for Horse and away . 



Lieut.   What shall we do ? 



Cor.   Endeavour to prevent it , that is all that 's to be said . 



Exeunt . Enter a Trooper with his Arms , and Monsieur Raggou meets him . Rag.   Owe d'ye , owe d'ye , Monsieur Lancashire ? vat make you have your arms so late at night ? is dear Alarm ? be de enemy in the quarteer ? 



1 Troop .  Worse than the enemy , the devil 's in the Quarter : our Dol is with child , and would lay it to me ; but I 'll lay down my Arms , and go home . 



Rag.   Begar , me vil lay down my Arms , and go home too ; Hast begar , now I tink , me have no home . Exit . 



1 Troop .  Captain , Captain . Within . who 's there ? what 's the matter ? 



1 Troop .  Thomas , 't is I ; the old Mutinier : tell the Captain I must speak with him . 

Within . He is but just laid down on the bed , to sleep a little . Come i' th' morning . 



1 Troop .  Flesh deu blood , I will speak with him . 



Captain above . Capt.   what 's the matter ? an Alarm ? 



1 Troop .  I marry is there , Captain ; there will be a whole Squadron upon you presently . 



Capt.   'Sdeath , my horse , presently . 



1 Troop .  The Enemy Dol is fallen into our Lancashire quarters , and has laid her Child to our Squadron : so here is your Back and your Breast , Captain , and I 'll go home . 



Enter four Troopers and Raggou . 2 Troop .  Flesh , we 'll father no child , not we . 



Rag.   Begar , me vil fader no shield too . Hey Monsieur Captain , here be your one Pistol . 



3 Troop .  Captain , we have brought you some Lancashire Arms ; here is ten or eleven Sowze Kidgiors for you . 



Cap.   What a Devil ails the fellows ? Above . 



Rag.   Begar , Captain , me vill keep no shield : your dam Madam Dol have get us all with a shield . 



Capt.   Run for the quean to come to me : I shall have all my Troop forsake me . Stay , Sirs , I 'll come to you : I must as well humour 'em as be severe , or else no Soldiers . 



Exit from above . Rag.   Well , me do know very well how it shall be my shield or no.  



4 Troop .  Well , Monsieur , and I have a mark to know whether it be mine or no , as well as you . 



2 Troop .  And so we have all . 



Enter Captain and Cornet . Capt.   My Masters , you might have had so much manners to have held your complaints till morning ; but however I have sent for Dol , and I 'll do you justice before I stir now . How now , Raggou ; what are thy sleeves stuffed withal so ? 



Rag.   Begar , does sleeve be my Stabla , dear be good Oata for mine Arse : and does sleeve be my Kitchen , dear be meat for myself . Vill you eat dis morning , Captain ? 



Capt.   Foh , your sleeves stink abominably . 



Rag.   Zoun , do you call that a stinka ? 't is true , it have a little huggo : begar , does sleeve keep your Troop alive ; does sleeve is the Physician to all de Troop : When any man be sick , me set on some hot vatera , dear let my sleeve boil one hour in it , and that make the comfortable Pottage in de varle . Have not me cure you all ? 



4 Troop .  Yes , indeed , Captain , he has cured us twenty times . 



Rag.   Begar , Captain , me have cure that dam whore Madam Dol , and yet for all that she lay her shield a top upon me . 



Enter Dol.  Capt.   OH , here she is . Now ( you audacious quean ) what makes you Alarm these people thus ? Who got you with child ? speak , and speak truth I charge you . 



Dol.   Why then I will speak truth , an 't please you : good Captain do not fright me . 



Capt.   Well then . Is it his child ? did he get it ? 



Dol.   I cannot say absolutely 't is his , Captain . 



Capt.   Why , is it this fellows ? 



Dol.   I cannot say directly 't is his neither . 



Capt.   Is it Monsieur Raggou's ? 



Dol.   I cannot say ( to speak truth ) 't is his in particular . 



Capt.   Death , ( you abominable quean ) say whose 't is , or I 'll slit your nose . 



Dol.   Why , truly , I cannot lay it to any one man ; but Gad is my judge , 't is the Troops child , Captain . 



Capt.   Was ever such a slut heard of ! 



Dol.   I desire your worship to believe me in one thing : truly Captain , and as Gad's my comfort , I have been as true and faithful a woman to the Troop , as ever wife was to a husband , Captain . 



Rag.   OH , ho , are you so ? me tink now , Madam Dol , you are de whore de Babylon ; for one whole Troop may make a Maypole . 



Capt.   Why this is some honesty yet , that she is true to the Troop . 



Rag.   Ould , Captain , for oughta me see does shield be your shield . 



Capt.   How prove you that , Sir ? 



Rag.   Begar , she say de shield belong to the Troop , and you say the Troop belong to you ; derefore de shield is your shield , begar . 



Capt.   But I 'll make some of you father it . There is none of you but have some private mark to know it ( to be your own ) by . 



4 Troop .  Faith , Captain , if it be born with a Gauntlet and a Head-piece on , I 'll own it . 



2 Troop .  Troth , Captain , if it be born with a Bridle in its hand , and Boots and Spurs on , I 'll own it . 



1 Troop .  Troth , Captain , I never touched her ; I was about it once ; but the jade laid herself so like a Constable tied neck and heels together , that I went to plunder her , and she up and beaten me like a Dog.  



3 Troop .  And , by my troth , if it be born leading a horse into the world , 't is my child , Captain . 



Rag.   Ould : you every one have a mark to know your shield : Madam Dol , before my Captain , if your shield be born wid never a 'sheart , den it be my shield ; for me have had no 'sheart does forty week . 



Enter Ferret-farm . Ferret .  By your leave , Captain . 



Capt.   What want you , Aspen ? 



Ferret .  I come to free all these men , and to own the child , Captain . 



Dol.   How , own my child ? the Rogue never touched me in his life , Captain . 



Ferret .  ha , Dol ! Confess , confess . Will you have the truth , Captain ? 



Capt.   ay , prithee , with all my heart . 



Ferret .  Why , then I must confess she goes with two children : one I got on the great trunks end , and the other on a staircase , by my life , Captain . 



Cap.   I never heard of staircase children before . 



Rag.   But vat if the shield be born wid no 'sheart ? you shall be hang before you fader my shield . 



Dol.   Captain , if I were to die to morrow , the rogue never touched me . 



Ferret .  I 'll cudgel the rogue to death , Captain . 



Capt.   Hold , hold . 



Rag.   Let him come , Captain : me vill kill him , begar . 



Draws and throws off his coat . Capt.   Hold Dol. I charge you to put up , Monsieur . 



Rag.   Me vill put up den . 



Capt.   Not one word more , I charge you , but all to your quarters . Be gone , Cornet , 't is time to sound to Horse ; and take heed I hear of no complaints . 



Rag.   Begar , me never see all that before ; diable , me be Monsieur Raggou indeed : me vill put on my coat presan , for begar if Monsieur Dung-hill-raker see me , begar he vill put me in his sack . Exeunt . 



Enter twelve Troopers at sick doors ▪ two at a door . 1 Troop .  Pox of this French fool , what does he mean to give us all Ribbons ? we do but laugh at him . 



3 Troop .  His business is to be admired ; I admire he has bought him never a shirt . 



2 Troop .  He is like the Hypocrites , that will not sing Psalms , because   never a Room to the street , they cannot be heard . 



4 Troop .  And so he 'll have never a shirt because it cannot be seen . 



Enter Lieutenant , Flea-flint , Ferret-farm , and Burndorp . Lieut.   Come , to horse , to horse . 



Flea .  Lieutenant , pray let Monsieur Raggou ride before , and make the Quarters to night . 



Ferret .  Pray do , Sir : for every fresh quarter we know you expect , and therefore you must wink . 



Lieut.   But , Sirs , I dare not own you , for my Captain is so severe , that I protest he 'll hang any man that plunders ; especially you Flint-flayars , that he has forgiven so often . 



Bunr .  Why , Sir , we 'll venture that , for we have a way to come off . 



Lieut.   Pray how ? for if the Country complain ( and they discover you ) the world cannot save you . 



Flea .  Why , Sir , you know Monsieur Raggou has a remarkable coat , with one sleeve always full of Meat for himself , and the other full of Oats for his horse . 



Lieut.   Well , what then ? 



Flea .  Why , I have such a coat ; and I will stuff up the sleeves , and rob like him ; I can spatter French , and have every thing so like him , that yourself cannot distinguish . 



Lieut.   Well , and how rob the rest ? 



Ferret .  To satisfy you , in such disguises as the Devil cannot find us out in . 



Lieut.   you 'll do well to keep in those disguises still , for i'faith he 'll find you at the long run else . Well , if you will venture , do ; I 'll aid you in what I can . 



Burn.   If the Country complain , they come directly to you , Lieutenant . 



Ferret .  then you bid 'em describe the men , and without peradventure they fall upon the Frenchman , with his remarkable sleeves . 



Lieut.   But suppose he stand it out , and make it out where he was in the time of plundering ? 



Flea .  that 's shrewd , I confess . 



Lieut.   Come , I 'll help you . If the Countrymen come in , and describe him , I 'll go directly to him , and tell him , I have Orders to seize him , for my Captain is resolved to hang him : so out of my kindness to him , I 'll let him make his escape ; and I 'll warrant he 'll away as if the Devil driven him . 



Ferret .  But , suppose he will not go at that neither , for he 's impudent enough . 



Lieut.   Ha! if he will not ( let me see ) I 'll write a Letter and have it ready in my hand , and we 'll pretend to search him for Letters of Intelligence , and so clap the Letter into his pocket , and pull it out again , which shall be as if it came from the enemy , and that ( according to his promise , they hope ) he will betray the Troop . 



Ferret .  I marry , this is something : needs must he go , that the Devil drives . 



Flea .  then much more must he go that the Lieutenant drives : I warrant he goes to some purpose . 



Ferret .  Good ; and when he is gone and fled for 't — 



Lieut.   The case is plain , he 's guilty : none but he could do it . 



Burn.   Why , this is Plot and Intrigue , Lieutenant , bravely laid , i'faith . 



Flea .  Why then Esperanza Flea-flint . 



Ferret .  What work we 'll make 



Enter Raggou and his Landlady . Lieut.   Here comes the poor rogue and his Landlady : he little thinks of our Tragical design against him . I 'll step aside , and see what work he 'll make . Exeunt . 



Rag.   Come Ladlady , bring me my Pistol , me must march . 



land   ay , Sir , I 'll fetch it you : 't is safe enough . Exit . 



Rag.   Begar , me have steal my Pistol , me vill make her believe she vill be hang , and den she vill endure plundering de betra . But ( pox take her ) me have search , and she have noting to plundra . 



Enter Landlady . land   OH Lord , what shall I do , Monsieur ? your Pistols gone . 



Rag.   Ha!  



land   It is gone , it is stolen . 



Rag.   Ha! you have carry my Pistol to the enemy ( you damn whore ) Begar , you shall hang tre pair of Stair higher den Haman . 



land   Truly I know not what 's become on 't : I hope you have it yourself . 



Rag.   OH , you damn whore , me vill plundra your house for slander a moy . 



land   Good , Sir , I have nothing worth plundering , but a great Cheese . 



Rag.   Give me your Sheese , you devil you . 



land   Here it is , Sir , and all I have in the world . 



Rag.   Pox take you , give me one shilling for my Sheese . 



land   With all my heart : truly it 's all the money I have . 



Rag.   Now give me my Sheese again , you damn whore : Vat shall me do wid dis Sheese ? it vill not go into my Kitchin-sleeve . Begar , for one shilling more you shall have the Sheese indeed . 



land   you 'll plunder it again ? 



Rag.   Begar , it go again my conscience to take your Sheese , because it vill no go in my Kitchen sleeve . 



land   I have not a penny to save my life . 



Rag.   Begar , me sell it to your Neighbour . 

Enter Neighbour . Vat vill you give me for my Sheese . 



land   it 's my Cheese . 



Rag.   Begar she lie , me plunder it very fair from her . 



Neighb .  then I hope I may buy plundered goods as well as other people . what 's your price ? 



Rag.   Begar , Dog-sheap : one shilling . 



Neighb .  there 's your money . 



land   Will you offer to buy my Cheese ? 



Neighb .  't is my Cheese . 



land   I 'll try that . Fight & exeunt . 



Rag.   Begar , fight till the devil part you . 

Enter Lieutenant , and all the Troopers . O Monsieur Lieutenant ! 



Lieut.   What dost with that Cheese ? 



Rag.   My Landlady love me vera dear , and she give me dis Sheese as a token to wear for her sake . 



Lieut.   Raggou , you must needs go make the quarters for the Troop . 



Rag.   Widgine all min heart . But , Lieutenant , dear be a favour for you . Gives him a knot of Ribbon . 



Lieut.   But what is the meaning of this ? 



Rag.   Begar , it be for my honor : me have lay out all my tre pone in Ribbon , and give all de Troop my favour to wear in the Hat.  



Lieut.   What , and is all thy three pound gone in Ribbon , and bought never a shirt ? 't is very fine . 



Rag.   Begar , and so it be very fine . As me tell you before , who the devil see my 'sheart ? all de varle see Monsieur Raggou in the Hat : every man vill admire , and ask , who gave all that favour to the Troop ? den they cry , Monsieur Raggou the French Cook : begar , that shall be more honor for me , den ever you shall get by your 'sheart . 



Lieut.   thou art a right Frenchman . My horse there , Groom : Let 's march away . 



Exeunt . ACTUS III SCAENA I  

Enter Flea-flint , Ferret-farm , and Burndorp . Flea .  IS not this like him as can be ? 



Burn.   't is like enough to delude the people with . 



Flea .  I 'll rant and tear the ground , Boy's . I will so plundra all de dam Bumpkin Dog.  



Ferret .  That will pass : that 's his word : 't is like him . 



Flea .  Be you pretty modest , Sirs , and let me play the devil among ' 'em . I will so terrify 'em with French-gibberish , that you shall appear no body amongst amongst 'em . 



Burn.   Good : for the more active and terrible thou art , they will the more remember thee when they come to complain , and so we shall be sure to scape . 



Flea .  Come away , Sirs ; we must be quick , and ride hard for 't . Exeunt . 



Enter Raggou like Flea-flint . Rag.   Begar , me have maka myself like Flea-flint , and me vill burn one two Town as me go to make a de Quarter , and me vill speak English , and me vill call myself Flea-flint : let me see . Come , where is this Constable ? where are all these damned dery damned Rogues and Whores ? I 'll slay your very souls , you beastly Bawds . Begar , all that be very good English , and it be very much like Monsieur Flea-flint , and begar , me hope he vill be taken and hang for dat , for begar me vill plundra de devel if me catch him . Exit . 



Enter Cornet and Biddy . Cor.   Come , let me see , Biddy , how finely you 'll court your Mistress now . 



Bid.   I can court her as all men court women ; you shall lend me two or three hundred oaths , your dissembling tongue , and your false heart , and then I cannot miss the right way of wooing her . 



Cor.   This comes very near scolding , Biddy . 



Takes her by the chin . Bid.   You make me forget myself : look you now , would any honest man take a Maid so kindly by the chin , and yet not mean to marry her ? 



Cor.   thou little fool , at that rate every man i' th' Kingdom would have ten thousand wives : if you 'll part with your Maidenhead , have at you Biddy . Come , come , you loving worm , I know I shall have it at last . 



Bid.   Nay , o my conscience I believe thee ; yet I have held fast hitherto . 



Cor.   I am glad to hear that , i'faith . 



Bid.   But I find I must look no more on those eyes ; if I do , i'faith I shall flutter so long about the Candle , that I shall sing my Virgin wings at last : I will therefore now conclude I am a man , and must go court my Mistress . 



Enter Lieutenant and Dol.  Cor.   here 's the Lieutenant and Dol , now behave yourself like a man  



Bid.   could you show me how to behave myself like an honest man ? that 's out of your way I doubt . 



Dol.   Still better and better . This confirms me . 



Bid.   Well , give me thy hand : I 'm resolved to be very virtuous , and very merry , and never think more of thee . 



Cor.   Well , Mistress Dol , here 's one has consented in part to marry you . 



Dol.   Pretty creature ! 



Bid.   Ugly Toad . Aside . 



Dol.   Well , and will you be content to ride before me lovingly a days ? 



Lieut.   ay , and behind thee too ; ride thee all the points o' th' Compass , wench , fear not . 



Bid.   OH Lord , but is there so many ways of riding , Lieutenant ? 



Lieut.   Hast thou lived to these years , and not known that yet ? 



Cor.   Well , but when will you marry ? 



Bid.   Nay , by my faith , let us woe first , and then marry : because I believe there is more pleasure in wooing than in the effects of it . 



Cor.   Why do you not begin and court her then ? 



Bid.   Nay , by my faith , let her begin first . 



Lieut.   that 's not the mode for the woman to woe the man  



Bid.   That is , if the man love the woman ; but that 's not my case : for 't is she love's me , not I her . 



Lieut.   OH , but in complaisance you must begin : It is not civil to put a woman to 't . 



Bid.   Not I ▪ faith : pray forsooth do you begin . 



Dol.   Indeed it shall be yours . 



Bid.   I protest it shall be yours : therefore begin , or I vow I 'll break off the match . 



Dol.   Nay , rather than so , I 'll begin . Sweet , Sir , I am much , and greatly ashamed . 



Bid.   Were you ever so before , Mistress ? 



Dol.   Yes , truly , I have been ashamed ; but it is so long since — 



Bid.   That you have forgot it , I suppose . But I disturb you , forsooth . 



Dol.   no disturbance , sweet Sir. ( I want sine words to express my love in . ) I am sorry that the Cartwheel of Fortune should drive me into the Coach-box of your affection . 



Bid.   Fortune will take it scurvily to call her wheel a Cartwheel : besides , Coach-box and Cartwheel did never agree in this world yet . 



Dol.   I am not able to express my love as it deserves ; but I have four hundred pound in gold , if that will do it . 



Bid.   By my faith you express yourself very well , and I will woe you heartily for it . Madam , you have struck me with such a desperate Dart , from those fair somewhat or other that you have about you . — Are you sure you have the gold you spoke of ? 



Dol.   Yes , my dear heart , very sure . 



Bid.   then if I do not love you above all womenkind , perish me , and sink me , refuse me , rot me , and renounce me . 



Cor.   Hold , hold , hold : do you call this wooing ? 



Bid.   Yes faith ; I had a Sister cast away with the very same speech , therefore do not interrupt me , for I know all mankind woos thus . And , as I was swearing , Madam , the Devil take — 



Lieut.   Enough , enough , enough , enough . 



Bid.   But , Madam , are you satisfied ? 



Dol.   I am , to the full : and do believe you . 



Bid.   But , if you please , Madam , now my hand is in , to accept of a hundred or two of oaths more . 



Dol.   no , no , no ; by no means : I believe you without 'em , and I am yours . 



Bid.   I have not sworn out half my Alphabet yet . 



Dol.   You have done sufficiently , indeed . 



Bid.   Well , give me your hand then ; you are the first woman certainly , that was ever gained with so little swearing . 



Cor.   thou hast wooed her , and wone her most bravely . 



Bid.   Have I ? why , then I 'm thine . But hark you , Lieutenant and Cornet , we will be married privately , and in the dark , because her face shall not turn my stomach . Madam , I have one ill humour , I cannot abide a woman with a bare face ; therefore , if I could buy you a mask that would stick to your face , and never come off , I believe I should love you very well . 



Dol.   I 'll have a Masque , or what you please , my dear : 
Next bout , I hope , will be my turn to jeer . 


Lieut.   Come , let 's in , and visit our new Quarters . 



Exeunt . Enter Raggou making Quarters , Constables and Neighbours . 1 Neighb .  I beseech your worship do not quarter so many upon me : I 'm but a poor man  



2 Neighb .  Alas poor man ! you have overcharged him . Rogue , he has more money than half the Town . 



Rag.   You be a dam Dog to betray your Neighbour : who would think to find the devel in a Country-bumpkin ! Begar , me vill make use of your develry . 



1 Neighb .  I pray your worship take four horse from me . 



Rag.   You be a dam rich Dog : begar , you shall have a Squadron upon you , if you no understand me . 



1 Neighb .  How should I understand you ? 



Rag.   You be a dam Dog : begar , me vill put twenty horse upon your back till you understand a moy . Vat vill you give me , if I take all de horse from you ? 



1 Neighb .  Indeed I 'll pray for your worship . 



Rag.   OH ho ! be that all ? do you understand noting but prayer ? Devil you fool vat be prayer to the Quarteer Master ? but can you pray in French ? 



1 Neighb .  Alas , not I , an 't please you . 



Rag.   Den , begar , your English prayer vill no save a Frenchman ; you shall have ten Arse more fo dat . 



2 Neighb .  an 't please you , Monsieur , I understand you . 



Rag.   You shall have no Arse upon you . 



3 Neighb .  And I understand you very well , Sir.  



Rag.   Begar , you have very much , a great deal of understanding . 



3 Neighb .  Here are more of our Neighbours that understand you , Sir.  



Rag.   Begar , den me understand too : get all your money togedra , and put in my pocket yourself , den me can swear begar , me never take no penny of you , a ha ! 



3 Neighb .  We will do it gladly , Sir , and pray for you too . 



Rag.   Begar , me no care for that . But you damn Dog , that no understan a moy , shall quarteer all de Troop ; and den look to your wife , for begar Flea-flint vill so get your shield for you . 

Exeunt . 

Enter Flea-flint , Ferret-farm , Burndorp , Lieutenant , Cornet , Raggou , and Dol.  Burn.   Lieutenant , we have done the work . 



Ferret .  We have burned seven Towns.  



Flea .  We have raised fourscore pound . 



Lieut.   y' are dextrous at your trade , you have made quick dispatch : but peace , we 'll share anon . Aside . Now you 're welcome . Come , where 's the Boors o' th' house ? we 'll see what my quarters can afford . Where are you all ? What house here , ho ? 



Enter Woman and Maid . Woman .  What want you , Sir ? 



Lieut.   Art thou the woman o' th' house ? 



Woman .  Yes , Sir , a poor woman . 



Lieut.   Art thou poor ? what a pox do I in such a quarter ? why , Quarter-mast . Raggou , is this the best house in the Village ? 



Rag.   Zoun , hang 'em , they 're very rich Dog ; but you shall have no meat for yourself , no Oat for your Arses , but her dam husband vill feast you all wid pray for you . 



Lieut.   Diable ▪ you Rotterdam whore , I 'll make you bring out your things : where 's your Cows , your Calves , and your sheep ? 



Woman .  Alas , we have none , Sir.  



Cor.   Hast thou any drink , good woman ? 



Woman .  no , truly , we have none . 



Flea .  Nor hast thou no wine , nor strong-water , good woman ? 



Woman .  no , indeed , we have none . 



Rag.   Why den , a pax take you , good woman . 



Lieut.   no Hens , nor Turkeys , nor Swine , nor nothing ? 



Rag.   hang her , begar she hide every thing , when they hear me come to make a de quarteer . 



Ferret .  send to the Market Town , and buy provision , and be hanged , or I 'll set fire o your house , you damned dery damned whore . 



Rag.   Zoun , does dam coward , how he domineer over the Bumpkin woman ! 



Woman .  Alas , we have no money , Sir , not we . 



Ferret .  What dost thou tremble and shake so for ? what a pox ails thee ? 



Cor.   What shall we do ? threatening will not serve the turn . 



Lieut.   Do but second me , and I 'll make 'em bring out all they have , I warrant you : do but talk as if we used to eat children . 



Ferret .  't is enough . 



Lieut.   Why , look you , good woman , we do believe you are poor , so we 'll make a shift with our old Diet . You have children i' th' Town ? 



Woman .  Why do you ask , Sir ? 



Lieut.   Only have two or three to Supper . Flea-flint , you have the best way of cooking children . 



Flea .  I can powder 'em , to make you taste your liquor : I 'm never without a dried child's tongue or ham . 



Woman .  OH bless me ! 



Flea .  Mine's but the ordinary way , but Ferret-farm is the man : he makes you the savouriest pie of a child's cauldron that ever was eat ! 



Lieut.   A pox , all the world cannot cook a child like Monsieur Raggou . 



Rag.   Begar me tink so ; for vat was me bred in the King of Mogul's kitchen for , tere ve kill twenty shield of a day ? Take you one shield by both his two heels , and put his head between your two leg , den take your great a knife and slice off all de buttack , so fashion ; begar , that make a the best Scotts Collop in de varle . 



Lieut.   Ah! he makes the best Pottage of a child's head and purtenance ! but you must boil it with Bacon : woman , you must get Bacon . 



Ferret .  And then it must be very young . 



Lieut.   Yes , yes . Good woman , it must be a fine squab child , of half a year old : a man child , dost here ? 



Woman .  OH Lord ! yes , Sir.  



Rag.   Do you hear ? get me one she-shild , a littel whore-shild , and save me all de lamb-stone and sweetbread , and all the big petty-toe of the shield : do you hear you round-head whore ? 



Woman .  ay , Sir , I OH that ever I should live to see such men ! Exit . 



Lieut.   I warrant you it works ; if there be provision in the Country , we shall have it . 



Flea .  How the whore trembled for fear ! 



Cor.   We shall have all the women in the Village about our ears : hidebound whores ! it's a question whether they 'll part with their meat or their children first . 



Lieut.   This foolery will be noised about the Country , and then the odium will never be taken off . 



Cor.   Why , what can they make on 't ? all understanding people will know it to be mirth . 



Lieut.   I know they will ; but the envious Priests will make fine talk on 't , and make a great advantage on 't too : though they know it to be nothing but mirth , they 'll preach their Parishioners into a real belief of it , on purpose to make us odious . they 'll preach against any thing : I heard a scandalous Sermon , of two hours long , against Prince Ruperts Dog.  



Cor.   Come , 't is no matter what hypocrites preach : let us see what the event will be . Exeunt . 



Enter Women in a fright , alarmed by their Neighbour . Woman .  Look to your children ; if ever you mean to see your children alive , hide your children : they 'll eat your children . 



1 Neighb .  Woe is me ! what 's the matter , Neighbour ? 



Woman .  I say , hide your children . 



2 Neighb .  Ah! good Neighbour , what 's the matter ? 



Woman .  Why , run away with your children . 



3 Neighb .  Why , that ever we were born ! what 's the matter ? 



Woman .  They will eat your children . 



4 Neighb .  OH , these bloody Cavaliers ! how , eat our children ? 



Woman .  They talk of boiling your children . 



All.   OH mercy on us ! 



Woman .  And roasting your children . 



All.   OH bloody villains ! 



Woman .  And baking your children . 



1 Neighb .  OH Hellish Cavaliering Devils ? 



Woman .  there 's nothing to be thought of , but hiding your children . 



1 Neighb .  I would mine were in my belly again . 



Woman .  that 's not safe : they 'll search there in the first place , to be sure . 



2 Neighb .  I 'll hide mine in the straw . 



Woman .  And so we shall have one of 'em lay you down a top of it , and smother one child whilst he is getting another . I say , run away with your children . 



3 Nighb .  OH bloody wretches ! I have heard much of their getting children ; but never of their eating children before . 



4 Neighb .  Neighbour , their getting of children might be born with ; but eating 'em was never heard of . 



Woman .  They have got a Cook from the great Mogul , on purpose to kill children : and they talk of roasting their haunches , and baking the cauldron , and broiling the chine . 



Maid .  And making Pottage of the child's head and purtenance . 



All.   OH deliver our poor children . 



Woman .  Do you stand whining and crying ? Fetch out your Sheep , and your Calves , your Hens , your Pigs , and your Geese , and your Bacon ; for there 's no other way to save your children . 



All.   ay , with all our hearts . 



1 Neighb .  I 'll bring two fat Sheep . 



2 Neighb .  I 'll bring Turkeys and Hens . 



3 Neighb .  I have a brave fat Calf worth eleven Nobles , by my troth I had as lief part with one of my children . 



Woman .  OH you uncharitable beast ! go fetch your Calf . Run every body , and bring your things to my house , as fast as you can drive . Exeunt . 



Enter Lieutenant , Cornet , Flea-flint , Ferret-farm , Burndorp and Raggou . Lieut.   Meat , or Children , to supper for a wager , Gentlemen ? 



Cor.   Meat , for a wager , if they have it . 



Lieut.   ay , without doubt ; for never was women and children so alarmed in this world . 



Flea .  When they were got together , and told their children would be eaten ; they set up their throats , and made a more horrid noise than a Welsh Hubbub , or an Irish Dirge . 



Enter Nurse with two Children . Ferret .  How now ! what think you if we be put to eat Children indeed ? By this light , here 's a woman with two Children . 



Lieut.   We shall be cross-bit with these Country whores ▪ what shall we do ? 



Rag.   Begar , me vill help you off : you shall eat no shildren . 



Nurse .  By your leaves , your good worships : I make bold to bring you in some provisions . 



Ferret .  Provisions ! where , where is thy provisions ? 



Nurse .  Here , an 't please you : I have brought you a couple of fine fleshy Children . 



Cor.   Was ever such a horrid whore ! what shall we do ? 



Nurse .  Truly , Gentlemen , they 're as fine squab Children : shall I turn 'em up ? they have the bravest brawny buttocks ! 



Lieut.   no , no. But , woman , art thou not troubled to part with thy children ? 



Nurse .  Alas , they are none of mine , Sir ; they are but Nurse-children ? 



Rag.   Dear be a dam whore for you . 



Lieut.   What a beast is this ! Whose children are they ? 



Nurse .  A Londoners , that owes me for a years nursing . I hope they 'll prove excellent meat : they 're Twins too . 



Rag.   A ha ! but , begar , we never eat no Twin-shild ; the Law forbid that : but hark you , have any woman with shield in the Town ? 



Nurse .  Yes , half a dozen . 



Rag.   Lieutenant , it be de best meat in de varle : begar , a woman with shield is better meat den one hen with egg at Shrovetide . 



Enter Landlady , and women with provision . Lieut.   How now ! what news , Landlady ? 



Woman .  Here is a great many poor women that have brought in provisions , in hope you 'll spare their children . 



1 Neighb .  We beseech your worships spare our poor children , and you shall want for nothing our Country can afford . 



Lieut.   Good woman , we are content to spare your children , but you must get us some strong drink . 



2 Neighb .  ay , I ; we 'll get you every thing you want . 



Lieut.   Why , then , go all home , and be contented ; for we promise you , if we eat any children , it shall be the two Nurse-children . 



All.   Ah , — preserve you all , Gentlemen . 



Rag.   Take some comfort ; for if we should eat your shildren , you shall no be a loser by that : for look you , good woman , how many shildren we eat in a Parish , so many shield we are bound to get before we leave it : that is very fair . 



Exeunt women . Lieut.   Why , is not this better than fasting ? 



Flea .  Well , and what harm is there in all this ? 



Cor.   None i' th' world . Come , let 's in , and dress our supper . 



Rag.   Me will go eat at my own quarteer . It be a brave thing to be in Office : begar the Clowns worship me , as if me were dear great God Bumpkin . Exeunt . 



ACTUS IU SCENA I  

Lieutenant , Flea-flint , Ferret-farm and Burndorp . Flea .  Lieutenant , here 's all our Country crew that we plundered yesterday . 



Ferret .  But , our comfort is , they know us not ; but cry out of a Frenchman , with two coat-sleeves , stuffed like two Country bag-puddings . 



Lieut.   This cunning rogue has cross-bit you all : he has been plundering as he went to make his Quarters , and in a Buffcoat too ; for here is a dozen fellows at my Quarter , and they all describe a rogue so like thee , that I protest thou wilt suffer for it . Nay , the rogue called himself ▪ Flea-flint , too . 



Flea .  Ouns , what shall we do , Sir ? 



Lieut.   Upon my word , this is no jesting business . 



Ferret .  ' 'Sheart , overreached thus ! 



Lieut.   You must even think of overreaching him again . You must first think of stopping the clamour of the Bumpkins ; that 's your first point of security . 



Flea .  But , Lieutenant , how should we do 't ? Faith , you must try your wits , and stick to us . 



Lieut.   I knew you would venture so far , 't would come to my turn to fetch you off at last , Rogues . 



Flea .  Why , Sir , my man and his both shall swear Raggou borrowed a Buffcoat of them . 



Lieut.   Let him be gone first , and then you may swear any thing . One of you go tell the Bumpkins , I am searching for the Rogue : the rest go with me to Raggou . 



Exit Ferret-farm . Burn.   This is his quarter . 



Lieut.   This ? Knock : it seems to be the best house i' th' Town . Knocks . 



Maid .  Who would you speak with ? Within . 



Lieut.   With Monsieur Raggou . 



Maid .  Sir , he gave us a strict charge to let no body speak with him . 



Lieut.   But I must , and will speak with him . 



Maid .  Indeed , Sir , he charged us , upon pain of his displeasure , not to disturb him . 



Lieut.   Pain of his displeasure ? what an impudent rogue 's this ! Show us , show us . 

Raggou is discovered in a Taffeta bed , with a Back , Breast and Head-piece on . How now ! what , in Taffeta Curtains ? the impudent rogue makes me laugh . You , rascal , Raggou ; look in his Head-piece too . 



Rag.   Who the devel disturb me ? you dam whore , you know vat me do to you last night ? 



Lieut.   Why , what was that you did to her last night ? 



Rag.   Begar me lie with her at three motion , as the Musketeer shoot of his Gun ; make ready , present , and give fire . 



Lieut.   OH my word that 's good discipline . 



Rag.   Begar , she shall make ready for you , if you will present and give fire . 



Lieut.   But how came it that I had not this good Quarter ? 



Rag.   Because me knew me should make a de Quarter but one night , and so , begar , me make a de best use of my time , as all the whole varle do too . 



Lieut.   But what a Rogue art thou : why dost thou lie in such a bed in thy Arms ? 



Rag.   For two gran reason , Sir. First , because my French louse shall go great way about before he come to de clean sheet : next , because a the dam English flea shall not bite a my sweet French body . 



Lieut.   Well , Maid , go down : I must speak with him . 



Exit Maid . Rag.   Vat you have wid me , Lieutenant ? 



Lieut.   Faith , out of my love , I would save thee from hanging . 



Rag.   hang ! for vat ? begar , hang me if me deserve , so you hang all dat deserve a de hang ; begar , that is de whole Troop , Lieutenant and all . 



Lieut.   Here you plunder in one shape , and there in another : sometimes , like Flea-flint , in Buff ; sometimes like yourself : that here is all the Country come in with such horrid complaints . Nay , they say you ravish women too . 



Rag.   Lieutenant , begar , me never ravish but one old woman , and she give me five shilling for my pain . 



Lieut.   Nay , here is worse than all that , my Captain has intelligence you 're a dangerous man , and hold correspondence with the enemy . 



Rag.   Me shall be hang , Lieutenant , if you tink so . 



Lieut.   Nay , 't is so ; I have orders to search you . — Put that in his Pocket , [ aside ] and pull it out again . 



Rag.   Ah , begar me have no long life before me be hang.  



Burn.   OH , Sir ! are you good at that ? he was going to convey Letters out on 's pocket . 



Rag.   Begar , he lie Lieutenant , me have no Lettra ; begar , hang a me , if me can write an read : the Hornbook be de Hebrew to me , begar . 



Lieut.   Search him , search him . 



Search , and pulls a Letter out , and an Engine . Burn.   here 's a Letter , Lieutenant ; and an Engine , I think . 



Flea .  what 's this ? 



Lieut.   OH , you need not write and read if you have this : I 'll be hanged , if this be not the key of his character he writes to the enemy with . 



Rag.   That make a de French Pie , and make a de Garniture for the Dish , that be all . 



Lieut.   Let 's see ; the case is plain ; he sent his intelligence in characters of paste . This very thing will hang him : but let 's read the Letter . 



Rag.   Begar , me have no Lettra : de devel send it in my pocket . 



Lieut.   Reads . Monsieur Raggou ; in hope that under this poor disguise of a French Cook you will show a rich faith — 



Rag.   Vat he mean by fait ? begar , me have no fait . 



Lieut.   Reads . And when you have delivered up your Troop to us , the Parliament will own you as yourself , and give you the respects due to your great and honourable family . 



Rag.   Devel , me have no honourable , nor family neider , begar . 



Flea .  The case is plain , you are of some great family . 



Rag.   Lieutenant , me confess me come of the King of France Kitchen , of the honourable family of the Turnspit : Begar , me tell you true , dear be all my family , and my honourable too . 



Burn.   OH , Sir , 't is a very cunning fellow ; my Captain sends word he used to be conversant with the Roundheads , and pray with them . 



Rag.   The Devel take a me , me never pray in my life , me swear altogedra in de King of France Kitchin.  



Lieut.   I love you so well , that I 'd be loath to hang you , Monsieur ; therefore I 'm content to let you scape : but be sure you be not taken . 



Rag.   Begar den hang a moy , for my Arse vill no go very far . 



Lieut.   Well , pray be gone , and say you found a friend . 



Rag.   Gad a bless you , Lieutenant : ven me come in France , zoun , me vill so pray for you . 



Flea .  And yet you say you never prayed in your life . 



Rag.   Begar , me tank Gad , me never have occasion to pray till just now . Adieu , adieu — a — Who send me that dam Lettra in my pocket ? Exit . 



Lieut.   Well , now we must keep the Bumpkins here till he is gone , and then give 'em orders to search the Countries for him . 



Burn.   And that will whidle them as well as if you had given them their money again . Exeunt . 



Enter Governor , Captain Holdforth , Mr. Telltruth , and Captain Tubtext . Hold.   In truth , drinking is a harmless recreation , so we proceed not to drunkenness . 



Tub.   Pray how farforth may we proceed in drink ? for I would take no more than is fit to be taken with a safe conscience . 



Tell.   Why , Captain Tubtext , if thy belly were as large as thy conscience , by that computation , the great Tun at Heidelberg would be just thy morning's draught . 



Tub.   Here is old Tom Telltruth : ha , ha , ha . 



Hold.   In truth , if he were not very faithful , we should never away with his boldness . 



Tub.   Well said , Captain Holdforth . But to the question ; how far may we proceed in drink ? 



Govern.   As far as the innocent recreation of knocking one another down with Cushions come to ; it is the exercise of our superior Officers . 



Hold.   I have observed , indeed , they do three things together : they drink , then practise Pulpit-faces , 



Tell.   ( To cheat the people with . 



Tub.   ha , ha , ha : in truth you hit so home . ) 



Hold.   And the third is throwing of Cushions . The practising and dissembling of holy looks , is of great use and design . 



Tub.   And drinking , and throwing Cushions , a great refreshing to the body . 



Govern.   As for Example . Throws a Cushion . 



Hold.   ha , ha , ha . I have seen our Grandee throw a Cushion at the man with the great Thumb , and say , Colonel , wilt thou be a Cobbler again ? Throws a Cushion . 



All.   ha , ha , ha . 



Tub.   Come , here 's to you , Governor , you Colonel Goldsmith , with a conscience as dirty as a Blacksmith : will you sell Thimbles again ? Throws a Cushion . 



All.   ha , ha , ha . 



Hold.   Noble Colonel , wilt thou brew Ale again ? Throws , etc.  What an everlasting cheat is Reformation and false Doctrine ! It has raised us from Cobblers to Commanders . 



Tub.   There is no other way to raise Rebellion , but by Religion . 



All.   ha , ha , ha . 



Govern.   I never knew the use of Religion before . 



Tub.   The women tickle like Trout at it : ha , ha , ha . 



All laugh . Tell.   I believe the Country will find it so . For I hear of twenty wenches with child . 



Govern.   In truth , I wonder at the witchcraft of it ; for notwithstanding the people have been bitten through the chine-bone with it , yet for all that , before the old wound is healed , they are ready to run after the Lantern of new lights again : ha , ha , ha . 



Tell.   Well , Sirs , since you are in such an ingenious way of confessing , tell me one thing , do not you wish your Garrison a fire , so you were at home , with all the wealth   got ? 



Tub.   thought 's free ; but talk no more of that : these are both treacherous Rogues , I dare not trust 'em ▪ 



Tell.   Well , you are merry , Sirs ; but faith be plain , Sirs : what says my seeming Saint that drinks by the conscience ? Dost not wish thyself at home , wallowing in thy plunder ? 



Hold.   You might find a better name for it . Hark in your ear : we are all such treacherous Rogues , we dare not trust one another : but we 'll talk in private . 



Govern.   But our Contribution-women will come in anon . 



Hold.   ha , ha , ha : in truth , they edify as one would have ' 'em . 



Tell.   Well , now you ought to be serious , and consider the enemies approaching . 



Tub.   In truth a good occasion to fetch in all the Goods and Chattels of the Country , upon pretence of securing them , and so make conditions with the enemy to march away with them . I see we shall be rascals to the last gasp . 



Hold.   And so we shall have provisions for a long Siege . 



Govern.   I 'll make your Siege short enough . 



Exit Governor and one Captain . Tub.   You are faithful ; they are Rogues : Read that , and tell me whether you will undertake or no.  



Gives Telltruth a Letter , & exit . Tell.   How ! very good . Is 't possible ! This is a greater Rogue in his own nature than the Devils invention can make him : he would not only betray his trust , but deliver up all the rest of the Garrison to mercy ; conditionally that he may have all their wealth , and safe convoy to his own house . I need lay no Plot , 't is done to my hand . I love the King well ; yet my own ends are mingled , because I have a Mistress among 'em , and cannot have her but by serving the King : and I believe most men have their reasons for their Loyalty as well as I ; so that , good King , wheresoever you see me , trust to yourself . Yet I will do something . What if I betrayed this Rogue , and his Letter , to the Governor to secure myself ? but then , if they have a mind to deliver up the Garrison , 't will make 'em shy of me I find I have a hard task on 't . 



Enter Governor . Govern.   OH , Telltruth , I came to ask thee a question ; and what think'st thou ? 



Tell.   Troth , I know not . 



Govern.   To know whether thou lov'st me truly , or no.  



Tell.   If you be serious , I could be angry with you , for raising such a doubt : to show you that I love you ( I do not say your Cause , but you ) read there ; look you , one of your Captain Rogues gave me that Letter , and the other gave me a whisper to the same purpose too . 



Govern.   Is 't possible ! what 's to be done with these villains ? 



Tell.   Something must be done , they 'll betray you else . 



Govern.   I thank thy honesty , I find it so . 



Tell.   Shall I speak boldly ? serve 'em in their own kind . 



Govern.   Introth , I had it in my head before to betray 'em , for the Rogues are rich . 



Tell.   Come , let not you and I be shy of one another , do it yet . 



Govern.   Art thou in earnest ? 



Tell.   By my life ; and I will put you in a way too . 



Govern.   Let 's in , and consider how : had we best secure ' 'em . 



Tell.   no : first command their two Companies out , then draw 'em into several parties , and then with your own Company disarm 'em , and so clap them up and their Officers ; then show 'em the reason ( this Letter : ) when that 's done , send the Letter to the Parliament , and write how you have secured 'em : which will so ingratiate you with them , that you 'll never be suspected for betraying on 't yourself . 



Govern.   My worthy friend , shall I fall on my knees and worship thee ? 



Tell.   Let 's be wise , and about our business . Exeunt . 



Enter Cornet and two Troopers . Cor.   Where have you been , Sirs ? 



1 Troop .  Why , we have been to take Flea-flint : my Captain is resolved to hang him . 



Cor.   For what ? 



2 Troop .  For plundering , and so forth ; but the Rogue has intelligence of it , and is gone : but he is in as bad a case as Raggou ; for we must send Hue and Cry after him . 



Exeunt . Enter Raggou . Rag.   Ah , jan povera de moy : my Arse can no carry me from the danger of the hang a de moy ; and yet me have spur two such great hole in his rib , that you may creep quite trow him . Me must go change mine coat , and mine hat , begar , me shall be known by that . Vat come here now ? 

Enter Frenchman with a Show . What , come ? 



French.   Come , who see my fine shite ? my rare shite , who see my sine shite ? my rare shite . 



Rag.   Monsieur , where you go wid your shite ? 



French.   To de Bristol Fair , Monsieur . 



Rag.   Dis Frenchman look as if he will be hang , begar , me vill put a the sheet of the hang upon him . Monsieur , Begar me have de very sine shite too , and it vill come de Bristol Fair too : it be de great vonder of de varle , it be de great fat Dromadory ; you hear of that ? 



French.   We , we : all de varle know de fat Dromadory . 



Rag.   Begar , you and me vill join partiner in the Fair : because you be my Countryman . 



French.   ay , Monsieur , and thank you too . 



Rag.   We vill give out in the Bill of the two famous Frenchman : one inventra de show of all Trade , and de oder make a de invent of the fat Dromadory . 



French.   Monsieur , wid all my heart . 



Rag.   Vera good : you shall go take a the best House in the Town : dear be two piece , two jacoby for you ; get some vera good dinner . You shall take a my coat and the hat , and leave your show wid me , for my waggon will come wid my Dromadory presan . 



French.   I had good luck to light o this Frenchman . Aside . 



Rag.   Begar , me have betra luck to light o does Frenchman . So , help me wid your waistcoat : vera good . So , now make all de haste in de varle . Adieu , adieu . Exit Frenchman . So , now , begar , me be very safe : but how the devil sall me show mine shite ? Begar , me forget to ask vat language all de Puppet in the show speak . Parla Francois Monsieur Puppey ? Owieda . A ha ! very good . 



Enter Constable's . 1 Const.   Sure we shall catch this fellow at last ; for we hear of him every where . 



2 Const.   ay , his two sleeves stuffed , and his French Hat edged with Ribbons will discover him . 



Rag.   Diable , dear be the Constable and Mr. Huy-cry come to catch a me . — Who see my shite , my rare shite , my sine shite ? Begar , me shall shite myself indeed . 



1 Const.   What a pox does he mean ? 



2 Const.   He would have you see his show . 



1 Const.   Come , faith let us . You fellow , come , let 's see your show . 



Rag.   How shall me do now ? begar , me must show it as well as me can . 



2 Const.   Sirrah , did not you see a Frenchman pass by ? 



Rag.   Frenchman ? Vat have he upon him ? 



1 Const.   Why , he has a greasy coat with the sleeves stuffed out . 



Rag.   A pox take him , begar he rob me just now of two piece , all me have in de varle , dat make a me cry . 



2 Const.   OH Rogue , Rascal ! alas to day ! give him a Crown , Churchwarden , we are at the Parish charge . 



1 Const.   Come , do not cry , poor fellow : let 's see thy shite ; there 's a crown for thee . 



Rag.   A Gad bless you . Here be the brave shite of de varle : here be the King of Spain play on the Bagpipe to his Privy-council . Dat's a very good jest . Den dear be the King of Solomon , he give judgement upon the vice shield . Dear is the first Act. Now put on your hat , and look upon all the Lady . 

jam more cum povera bla cum povera , Plays and sings . 
jam , jam , jam , jam Tomba net , 
jam jang Tomb net equbla . 
Now here be the Queen of Swiveland , she sit in great Majesty : her leg hang over de chair , vera full of temptation , make your chaps watra . Vera good jest . Den dear be the whore of Babylon , she make great love to the Maypole in the Stran. Second Act.  

jam more cum povera , etc.  
Plays and sings . Dear be the King of Denmark's and Norway , learning to juggle of the Bishop of Munsera . Dat's a vera good jest . Dear be the silent Ministra , he make a de long preach in the Playhouse . Dear is tre Act : that is all . 



2 Const.   I thought your Plays had always had five Acts.  



Rag.   Dey be the great Puppet have five Act ; the little Puppet have but tre . Vill you go catch dis dam dog for me , and get a my money for me again , my two jacoby ? Begar , me be undone , if you no catch does dam dog for me . 



1 Const.   we 'll away : we 'll have him I warrant thee . 



Exeunt . Rag.   Begar , me be very sine sheet , if it vill hold out . But hold a ; vat if they catch my Coat ? Begar , den they vill hang a my Coat : but damn dog vill confess me have his Show den ; begar , me shall be hang wid mine Coat . Begar me vill put away mine Show . 

Enter Flea-flint , with Hue and Cry after him . Who the Devil is that ? 



Flea .  A pox on 't , I must be robbing alone , and without my Lieutenant's advice ! I must be careful , or suffer for it . The Rogues follow me with Hue and Cry ; I am not able to go further , I must change my clotheses . How now ? what fellow 's this ? ' 'Sheart , would I could persuade him out of his Show , and take my Cloak for it . 



Rag.   Begar , would me could persuade him to take my Show , and give me the Cloak for that . 



Flea .  Come hither , honest fellow . 



Rag.   Devil , it is Flea-flint . Ah me be povera de moy , begar , me be half hang already . Me vill no speak French begar , den he vill know me : me vill belch Dutch at him . Yaw min here , 



Flea .  Come hither honest man : what 's that , a Show ? 



Rag.   Yaw min here . Begar me vill slit my mouth from one ear to de odra , to speak good Dutch ; and den , when me speak French , begar me vill sew it up again : dere's a vera good trick to save a my life . 



Flea .  Fellow , wilt thou sell thy Show ? 



Rag.   Yaw min here . Begar , does Dutch make me vera sick . Look ! begar , every time me cry , Yaw min here , dear come up a pickle Herring with it . Yaw , look dear it go . 



Flea .  Art thou a Dutchman ? 



Rag.   Yaw verathticke . 



Flea .  Where hab you de neder Lands go Weston ? 



Rag.   Diable , vat shall me say ? Begar me have no more Dutch.  



Flea .  Hab you de neder Lands go west Lanceman ? 



Rag.   Ick haben de Hoy Dutch Lander go weston Lanceman . 



Flea .  Nay , it may be what Duchess it will , for I can speak no more . 



Rag.   Ick maken we 'll vander slapan can Helder Hought . 



Flea .  But wilt thou sell thy Show ? 



Rag.   Yaw , Yaw , ick vill van hundred Gilder haben . 



Flea .  that 's ten pound ; that 's too much . I would I had it at any rate . 



Rag.   Begar , never fear , you shall have it . 



Flea .  wilt thou take five pound ? 



Rag.   Neave ick : ick maken de Show myself , and ick maken dat better as dis , and dat's better as that , and dat's better as all begot . 



Flea .  I hear 'em coming : here 's ten pound for thee , and I 'll give thee my Cloak to boot and Hat.  



Rag.   Dear be my Show and my Cap : me tank you Lanceman . So , dis dam Rogue never do no good in all his life before ; and me hope , begar , he vill be hang for dat . Exit . 



Flea .  Now , what shall I do with this Show ; for I cannot show it ? why , if any body would see it , I must say it 's locked up ; the key is gone before to Bristol Fair : that 's all I have for 't . 



Enter Constable's looking for Flea-flint . 4 Const.   Come , Sirs , we shall have him at last . 



3 Const.   Stay , Sirs : what fellow 's this ? who are you , Sir ? 



Flea .  A poor man , Master , going with my Show to the Fair , to get a penny , and a Rogue has robbed me of all I have , almost ten pound . 



4 Const.   OH damned Rogue ! Had he not a grey Cloak and Hat.  



Flea .  ay , ( wicked villain ) the same , Master . 



3 Const.   it 's the same Rogue we are looking for , we shall have him i' th' Fair , I warrant you . Let 's away . 



Exeunt Constables . Flea .  This rogue thinks himself so safe now , and he 'll be hanged sure enough if they catch him . 



Enter the first Constables with him that had Raggou is Clotheses . 1 Const.   Look you , there 's the notorious Rogue with the Show : take him . 



Flea .  What would you have with me , Gentlemen ? 



French.   Begar , me vill have my Show from you . 



Flea .  Pox take you and your Show ; a damned Rogue that had it , has rob me of ten pound , and my Hat and Cloak . 



1 Const.   Come , these are both Rogues : bring 'em away . 



1 Watch.   Hold , it will do us no good to have them hanged , what if we plunder them as they use to do us . 



Const.   't is a very good motion , do you hear , we are to ask you a question , will you be hanged , or be plundered ? 



Flea .  I 'll be hanged before I part with my money . 



2 Watch.   then let 's hang him , we can take his money when he is dead . 



Con.   then do you hang him . 



Enter Bumpkin passing over the Stage . 1 Watch.   Not I , I know not how to hang him . 



2 Watch.   Troth hang him yourself , if you 'll have him hanged . 



Const.   Dost here brother Bumpkin ? I 'll give thee an Angel , and hang this fellow . Constable calls to the Bumpkin . 



Bumpk .  It is not worth while for one , but I 'll take Angels a piece to hang you all . 



Const.   hang you rascal , come there fall on boys , and plunder him . Plunder Flea-flint . 



Flea .  Pray you , Gentlemen , give me some money again to bear my charges home . 



Const.   there 's a Crown for thee , and farewel . 



Exeunt all but Bumpkin . Bumpk .  Hey day ! this will prove a very wonder , 
That Bumpkin should a Soldier plunder . 


ACTUS v. SCAENA I  

Enter a joiner , Servant , and a Painter at one door , and Raggou at another . Seru.   Joyner , make haste , and set your tother Post up ; and Painter , fetch your Colours , your Pots and Pipkins , and paint this Post in the mean time : it must be dispatched before the people are stirring . 



Paint .  My things are all ready , Sir , at the next house : we can scarce see to work yet . 



Seru.   And be hanged then go get some Ale to clear your eyesight : I 'll warrant you 'll see the bottom of the Pot well enough without daylight . 



joyn .  Make what hast you can , I 'll bring my Post as soon as you 'll be ready to paint it . Exit . 



Paint .  I 'd laugh at that , i saith . But friend , what noise was this all night ? I think the Watch was searching for somebody . 



Seru.   ay , I ; hark , you may hear 'em searching still . Why , it seems 't is a kind of outlandish Frenchman that they look for : he has a grey Hat , and a grey Cloak ; but come , let us mind our business , and make haste . Exeunt . 



Rag.   That be me : they slandra a moy , me be no outlandish Frenchman , begar me be a French Frenchman : Hark , they come : vat shall me do ? Begar , me vill stand for de odra Post till the dam Bumpkin be gone ; a pox take 'em , the devel could not Hue and Cry me so close . How shall me do to be like a that Post ? Hark , they come now . 



Raggou gets upon the Post , and sits in the posture of the other Post.  Enter Constable and Watch.  Const.   Pox o this outlandish French-fellow for me ; I 'm as dry as a Dog.  



1 Watch.   So we are all : let 's go and knock 'em up at an Alehouse , and eat and drink a little . 



2 Watch.   With all our hearts . 

Enter Painter . Honest Painter , canst tell where we may have a little Ale ? 



Paint .  ay , sure , two or three doors off you 'll find 'em up , and a good fire , where you may tossed your noses , Boys . 



Const.   thou didst not see an outlandish Frenchman this way ? 



Paint .  no , I saw no Frenchman . Exeunt Constables & Watch.  Why , what a Devil , this Joiner has been here , and set up his Post , before I came : how time slips away at an Alehouse ! 



Rag.   Begar , would a good rope would slip away you too . 



Paint .  Now to work . Whistles , and paints him . 



Rag.   He vill paint a me ; vat shall me do ? 



As he stoops , Raggou throws a stone at him . Paint .  A pox o these roguing Prentices . Sirrah , I 'll have you by the ears : a company of Rogues , a man cannot work for you ! If you serve me such another trick , I 'll break all your Windows . 



Rag.   De pox break all your neck . 



Throws the Pipkin at him as he stoops . Paint .  Why , you damned Rogue , you have broke my head : ' 'Sheart , I 'll complain to your Master . Spoiled all my Colours too ! I 'll not endure it ; I 'll be revenged , whatsoever it cost me . Exit . 



Rag.   A pox dis Rogue ; he murder mine face wid his dam paint . Now the coast be clear , me vill take a de Coat of Monsieur jack Painter and go ; for begar dear be no stay in does Town for moy . 

Enter joiner with his Post.  Hark , dear be something : me must be the Post again . A pox on that . He stands up for a Post again . 



joyn .  Why , how now ? what a devil , another post , and none of my work ? ' 'Sheart , do you employ two men at once ? I 'll not be used thus ; I 'll be paid for my work , and then let the devil set up your Posts . Exit . 



Rag.   So , now begar , me vill take the Coat of de jack Paintra , and the Post of de jack Joyner , den no man vill suspect a moy . Offers to lift the Post.  Diable , it is too much heavy for moy ; begar me betra be hang den have all does dam Joyner sit upon me . Diable , and vould me vere in bed wid all the King of France Army , begar me voued fain see vat dam English Bumpkin , Mr. Huy-cry come fetch me from dem . Exit . 



Enter Servant , Painter and joiner . Seru.   Why , what a foolish fellow art thou to be so angry ? I employed no Joiner but thyself . 



joyn .  ' 'Sheart , there was two carved Posts up , and I 'm sure I brought the third . 



Seru.   thou art mad , and so is this fool too , to complain of throwing stones at thee , when we have never a Apprentice , nor none within six doors of us . 



Paint .  I 'm sure my Pipkin's broke , and my head too : pray look here . 



Seru.   Why , what 's here ? here 's a broken Pipkin indeed , but where 's the three carved Posts ? 



joyn .  There was two stood up when I came to the House , and I set the third down here . Ounes , my Post and my Tools and all 's gone . 



Seru.   I believe you are both drunk . 



Paint .  Heart man , I painted the Post that stood there . 



joyn .  Well , and heart man , I brought the tother , an you call it heart man , and all 's gone you see . 



Seru.   My Masters , go look after your things , and make an end of your work . 



Paint .  Let 's go search for this fellow that stole our goods here . 



Exeunt . Enter Telltruth and Dol.  Tell.   OH Dol , d' ye hear , put her off till your friend come as before you pretended , and say you 'll marry when the Garrison is delivered up . 



Dol.   The Lieutenant and Cornet are very eager to have it dispatched , that they may have the money I promised , and then they are resolved to laugh me to death . 



Tell.   Well , but you know it will be our turn to laugh at them , if all be right you have told me . 



Dol.   Upon my life I have been faithful in all points , and I find I shall take pride in doing good , since I have prospered so well in serving you . 



Tell.   Your reward shall answer your service . I must to the Captain , and give him an account of all I undertaken , which will meet his expectation . 



Dol.   Let me alone to manage my undertake . 



Enter Captain and Lieutenant . Tell.   here 's the Captain ; be you gone therefore : I would not be seen with you , till I make him acquainted with every thing . Exit cum Doro.  



Lieut.   But pray , Sir , why are you thus severe now , to banish the Flint-fleyers ? 



Capt.   The King's Honour and Interest is so abused with these scandalous fellows , that I 'm resolved to cashier ' 'em . 

Enter Telltruth . O , friend Telltruth ! look you Lieutenant , my opinion seldom fails me . 



Tell.   So , you had some dispute then concerning me . Look you , Sir , it 's now in my power to do more than ever I hoped for : you have a Foot Company ? 



Cap.   Yes ; they are now 〈…〉 , see they march fair , and do no wrong . Exit Lieutenant . 



Tell.   Read that : upon my life there is but three Companies , and two of 'em are disarmed , and Prisoners , Officer's and all . I laid no plot to do it , I found 'em all ready to betray one another to get the wealth ; the manner how , hereafter . The Governor has commissioned me to make his Conditions ; which must be a Convoy , with all his wealth , to his own home . The Country bring in their plate and goods to secure 'em from your party , and he 'll make conditions with you to march away with 'em , and so cheat the people : ( precious Rogues ! ) besides what they preach the women out of . 



Capt.   That must not be ; for the King has Intelligence that they have great Treasure there . 



Tell.   Does he know how they came by it ? 



Capt.   Yes , very well ; with the cheat of preaching ( I mean Tub-preaching , and Lectures . ) The Lectures your wives read you , never awed you so . 



Tell.   But faith , Sir , give him his Conditions . 



Capt.   I 'll storm it first . 



Tell.   I intent not to have you keep Conditions when you have made ' 'em . 



Capt.   that 's base ; I scorn that : my Honour is at stake . 



Tell.   What , for breaking Articles with a Rebel ? Had it been a fair enemy , I grant you . Suppose you storm it , and be beaten off ? the King would give you little thanks for the punctillio of your own private honour . Let your Lieutenant do it : the Captain may with his Honour break the Conditions that his Lieutenant makes . 



Capt.   I may approve of that ; I would not have my own hand appear against me . But I am glad to see you thus earnest for the King : sure you have some design . 



Tell.   By my troth I have ; but so small a one , it is not worth this labour : you shall know it , for you must assist me . 



Capt.   With all faithfulness . 



Tell.   Come then , let 's sign Articles . So , march , and take possession . Exeunt . 

〈…〉 you are 〈◊〉 



Paint .  Heart man , I painted ▪ 



Enter Raggou like an old woman . Rag.   Me vill make a me nose of wax , like the old woman , and vill go to Madam Dol , and tell her me come from Monsieur Raggou . Vera good . And if she vill beg his pardon of de Captain , he vill come and marry her , although her shield be born wid a 'sheart and back and breast too ; for begar me find in mine conscience me had betra marry a dam whore , dan be hang.  Exit . 



Enter Telltruth , Captain , Lieutenant , Cornet , etc. with the Governor Prisoner . Tell.   Now , Sir , are you satisfied in my faith ? 



Capt.   I am so ; and I have found you a worthy person : command me to any thing . 



Tell.   then I 'll make you merry till I go about my design . Captain Tubtext , that got the two Sisters with child , is now in bed with them eating a Sack posset ; and , that we may both shame and fright 'em , there are Bears i' th' Town , and other Shows that are going to Bristol Fair : now I 'll speak to the Bearward to muzzle a Bear , and turn him lose into the room , and I 'll bring you where you shall see the sight . 



Capt.   Content , for I am a great lover of sports : let not the Shows go away , for I mean to celebrate Dol's wedding . 



Lieut.   that 's kindly done . you 'll need no other sport than to see Dol rant and tear when she finds she has married a Girl . 



Capt.   But the sport will be , when you and the Cornet receive your fifty pound a piece you told me of . 



Lieut.   Yes , faith ; we shall have it sure enough . 



Capt.   Yes , for 't is deposited in my hands . 



Cor.   Never was jade so deeply in love ! but the jest is the Girl has made conditions with Dol , to put on a Masque when she is marrying ; for her face is so bad she cannot away with it . 



Capt.   Give all the Troop favours ; let 'em dispatch , and bring them in to the baiting of the Sack-posset , and let the Country be summoned in . Exeunt . 



Tubtext and his Sisters are discovered in bed , eating a Sack-posset : Enter Captain , Lieutenant , Cornet , Ferret-farm , above . Tub.   Here is this spoonful in remembrance of our sweet Sisters precious fruit she goes with . 



He puts a spoonful in each of their mouths . 1 Sister .  My tender , and most shamefaced thanks be returned you . 



Tub.   Now here is to the Maiden-fruits of this our weeping-sister . Wipe your tears ; if they were Cavaliering burdens you went with , your case were mournful ; but as they are my offspring , repent not ; for your Infants ( be assured ) will be Babes of Grace . 



Capt.   What a damned Rogue is this ! 



1 Sister .  Why then , it seems , we religious Lambs may play with one another , without sinning ? 



Capt.   Was ever such blasphemous Rogues and Whores ! I tremble to hear ' 'em ! Let in the Bear upon ' 'em . 



1 Sister .  Here is to this our sweet comforting man  



2 Sister .  I am overjoyed to hear that religious Lambs may play , and yet not sin . 



Put their Spoons in his mouth . Enter Bear.  Tub.   what 's here , a Bear ? mercy upon us ! 



All.   Help , help , help , help . 



Tub.   shift for yourselves , sweet Sisters . 



Capt.   Now Bear , now Saint . 



Lieut.   Halloo Saint , halloo Bear : I 'll hold a — 



Cor.   Hundred pound of the Bear : thou Boy Bear.  



Lieut.   A hundred pound of the Saint . So , now take off your Bear.  



Ferret .  By my faith , we must stave and tail him off for aught I see , Captain . I have been at many a Bear-bayting , but never at a Saint-bear-bayting before . 



Exit Bear , etc.  Capt.   Now , Sir ; is your name Tubtext ? 



Tub.   Yea.  



Capt.   And do you think your two Whores are with child with two babes of grace ? 



Tub.   Yea , foul mouth . 



Capt.   What an audacious Rogue is this ! And dost thou really believe thyself in such a degree of perfection , that thou canst not sin , and so , need no repentance ? 



Tub.   Yea , sure , we are past repentance . 



Capt.   thou damned villain , I believe thee . Blasphemous Rogue ! how many poor souls hast thou deluded ? Sirrah , it were just to make thee marry these two women , and then hang thee for having two wives . 



Enter Ferret-farm . Ferret .  Sir , our wedding folks are coming , and are so merry , and so pleased ; that , if their joy continue , the Example will make us all marry . 

Enter Biddy as Bridegroom , Telltruth in her hand dressed in Dol is clotheses , and Dol in other clotheses , and Raggou dressed like an old woman with a Muffler . Look you , here they are , pleased as you see . 



Dol.   Now stand you here till I beg your pardon of my Captain . 



Bid.   By your leave , Captain , I have made bold to espouse your old handmaid Dol ; and give us leave to laugh ; for faith my Lieutenant and Cornet has cheated her , Captain , for they have matched her to a Girl : I am a very Girl , and yet I have not wronged you , for I told you before I could not get your children . 



Tell.   And we laugh , to think how we have cheated you ; for though you cannot get my children , if I can get yours , we shall do well enough . 



Bid.   OH Lord , what 's that ? that is not Dol's voice . 



Dol.   y' are i' th' right ; it is not Dol's voice , nor Dol that has married you ( keep the money , Captain ) but your old love Telltruth . Pray have your money , Lieutenant , before you laugh me to death . 



Bid.   What , my old Lover Telltruth ! 



Tell.   Now the laugh is on our side , Gentlemen . Come , be not troubled , for I am the same honest lover Lover that ever I was . 



Bid.   Nay , I 'll swear thou deservest me , thou art a desperate lover to venture on a wench that has trooped so long under such a handsome Cornet : but he 's a fool too ; for if he had followed his blow close at one time , he had had all that I could have given him . 



Tell.   I had spies upon you , and am well assured of your honesty . Ask Dol.  



Dol.   Yes , faith , I watched your water at every turn . Do you remember he would have gone o' th' score for your Maidenhead ? but you cried 't was worth ready money at any time ; but marry me , and then halloo Dog for thy Silver Coller . You remember this ? 



Bid.   ay , to my shame I do . 



Tell.   What , are you ashamed that you are honest ? 



Bid.   no , but I 'm ashamed that I lost so much time ; for I 'm sure thou wouldst have had me honest or not honest . 



Tell.   Come , be not troubled , I pass by all . 



Bid.   I love thee for thy confidence , give me thy hand , by my life I 'm very honest ; but I have had as much a do to keep myself so , as ever poor wench i' th' world had . 



Cor.   But I hope , Biddy , you and I shall not lose our acquaintance ? 



Bid.   If my husband will have it so , I cannot help it . But I hope he has more wit than ever to let me see you again : if you have not , husband , in good faith , at your own peril . 



Tell.   I 'll have wit enough ; fear not . 



Enter Ferret-farm . Ferret .  Sir , here 's the Country-gentlemen come . 



Capt.   Pray let 'em come in . 

Enter Country-gentlemen . Gentlemen , 't is not unknown how publicly you have appeared against your Prince ; and how secure you thought yourselves under the protection of these Hypocrites : but to show you what rogues they are ; all the wealth that you brought hither to be secured from us , they would have made conditions to have marched away with , and so cheated the whole Country . Look you , there 's their Articles : there 's Reformation for you . 



1 Gen.   We are deceived indeed in them ; to have used us thus ! 



Capt.   You must own , Gentlemen , that all the wealth , that 's here , is justly forfeited to the King.  



2 Gent.   We grant it , worthy Captain , and our lives to boot . 



Capt.   Although the wealth that 's here be great , and the Kings wants require it ; yet , to show that he had rather have his subjects hearts than money , he has Commissioned me to return every man his own again . 



1 Gent.   Sir , this gracious act of the King , and your readiness to perform it , shall turn us all faithful subjects to the extent of our lives and fortunes . 



Capt.   Now you deserve his mercy . 



Dol.   Sir , will you grant me a request ? Poor Raggou has sent me word , if I can beg his pardon of you , he 'll marry me . 



Capt.   Dol , you have been instrumental to our friend Telltruth ; I must grant you any thing . 



Dol.   then pray , Sir , let 's make a little sport with him : who do you think that old woman is ? 



Capt.   I know not . 



Dol.   't is Raggou himself . Pray fright him a little before you seal his pardon . 



Capt.   What a Devil has he done to his face ? 



Dol.   I know not ; I believe he has clapped wax upon 't . 



Capt.   Now , good woman , what wouldst thou have ? 



Rag.   Me come in de crowd , in hope to see a Soldier hang : it would be great satisfaction to the Country , truly . 



Capt.   Well , good woman , where dost thou dwell ? 



Rag.   Begar me have no dwell : vat shall me say to him ? I live at Bristol Towns end , an 't please your worship . 



Capt.   But , woman , if thou wouldst tell me where to find a plundering Frenchman , called Raggou , the Country should hang him with all my heart ; for that 's a notorious rogue , and he shall be hanged if he live above ground . 



Rag.   Begar he serve a me vera well to hang me : vat a Devil make a me come here ? dis be my vit : a pox on mine French wit.  aside . 



Capt.   Woman , find out that Rascal for me , here is ten shillings in earnest , and when thou takest him , I 'll make it ten pound . 



Rag.   But will your worship secure me that I shall have no harm if I find him ? 



Capt.   I upon my honour , before all this Company , thou shalt have no harm . 



Rag.   Bear witness , gentlemen ; now give me ten pound : for begar me be the man , me be Monsieur Raggou . 



All.   How ! Monsieur Raggou ! 



Rag.   Wie mafoy , ha , ha ; me have sheet a my Captain of ten pound , and save a my life too ; dear be the French vit ! Begar me honour my vit very much for that . 



Capt.   Call the Marshal . Take him and hang him upon the next tree . 



Rag.   hang a moy ! did not you before vitness engage your honour that me shall have no harm ? Begar you vill do me great deal wrong , if you hang me now . 



Capt.   I promised , indeed , that the old woman should have no harm ; but Raggou shall certainly be hanged . 



Rag.   A ha ! dear be a dam English trick vill hang a Frenchman . But hold , hold : if you hang Raggou , how can you save de old woman ? Dear be Law case for you ! Let me have fair play for my life . 



Capt.   Take the old woman's garments and lay them up safe , and then they have no harm ; then my honour is clear , and here is Raggou fairly to be hanged . 



Marsh.   Come , come away ; 't is a plain case , you must hang for 't . 



Dol.   Why were you such a fool as to come hither ? 



Rag.   For love of you , you damn whore you . 



Dol.   Why would you betray yourself for ten pound ? 



Rag.   That be my cunning ; the hangman shall have de ten pound because he shall no hurt a me when he hang me . But , Captain , begar you can no hang me in justice ; for the old woman is Raggou , and Raggou is the old woman , and the Devil can no part us : so if you hang Raggou , you hang the old woman , and you hang your own honour too , begar . 



Capt.   Well , Sir , you have pleaded so well for yourself , that conditionally you will marry Dol , I 'll pardon you . 



Rag.   If you tink it better to marry den to be hang , Captain , me leave all to your judgement . 



Capt.   Why , then marry her . 



Rag.   But who shall keep de shield ? 



Capt.   The Troop shall keep it . 



Rag.   Why may not the Troop as well marry her , and me vill make one ? dat's very fair me tinks . 



Capt.   Nay , you may be hanged yet if you william  



He takes the woman in one hand , and the halter in the other . Rag.   Let a me see : here be whore , and here be halter ; vera fine shoice begar ! me can no tell which to shuse ; but me vill even stan to mine fortune , and cross and pile for it . 



Capt.   By my troth it shall be so , and take your choice ; cross or pile ? 



Lieut.   Why , cross he shall be hanged , and pile he shall be married . 



Rag.   no , begar , it fall be cross if me be married , and pile if me be hang.  



Lieut.   Now it 's an even lay whether this Farce be a Comedy or a Tragedy . 



Cor.   Come , Gentlemen , whore or halter for a wager ? 



Lieut.   Whore for a wager . 



Cor.   Halter for a wager . 



Rag.   Hold , hold : vat if it be nedra cross nor pile ? 



Capt.   If it be neither cross nor pile , thou shalt neither be married nor be hanged , upon my Honour . Come , here is your fortune for you : i'faith , 't is cross , thou art to be married . 



Rag.   Den dear be your halter again , and me tank you . 



Capt.   Come , take your beloved wife , and strike a match . 



Rag.   Den let her take me , and the Devil in hell give her good of me . 



Capt.   then you have my pardon , and all is well . 



Enter Ferret-farm . Ferret .  Sir , here are two of Queen Elizabeth's Tilters , going to Bristol Fair , desire to dance before you . 



Capt.   With all my heart : call 'em in . 

A Dance of two hobby Horses in Armour , and a jig . You have done well : where 's my man ? give 'em half a piece ; you have done prettily indeed . Lieutenant , cashier the Flint-fleyers : as for these Hypocrites I 'll keep them prisoners till the King dispose of 'em , which will be but too mercifully I 'm sure . 



Cor.   I suppose , Governor , the Parliament will reward you with some Bishop's Lands for being so honourably pulled by the ears out of your Garrison . 



Capt.   Come , upbraid 'em not ; I hate that . To morrow , Sirs , summon in the Country , and every man shall have his right . 



All.   God bless the King , and all his good Soldiers . 



Capt.   You see , Lieutenant , how with good usage the people return to their Loyalty : I know you are a brave fellow ; but you have been to blame in the Country , and that disserves your Prince more than your courage can recompense . 



Lieut.   Sir , you shall never have occasion to say this again . 



Capt.   I believe you : and I wish that the great Timber , the Pieces of State , that lie betwixt the King and Subjects , 

I wish that they would take a hint from hence 
To keep the people's hearts close to their Prince . 


Exeunt Omnes . EPILOGUE . 

Prologues , and Epilogues , should something say 
In order to th' excusing of a Play ; 
But things to th' purpose , being laid aside , 
We shoot at random at least six bows wide ; 
Speaking of this or that , of Sea or Land , 
Of any Matter but the thing in hand ▪ 
If men with such faults , Poets do Commence , 
I may put in with my impertinence . 
And though my dull Muse cannot make y'a feast , 
I 'd fain be thought a Poet at the least : 
I find I am one , I can prove it plain , 
Both by my empty Purse , and shallow Brain : 
i  other symptoms to confirm it too , 
i  great , and self conceit , of all I do : 
I have my little Cullies too i' th' Town , 
Both to admire my works , and lend a Crown . 
My Poet's day I mortgage to some Citt , 
At least six months before my Play is written ; 
And on that day away your Poet runs , 
Knowing full well , in shoals , come all his duns . 
If these things make me not a perfect Poet , 
He that has better Title let him show it . 
Some Plays printed for Thomas Dring . 

The Unfortunate Lovers . 
The Amorous Prince : Or , Curious Husband . 
Town-shifts . 
The Six Days Adventure . 
Albumazer . 
The Changeling . 
Love and Honour . 
School of Compliments . 
Acted at the Duke's Theatre . 

Plays new Printed . 1672.  

The Dumb Lady : Or , Farrier made Physician . 
The Rehearsal . 
The Old Troop : Or , Monsieur Raggou . 
Acted at the Theatre Royal.  

FINIS . 

