PROSODIA CONSTRUED And The meaning of the most difficult words therein contained plainly illustrated : Being An addition to the construction of LILIES Rules , and of like necessary use . 

By Barnab . Hampton . 

LONDON , Printed by Roger Norton , 1672.  

PROSODIA CONSTRUED . 

Prosodia Prosodie ( that is to say , that part of Grammar , which teacheth the right accenting or tuning of the syllabels of words and also the quantity of syllabels as Holioke writes : ) est is ea pars that part quae which tradit teaches pronunciationem rectam the right pronunciation vocum of words : dicitur Latin it is called in Latin [ after the Latin manner ] accentus the accenting [ or right tuning of ] words in pronunciation . Autem and Prosodia Prosodie dividitur is divided in Tonun into the tone [ or tune : ] Spiritum the breathing [ in pronounciation ; ] Tempus the time ; that is to say , the time for pronunciation of a long syllabel or a short . ] Tonus the tone , or tune est is lex a law vel or nota a note [ or mark ] quâ whereby syllaba a syllabel in dict one in a word elevatur is lifted up vel deprimitur or is pressed down . Autem and tonus the tone est is triplex threefold . Acutus sharp [ or lifted up ] Gravis Grave [ great or pressed down , ] Circumflexus the circumflex [ or bowed about accent , or both lifted and pressed down , after Rainus , after others lifted up like the acute accent . ] Tonus acutus the acute [ or sharp ] accent est is virgula obliqua an overthwart stroke [ or dash ] ascendens ascending [ or going ] in dextram up towards the right hand sic after this fashion [ ' ] Gravis the grave [ or pressed down accent or tone ] est is virgula obliqua an overthwart dash [ or stroke ] descendens descending in dextram towards the right hand and hune modum after this manner [ ` . ] Circumflexus the circumflex accent [ or that accent , which being bowed a bout , is both lifted up & pressed down , ] est is quiddam conflatum a certain thing composed [ or made ] ex utrilque of them both , hâc figurâ of this figure or fashion [ . ] Etiam also Apostrophes addatur huc may be added hither qui which est is quaedam pars circuli a certain part of a circle apposita set to , in summo litterae on the top of the letter , quam pinges which you shall describe sic after this fashion [ ' . ] Ostenditur hac nota it is showed by this note or mark [ or this note showeth ] vocalem ultimam the last vowel dictionis of the word deesse is wanting [ or to be wanting : ] ut as , Tanton ' me crimine dignum dixisti ; pro tantone . Ne what dixisti me dignum haste thou said that I am worthy of tanto crimine so great blame ? Sunt there be spiritus dito two breathe [ thorough the throat in pronounciation , like the Hebrew gutiural letters , 〈◊〉 ] Asper the rough [ or harsh breathing , ] & and lenis the mild [ or smooth : ] Asper the harsh [ or rough breathing in pronunciation ] quo whereby syllaba aspirata an aspirated syllabel [ or a syllabel of harsh pronunciation ] profertur is pronounced : ut as , homo a man or woman , ●honor honour . Lenis the mild , quo whereby syllaba a syllabel profertur is pronounced [ or uttered ] citra aspirationem without harsh breathing in pronunciation : ut as , Amo I love , ●nus a burden . 

Regula prima the first rule Tonorum of accents . 

Dictiobrevis a short word monosyllaba being of one syllabel , aut longa or a long one positione by position , acuitur is made acute : ut as , mell honey , fell gall , pars part , pax peace . Longa naturâ a long word by nature circumflectitur is made circumflex , [ or circumflexed : ] ut as , spês hope , flô●a flower , sôl the Sun , thûs frankincense , rûs the country . In dislyllaba dictione in a word of two syllabels si if prior the forms fuerit longa shall be long naturâ by nature , posterior the latter brevis short , prior the former circumflectitur is circumflexed : ut as , Lûna the Moon , mû sa a song . Acuitur it is made acute [ or lifted up ] in caeteris in other words : ut as , cítus quick , [ or swift , ] látus broad . solerss subtle [ or cunning . ] Simo if dictio polysyllaba a word of many syllabels habet hath penultimam the last syllabel saving one longam long , acuit eandern it marketh the same acute , [ or lists it up : ] ut as , libértas liberty , penátes heathenish household gods . Sin but if habet it have penultimam the last syllabel saving one brevem short , acuit antepenultimam it maketh the syllabel before the last save one acute [ or lists it up : ] ut as , Dóminus a Lord , Pontifex an Archbishop or Prelate , Composita words compounded á of facio the word facio to do excipiuntur are excepted ; ut as , benefácis thou dost well , malefácis thou does evil , calesácit it maketh hot , frigefácit it marketh cold . At si but if penultima [ understand the word syllaba syllabel ] the last syllabel save one fuerit longa shall be long naturâ by nature , & and ultima the last syllabel brevis short , penultima the last syllabel save one circumflectitur is circumflexed : ut as , Românus a Roman , amâtor a lover . Composita the compound words , à of fis thou art made or done & and sit he is made or done acuunt do lift up ultimam the last syllabel : ut as , malefít it is ill done , calefit it is made hot . benefít it is well done , satisfít it is satisfied . Quia because hodie at this time , [ or in this age ] propter imperitiam for the unskilfulness hominum of men circumflexus the circumflex accent vix discernitur is scarcely discerned [ or distinctly known ] ab acuto from the acute accent prolatione in pronunciation , Grammatici Grammarians confuderunt have moved without all order , [ or have used promiscuously or in common ] circumflexum the circumflex accent cum acuto with the acute accent [ that is to say in respect of the tone or sound : otherwise they are not used promiscuously . ] Sunt there are quinque five things quae which perturbant do very much trouble regulas tonorum the rules of the accents differentia the difference transponit transposeth [ or removeth ] tonum the [ tune or ] accent : ut as , unà together adverbium an adverb acuit ultimam makes the last syllable acute [ or lists it up ] ne videatur that it may not seem esse to be nomen a noun . Sic so eò thither , aliò to another place , aliquò somewhither , continuò by and by [ forthwith ] sedulò diligently , porro moreover , fortè by chance , quà which way , aliquà by some way , nequà left any way , illò thither , falsò falsely , citò quickly , ferè almost , planè manifestly [ or plainly , ] & alia and others id genus of that kind : putà the word putà pro for sicut , ponè pro for pòst afterwards , coram in presence , circum on every part , alias elsewhere , or otherwise , palàm openly , ergò this word ergò therefore conjunctio a conjunction , said but ergô pro for causa a cause circumflectitur is circumflexed : ut as , venimus we came illius ergô for his sake [ or cause . ] Igitur therefore haec omnia all these , sicut Graeca acuti-sona like as Greek words of an acute sound [ or accent ] quidem indeed acuuntur are sounded acute [ or as a lifted up ] in fine sententiarum in the end of sentences , verò but in consequentia verba among words following [ them ] gravantur they are [ sounded or ] made grave tones [ or pressed down ] Sic so causa differentiae [ for the cause of difference or ] for difference sake , antepenultima the last syllabel save two suspenditur is lifted up in his in these . Deinde afterwards , próinde therefore , périnde even as , aliquando sometime , né . quando jest at any time , hujúsque and of this sort , álonge far off , délonge from a far , déinceps afterwards , duntaxat only , déorsum downward , quápropter wherefore , quinimo but that more is , enímvero forsooth , propémodum almost [ in a manner ] ádmodum very much [ yea , ] áffabre workmanlike [ cunningly ] intereáloci in the mean while , nihilóminus yet nevertheless , paulóminus a little lesle , [ somewhat lesle ] cum when non sunt they are not orationes diversae diverse ; speeches , uti sunt as are pube tenus up to the middle , crurum tenus up to the shanks : enim for non sunt composita they are not compound words , velut like as , hactenus [ thus far ] hitherto , quatenus how far , [ so far as ] & and reliqua the rest ejus generis of that kind [ or sort . ] Transpositio transposition [ or removing of words ] invertit tonum [ turns or ] changes the [ tune or ] accent , id quod that which venit comes in usu in us in praepositionibus among prepositions , quae which postpositae being set after gravantur are made grave tones : ut as , Per transtra through the seats & and remos oars or rowers . Imperium the rule [ or government ] is te penes in the power of thee . Attractio attraction [ or drawing together ] mutat tonum changes the accent , come when conjunctio inclinativa an enclitical conjunction [ or a conjunction that gives his accent to the last syllabel of the word before him ] sequitur followeth post vocabulum aliquod after any word : ut as , que and [ or both , ] ne whether , ve or [ or either . [ Enim for hae particulae these particles attrahunt do draw accentum the accent [ or tune ] syllabae praecedenti to the syllabel before-going que and acuunt eam do make this syllabel acute , [ or list it up : ] ut as , Limináque both the thresholds [ by Synecdoche the Temple ] que and laurus the laurels dei of [ the feigned god ] Apollo : [ It may be constructed , ] Que both lumina the lights laurásque and the laurels dei of God : Sic so Dum , sis , nam , parelca are things added . Autem but ubi where est there is manifest a compositio a manifest composition tonus the accent non variatur is not varied : ut as , Dénique finally , útique verily , ítaque therefore , undique on every side , híccine is this he ? & and hujusmodi of this sort . Tamen notwithstanding ubíque , servat keepeth tonum the accent sui temporis of his time , & and also ubívis . Concisio the cutting [ short ] transfert conveys over tonum the accent cum when dictiones words castrantur are cut short per Syncopen by the figure Syncope , aut or Apocopen Apocope ; tunc enim for then retinent they retain [ or keep ] tonum the accent dictionis integrae of the whole word : ut as , Virgíli , Valéri , Mercúri , pro instead of Virgilii Valerii , Mercurii . Sic also , quaedam nomina certain nouns & and pronomina pronouns syncopata cut short by syncope circumflectunt ultimam do circumflex the last syllabel t●ut as , Arpinâs one of Arpinum , Ravennâs one of Ravenna , nostrâs of our country or sect , cujas of what country or sect , etc. and so forth . Sic likewise donêc until à of donecum . Sic so hûc hither , illuc thither , istuc thither , adhûc yet , hitherto , etc. and so forth , pro for hucce hither , illucce thither , etc.  Et and composita compound words à of dic , duc , fac , ut as , benedic bless thou , redûc being ( again , or ) back again , calefac make hot or warm . Idioma the idiom , hoc est that is , proprietas linguae the propriety of the tongue variat changes tonum the accent , ad●o●t so that , si if Graecae dictiones Greek words veniāt integre ad nos do come wholly or purely unto us servant tonum suum they keep their own accent : ut as , Simois a River in Troy , Periphas a man's name in Virgil , acuunt penultimam they make the last syllabel saving one acute [ or lift it up : ] at but facta Latina being made Latin words elevant antepenultimam they lift up the syllabel before the last saving one , quia because corripiunt they make short penultimam the last syllabel saving one , Autem but quae words which prorsus siunt are made altogether Latina latin words servant quoque they do keep also tonū Latinū the Latin accent : ut as , Geórgica , Bucóolica , antepenultimâ acutâ the last syllabel saving two being acute , licet although apud Graecos among the Greeks habeant they have tonum the accent in ultima on the last syllabel : ut as , Georgica , Sic & so also comoedia , tragoedia , sophia , symphonia recipiunt receive or have tonum their accent 〈◊〉 antèpenultima on the last syllabel saving two , licèt although they have it in penultima on the last syllabel save one in sua lingua in their own tongue . Por●o moreover , s● if tonus proprius the proper accent vocis peregrinae of a strange word ignoretur be unknown , tutissimum fuerit it shall be a most safe thing enunciare illam to pronounce that word , juxta Latinum accentum according to the Latin accent . Syllabae communes common syllabels in pro●a oration in prose 〈…〉 not composed in more temper corripiuntur are always made shortcut as , celebris famous , cáthedra a seat or chair , mediocris indifferent or mean.  

Hactenus hitherto de tonis of the accents & and spiritibus breathe in pronunciation , deinceps henceforth [ or from henceforth ] adjiciemus we will add pauca a few things de tempore syllabarum concerning the time of syllabels & ratione and the form carminis of a verse . Tempus the time we est is mensura the measure syllabae pronunciandae of a syllabel to be pronounced [ or of pronouncing a syllabel . ] Syllaba brevis a short syllabel est is unius temporis of one time , vero but longa a long syllabel duorum is of two supines . Tempus breve a short time notatur is noted sic thus [ or after this fashion ] ( ● . ) Autem but , longum a long time sic thus , ( - ) : ut as for example , tērra the earth . Pedes feet siunt are made ex syllabis dispositis of syllabels disposed justo ordine in a just [ or right ] order . Autem and pes a foot est is constitutio the setting [ or placing ] together duarum syllabarum of two syllabels vel or plurium of more ex certa observatione according to the certain observation temporum of the times , or measures of the syllabelsr . Alii pedum some of the feet dislyllabi are of two syllabels , alii others trissyllabi are feet of three syllabels . Autem but non multum attinet it doth not much appertain ad hoc nostrum institutum to this our purpose [ or instruction ] disterere to reason de te●asyllabis concerning feet of four syllabels . Dissyllaba feet of two syllabels sunt are Spondaeus , ut as for example , ¯ ¯ virtus virtue ; Pyrrichicus , ●ut as , ˘ ˘ Deus God ; Trochaeus , ut as , ¯ ˘ Panis bread ; jambus , ut as , ˘ ¯ amans loving . Trisyllabi feet of three syllabels sunt octo are eight , Molossus ut as , ¯ ¯ ¯ magnates Noble men or states ; Tribrachus , ut as , ˘ ˘ ˘ Dominus a Lord ; Dactylus , ut as , ¯ ˘ ˘ scribere to write ; Anapaestus , ut as , ˘ ˘ ¯ pictas godliness ; Bacchius , ut as , ˘ ¯ ¯ honestas honesty , Antibacchius , ut as , ¯ ¯ ˘ audire to hear ; Amphimacer , ut as , ¯ ˘ ¯ charitas charity ; Amphibracus , ut as , ˘ ¯ ˘ venire to come . Porro moreover , pedes feet concinnati trimmed ( or well composed ) justo nu●●ero in a just or lawful number atque ordine and order constituunt carmen compose ( or make ) a verse . Enim for carmen a verse est is oratio a speech constricta bound justo atque legitimo numero to a just and lawful number pedum of feet , Imprimis first of all , composituro carmen he that is to compose a verse discendum est must learn metiri ipsum to measure it rite truly ( or well ) pedibus by the feet , quam which vocant they call scansionem scanning . Autem and scansio scanning est is legitima commensuratio a lawful measuring together ( or measuring ) carminis of a verse , in singulos pedes into everyone ( or each one ) of the feet . Synaloepha , Eclipse , Syjnaeresis , Diaeresis & an Caesura accidunt do hap scansioni to scanning ( or lawful measuring of a verse by the feet . ) Synaloepha est is quaedam elisio a certain striking out vocalis of a vowel ante alteram before another in diversis dictionbus in diverse words : ut as , Crastina vit ' to morrows life est is nimis sera too late , viv ' live hodie to day . Autem and fit it is made interdum sometime , in his dictionibus in these words : ut as , Dii heathenish gods Diis to , ( from , by , or with ) those gods . iidem the same , deinde afterwards , deinceps afterwards ( or furthermore ) semianimis half dead , semihomo half a man , semiustus half burned , dost he ( or it ) is wanting , deero I shall be wanting , deerit he ( or it ) shall be wanting , & similia and such like words . At but heu & and o nunquam intercipiuntur are never taken away . Eclipse est is quotics as often as ● the letter ● cum sua vocali with his vowel perimitur is taken away , proxima distione the next word exorsa beginning or ( when the next word begins ) à vocali with a vowel ; ut as , Monstr ' , horrend ' , inform ' , ingens ; cui lumen ademptum ; pro for monstrum , horrendum , etc. and so forth ; OH ingens , horrendum , inform monstrum O huge , horrible , deformed , ( or ill favoured ) monster , cui from whom lumen ademptum his eye was taken , ( or whose eye was put out ) Synaeresis est is contractio the contraction ( or drawing together ) duarum syllabatum of two syllabels in unam into one : ut as , Ceu or alvaria the hives texta fuerint have been ( or were ) framed lento vimine with a soft ( or tender ) twig : pro for alvaria . Diaeresis est is ubi when ( or where ) duae syllabae two syllabels fiunt are made ex una dissecta of one syllabel cut asunder ( or parted : ) ut as , Debuerant they ought evoluisse to have unwound fusos suos their spindle's : promise for evolvisse . Caesura est is cum when post pedem absolutum after a perfect foot syllaba brevis a short syllabel extenditur is made long in fine dictionis in the end of a word . Species Caesurae the kinds of Caesura sunt are Triemimeris a Triemimer ( as though you should say , The division or the half of three feet ) ( subaudi understand thou constans consisting ) ex pede of a foot & and syllaba a syllabel : Inhians pectoribus he much coveting the breast , consulit takes counsel [ or divination ] from exta the entrails spirantia yet living . Penthemimeris a penthemimer ex duobus pedibus [ consists ] of two feet & syllaba and a syllabel : ut as , Amor love vincit overcometh omnia all things , & nos cedamus and let us yield [ give place ] amori to love . Hepthemimerit an Hepthemimer ex tribus pedibus of three feet & syllaba and a syllabel : ut as , Ostentans boasting of artem his skill [ or cunning ] que and pariter also [ or likewise ] arcum sonantem his sounding bow . Eneëmineris an Eneemimer constat consisteth ex quatuor pedibus of four feet & syllaba and a syllabel : ut as , Ille he fultus having born up latus niveum his side white like snow molli hyacintho with soft crowto●ss [ being a purple coloured flower . ] 

De generibus concerning the kinds Carminum of Verses . 

Genera Carminum the kinds of verses de quibus concerning which decrevimus we have determined [ or purposed ] tractare potissimum to entreat of principally hoc loco in the place , sunt are Heroicum the Heroic verse , wherein the deeds done by noble man are set down with praise , Elegracum the Elegiac verse [ wherein lamētable matters are set forth ] Asclepiadaeum the As●lepiade [ or the verses whereof Asclep●ad●ss was the first Author . ] Sapphicum the Sapphick , Phaleucium the Phaleucic , [ or the verse whereof Phaleucus was the first Author . ] Lambicum the lambick verse . Carmen Heroicum an Heroic verse , quod idem which same verse dicitur Hexametrum is called an Hexameter , quidem constat indeed consi●●th sex pedibus of six feet , numero in number , vero but duobus of two feet genere in kind , dactylo a dactyle , & spondeo and a spondee . Quintus locus the fifth place vendicat claims peculiariter properly dactylum a dactyle libi to itself , sexus the sixth place claims spondaeum a spondee : reliqua the rest , hunc vel illum this foot or that prout volumus even as we will : ut as , Tityrus OH Tytir●s , tu thou recubans lying at rest sub tegmine under the covering patulae fagi of a broad or wide spreading beech tree , Spondaeus a spondee reperitur aliquando is found sometime etiam in quinto loco even in the fifth place : ut as , Chara soboles . OH dear offspring Deum of the Gods , magnum incrementum the great increase Jovis of Jupiter . Ultima syllaba the last syllabel cujusque versus of every verse habetur communis is accounted common . Carmen Elegiacum an Elegiac verse , quod & which also habet hath nomen the name Pentametri of a Pentameter , constat consisteth● ● duplici Penthemimeri of a double Penthemimer , quarum of which prior the former comprehendit comprehends or contains duos pedes two feet , dactylicos being dactyls , spondaicos spondees , vel or alterutros either of them , cum syllaba longa with a long syllabel ; altera e●iam also the other ( Penthemimer ) contains duos pedes two feet , said but omnino dactylicos always [ or altogether ] dactyls , item also [ or likewise ] cum syllaba longa with a long syllabel ; ut as , Amor love est is res a thing plena full soliciti timoris of pensive or careful fear . Carmen Asclepiadaeum an Asclepi●de verse constat consists ex Penthemimeri of a Penthemimer , hoc est , that is to say , spondaeo of a spondee & and dactylo a dactyle & and syllaba longa a long syllabel , & and deinde moreover duobus dactylis of two dactyls : ut as , Meccenas OH neble Menas edite descended atavis Regibus of ancient or noble Kings ( Thus Bond ) at avis Regibus , id est that is , antiquis Regibus Atavis , after Cooper and Rider are the great grandfathers grandfathers : but it may be interpreted as Bond hath it , by a Metonymy of the subject for the adjunct ; for great grandfathers grandfathers are the subject . Carmen Sapphicum a Sapphic verse constat consists ex ●ochaeo of a trochee , spondaeo of a spondee , dactylo a dactile , & and demum at last duobus trochaeis of two trochees : ut as , Jam now Pater id est , Jupiter misit Jupiter hath se● [ for so heathenish men believed ] satis nivis snow enough atque and dirae [ subaud grandinis understand thou the word grandmis ] terrible o● horrible hail terris in our land [ or country ] Tamen notwithstanding in hoc genere carminis in this kind of verse Adonicum additur an Adonick is added post tres versus after three verses , quoth which constat consists ex dactylo & spondaeo of a dactyle and a spondee : ut as , Pusce O suscus , integor a man uncorrupt aquavitae of life , que and purus pure sceleris of wickedness , non eget needs not jaculis the darts nec a●cu nor the bow Mauri of the M●or , nec neither pharetrâ his quiver gravida full venenatis sagittis of poisoned arrows . Carmē Phaleuciū that kind of verse whereof Phaleucius was the first Author , five or Hendecasyllabum a verse of eleven syllabels constat consists ex spondaeo of a spondes dactyio a dactyle , & and tādem at the last tribus trochaeis of th●ee trochees : ut as pavens Mabili OH trembling or fearful Mab●litu [ or M●bil ] quoquo d●ff●gias whithersoever thou canst fly away , non poteris later thou shalt not be able to lie hid from nostrum nasum our face [ by Synecdoche , ] [ or fight by Metalepsis Legitm us versus lambicus a lawful lambick verse constat consists è solis jambis of iambics alone : ut as , Roma ipsa Rome herself ruit falleth viribus suis by her own strength ( or force . ) Tamen notwithstanding in locis imparibus in places unlike recipit interdum it receives sometime tribrachum , spondaeum , dactylum , an apaestum , the tribrach , spondee , d●ctyle , anapest pro jambo instead of the foot jambus , atque and in paribus ( subaudi locis understand the word locis ) in like places tribrachum it receives or takes a tribrach ; rariès it makes more rarely ( or seldom ) spondeum a spoudee . Hoc carmen this verse deducitur in duo genera is divided into two kinds , Dimetrum a dimeter ( which consists of four feet , ) & Trimetrum and a Trimeter , five or Senarium a verse consisting of six feet . Dimetrum a Dimeter ( verse ) constat consists ex quatuor pedibus of four feet : ut as , OH dulces notae OH sweet notes carminum of songs quas which pulchra thyself being fair fundis thou pourest out o'er melleo with thy honey mouth ( or sweet mouth ) que and succinis lyrae singest after the harp ( or to the harp ) ( In verses which are sung to the harp , two simple feet are commonly accounted for one ) Trimetrum a Trimeter five or Senarium a verse consisting of six feet , Trimetrum a Trimeter verse constat senis pedibus consisteth of six feet : ut as , Qui they which damnant do reprove ( or find fault with ) nos us , sunt are maximi histriones the principle stage-players . 

De quantitate concerning the quantity primarum syllabarum of the first syllabels . 

Quantitas the quantity primarum syllabarum of the first syllabels cognoscitur is known octo modis eight ways ( or by eight rules : Positione by position , vocali ante vocalem by a vowel before a vowel , diphthongo by a diphthong , derivatione by derivation , compositione by composition , praepositione by a preposition , regula by rule , exemplo by example , seu or authoritate by authority . 

Vocalis a vowel ante duas consonantes before two consonants aut duplicem or a double consonant in eadem dictione in the same word est is ubique longa every where long positurâ by position , ut as , ventus a wind , axis an axle , tree , patrizo to do like his father . Quod si if so be [ or , but if ] consonans a consonant claudat priorem dictionem do end the former word , item also sequente the word following inchoante beginning á consonante with a consonant , etiam also vocalis praecedens the vowel going before erit longa shall be long positione by position : ut as , Mayor sum I am greater quam tha● cui whom fortuna fortune possit nocere can hurt . Syllabae the syllables jor , sum , quam , & and sit , longae sunt are long positione by position . At si but if prior dictio the former word exeat do end in vocalem brevem in a short vowel , ●equente the word following incipiente beginning a duabus consonantibus with two consonants , interdum sometime producitur is made long , said but rariùs more seldom : ut as , Occulta spolia [ deportabant they did bear away ] secret [ or unknown ] spoils & and plures triumphos many triumphs the pac● as concerning peace . Vocalis brevis a short vowel ante mutam before a mute sequente liquida a liquid following , redditur communis is rehearsed [ or made common : ut as , Patris of a father , volucris a fowl [ or bird . ] Vero but longa a long vowel non mutatur is not changed : ut as , Aratrum a plough , simulacrum an image . 

Vocalis a vowel ante alteram before an other in eadem dictione in the same word est ubique brevis is every where short , ut as , Dĕus God , mĕus mine , ●us thine pĭus godly . Excipias you may except [ or , excipias for fac ut excipias except ] genitivos casus the genitive cases in ius , habentes formam having their form or [ declining ] juxta secundam declina●ionem pronominis according to the second declension of the pronouns , ut as , unius of one , illius of that . Ubi where ● the vowel● ● reperitur communis is found common , licèt albeit in al●erius in the word alterius of another , sit semper brevis it be always short , in alius in the word alius of another semper longa it be always long . Etiam also genitivi & dativi the genitive and dative cases quintae declinationis of the fifth declension , sunt excipiendi are to be excepted ubi e where the letter e inter geminum i between the double i fit longa is made long : ut as , faciei of a face , alioqui otherwise non not , [ that is , it is not made long : ] ut as , rĕi of a thing , spĕ of hope , fidĕi of faith . Etiam also fi the syllabel fi in 〈◊〉 in the verb fio to be made or done , est longa is long , ni i except e & r the letters e and r sequantur do follow simul together : ut as , Fierem I might be made or done , Fieri to be made or done . Sic so octo mariti the eight husbands●unt ●unt are made up in number ( or account , ) for then they might not be married to any more than eight husbands . Quid what non putes may you not think posse fieri can be done . Oh Interjectio the Interjection oh signifying ho ho , a voice or shunning habet hath priore● syllabam the former syllabel ancipitem doubtful ( or double that is , both long and short . ) Vocalis a vowel ante alteram before another in Graecis dictionibus in Greek words subinde ever now and then fit longa is made long : ut as , Pierides OH Muses dicite say you [ or tell you . ] Respice Lāerten look back unto ( or regard ) Laertes who was the father of Ulysses . Et also in possessivis in possessines , ut as , Aenēia nutrix Aeneas his nurse . Rhodopēius Orphēus Orpheus of Rhodope [ a mountain in Thracia . ] 

Omnis diphihongus every diphthong apud Latino's among the Latinists est is longa long : ut as , Aūrum gold , neuter neither the one nor the other , mūsae of a song : nisi , except vocale sequente 〈◊〉 vowel following [ or when a vowel followeth : ] ut as , Praeire to go before , praeustus burned in the sore part , [ or burned at the point , ] praeamplus very large . 

Derivativa derivatives , or words derived of others sortiuntur are allotted [ asssigned ] eandem quantitatem the same quantity cum primitivis with their primitives : ut as , ămator a l●ver , ămicus a friend , ămabilis amiable [ or to be beloved , ] prima syllaba the first syllabel brevi being short ab ămo of the verb ămo to love . Tamen notwithstanding pauca excipiuntur a few derivatives are excepted quae which deducta being derived a brevibus of short primitives , producunt do make long primam the first syllabel . Cujus generis of which kind sunt are , Vox uōcis a voice [ or word ] à uŏco of the verb voco to call ; lex lēgis a law à of lĕgo to read ; Rex rēgis a King à of rĕgo to rule [ or govern ; ] sēdes a seat & and sēdile a bench [ or stool ] à of sĕdeo the verb sedeo to sit , jūmentum a drawing beast to draw burdens à jŭvo of the verb juvo to help ; sōmes chips [ or any matter which is easily set on fire , ] & and fōmentum a plaster ●o mitigate pain à of fŏveo to cherish ; jūcundus pleasant à of jŭvo to help ; jūnior younger à of jŭvenis a young man or woman ; mōbilis to be moved [ or movable ] à of mòveo to move ; hūmanus gentle [ or courteous ] ab hŏmo derived from homo a man or woman's uōmer a ploughshare à of uòmo to cast up : pēdor the stink of the feet à of pĕde a foot . Et contra and contrariwife : sunt there are [ subaudi verba understand the word verba words ] quae deducta which bring derived a longiss of long primitives corripluntur are made short , qualia sunt of what sort are , Dux dŭcis a captain [ or leader ] à of dūco to lead , dĭcax a jester [ or scoffer ] maledĭcus one that useth railing , & also multa many words id genus of that kind [ or sort ] à of deco to say [ or speak ; ] sĭdes faith , a of fio to be made or done ; ărena sand , ărista the beard of a corn ear , ab āreo derived from [ or of ] areo to be dry : pŏsui I have , put [ or set ] à of pōno to put ; gĕnui I have begotten à of gigno to beget ; frăgor the noise made with the fall of any thing , & and frăgilis brittle [ or frail ] à of frāngo the verb frango to break ; nŏto nōtas to mark , à of nŏtu to be known ; năto to shoot out under the earth à of nātu to be grown or sprung up ; dse●tus eloquent à of dissero to dispute ; ŏpor adead ( or sound ) sleep à of Sōpio to bring asleep . Et also nonnullá alia some others exutroque genera of both kind quae which relinquuntur are l●ft observanda to be observed studiosis of the studious inter legendum while they are reading . 

Composita compound words sequuntur do follow quantitatem the quantity simplicium of their simple words ; ut as , pŏtens mighty , impŏtens impotent , or weak ; sôlor to delight , consôlor to comfort ; lĕgo to read , perlĕgo to read thorough , lēgo as , to send as an Ambassador à of allēgo to excuse by messengers . Tamen notwithstanding , haec brevia these short words enata being derived à longis of long words excipiuntur are excepted : ut as , Innŭba unmarried , pronūba a bride-maid à nūbo derived of nubo to be married , dejĕro to swear with a great oath , p●jero to for swear à of juro to swear . Ex praepositionibus of the prepositions , ha' these ubique producuntur are every where made long ; A , de , prae , se , e , nisi , except 〈◊〉 sequente a vowel following [ or when a vowel doth follow : ] ut as , unda the water dehiscens dividing itself with its [ or his ] own proper motion , Sudibusve praeustis or that kind of country spears , being burned at the end . Quoque also pro this preposition pr●●t is longa long , Praeterquam saving only in istis in these ; Prŏcella a great storm ( or tempest on the sea . ) prŏtervus saucy , froward , prŏfugus a fugitive , or a wanderer , prŏnepos a nephews son , prŏpago a lineage ( or stock ) promise for stirpe a descent of the stock , prŏfanus wicked [ or unholy , ] prŏfiteor to profess , pr●fundus deep high , prŏficiscor to proceed , prŏ●ari to pprophecy , prôpero to make haste , prŏfugio to fly fast away , prŏfecto the thing proceeding [ or one departed ] [ but with OH grave it signifeith truly . ] procurto to run before , profundo to pow●● out largely , propella to drive away [ a fár off , or to drive forth ] propullo to drive away , propago , as , to cause to spread abroad , habent 〈◊〉 priorem syllabam the first syllabel ancipitem doubtful Prŏpheta a Prophet & and prŏpono to drink to sunt are Graeca Greek words [ subaudi understand thou scripta the word scripta written ] per oh parvum with little O ( which they call 〈◊〉 ) & and proinde therefore habent they have primam the first syllabel brevem short . Etiam also di the syllabel di producitur is made long , nisi except in dirimo in the word dirimo to break off , & and dĭsertus èloque●●t . Reliquae praepositiones the rest of the prepositions corripiuntur are made short , si if positio position sinat do suffer . Cujusmodi sunt of which sort are ad to , ob for , ab from , sub under , re in composition , etc. and so forth . 

Omne praeteritum every preterperfect tense dissyllabum of two syllabels habet hath priotem the former syllabel longam long : ut as , lēgi I have read , ēmi I have bought . Tamen notwithstanding excipias except fídi I have cleaved à of findô to cleave , bĭbi I drank , dĕdi I gave , scĭdi I have cut , stĕti I stood , tuli I have born or suffered . 

Geminamia words doubling priman the first syllable praeteriti of the preterperfect tense brevem shortss ut as , pēpendi I have weighed , tĕtendi I have stretched● tŏtondi I have sheared , mŏmordi I have bitten , pĕpendi I broke wind backward , tŭtudi I have knocked , fĕfelli I have deceived , tĕtigi I have touched , pŭpugi I have pricked , dĭdici I have learned , cŏ●cidi I have fallen à of cado to fall , cĕcĭdi I have beaten ( or cut ) à of caedo to heat ( or cut . ) Et also quin moreover ( that more is ) supinum dissyllabum a supine of two syllabels quoque likewise producit priorem maketh the former syllabel long : ut as , mōtum to move , lātum to bear or suffer , lōtum to wash , crētum to perceive . Excipe except thou quĭtum to may or can , lĭtum to daub ( or smear ) over , ĭtum to go , tŭtum to rush , rătum to suppose , dătum to give , ●ătum to sow , Et also cĭtum a of cieo , es , to trouble [ of the second conjugation : ] nam for as touching citum to trouble à cio cis of cio cis , quartae of the fourth conjugation , habet it hath priorem the former syllabel longam long . 

Verò also quantitas the quantity quarum syllabarum of what syllabels non cadit doth not happen [ or come ] sub praedictas rationes under the aforesaid rules , petenda est it is to be sought [ or fetched ] à usu from the use , exemplo the example atque and authoritate authority poetarum of Poets , certissima regula being the most certain rule omnium of all . Ergò therefore , discant pueri let boys learn observare to observe [ or mark diligently ] communes quantitates the common quantities primarum syllabarum of the first syllabels ex Poetis of Poets . Cujus sortis of what manner sort sunt are Britannus a man of Britan , Bythynus a man of Bythynia , Cacus a giants name , Cosyra the name of an Island [ or Isle , ] Crathys the name of two rivers , one in Greece , the other in Calaber , Pachinus a mountain in Sicily , Palatium a Prince or Emperor's court or palace , Pelion a hill in Thessaly , Criticus be that judgeth men's writings , Curetes spear-men , Diana Jupiter's daughter , [ an heuthetishgoddess , ] Fidene a Town of the Sabines in Italy , Gradivus the name of Mars , hinnulus a little mule , Pyrene the name of a fountain , rubigo rust , Rutilius the name of diverse Romans , Hymen a song sung at a wedding , Italus a man of Italy , liquor moisture [ or liquor , ] liquidus moist , Lycus engendered of a wolf and a dog , Orion Neptune's son , rudo to bray like an ass , Sychaerus Dido's husband , Sycanius a man of Sicily , & similia and the like words . 

Mediae syllabae middle syllabels possunt cognosci may be known partim partly eadem ratione by the same way [ or means ] quâ by which primae the first [ syllabels may be known , ] etiam also partim partly ex incrementis from , or by the increases [ or increasing ] genitivi of the genitive case , atque and analogiâ from the proportion conjugationis of the conjugation . Arbitramur dictum we think [ or judge ] it to have been spoken abunde abundantly suprà before in generibus nominum in the genders of nouns de incrementis concerning the increasings genitivi of the genitive case nominum polysyllabarum of nouns of many syllabels , unde from whence licebit it shall be lawful petere to seek [ or fetch direction ] si quid haesitaveris if you shall doubt anything the hac re concerning this matter . Frequens lectio the often reading & and observatio the diligent observation optimorum poetarum of the best poets facile suppeditabunt will easily furnish us with caetera the residue , Pueri didicerunt boys have learned analogiam conjugationis the proportion of the conjugation ex imbibitis rudimentis from the first principles [ or instructions ] conceived [ or understood , ] nempe that is to wit , a the letter a , indicem a sign [ or token ] primae conjugationis of the first conjugation esse to be longam long naturâ by nature , praeterquam in do saving only in the verb do to give , & and ejus compositis in the compounds of that verb [ or in his compounds , ] quando when sunt they are hujus conjugationis of this conjugation : ut as , Damus we give , circundămus we compass about ; dăbis thou shalt give , circundăbis thou shalt compass about ; dăre to give , circundăre to compass about . Praeterea furthermore , animadvertant let them mark diligently syllabas rimus & ritis the syllabels rimus and ritis ubique habendas every where to be taken [ or accounted ] pro brevibus for short in praeterito perfecto , in the preterperfect tense modi subjunctivi of the subjunctive mood , autem but debere that they ought esse to be longas long in future , in the future tense in prosa oration in prose [ or that which is no meeter : ] verò but reperiti indifferntes that they are to be found indifferent in carmine in verse , quemadmodum even as Aldus the Grammarian contendit affirms [ or proves ; ] ut as , praeterito in the preterperfect tense amauérimus when we have loved , amaveritis when ye have loved : futuro in the future tense , amaverímus when we shall or will love , amaveritis when ye shall or will love . Et also est there is a time ubi when mediae syllabae the middle syllables , variant do vary apud poetas among poets : ut as , in his in these quae which subjunximus we have set under : connubium wedlock , ficedu - la agnat-snapper , Malea a promontory by Laconia , Pharsalia a country of Th●ssaly , Batavus a man of Holland , Sydonius a man of Sydon , & and similia the like words . 

Latina adjectiva Latin adjectives in inus ending in inus , producunt penultimam do make long the last syllabel saving one : ut as , clandestînus secret , mediastîmus a slave , parietînus of a decayed watt , matutinus belonging to the morning , vespertinus belonging to the evening , repen●us sudden . Praeter except hae● sequentia these adjectives following . Diutĭnus long continuing , crastĭnus appertaining to tomorrow , pristĭnus ancient , perendĭnus belonging to the next day after tomorrow ( or of the third day after ) hornotĭmis of a year old , sero●nus that is in the evening , oleagĭnus of an olive-tree , fagĭnus of a be●●h-tree , cedrĭnus of a cedar-tree , carbasĭnus of fine linen , Et and reliqua materialia the residue of the nouns signifying matter , five or in inus words ending in inus , formata form a nominibus metallerum of the name of metals , qualia sunt of what sort are permulta very many deducta derived à Graecis vocibus in inos of Greek words in inos ; ut as , Cristallĭnus of Crystal , my●rhĭnus of myrrh , hyacinthĭnus of a jacinth stone , ādamantĭnus of an adamant stone , etc and so forth . Usus use & and observatio diligent marking poetarum of the poets foelicius docebit will more happily teach caetera the other words ( or the rest ) quam than ullae regulae any rules Grammaticorum of Grammarians , quas which solent thae are wont tradere to teach de quautitate concerning the quantity mediarum syllabarum of middle syllabels , aut either fine ullo modo without any measure aut fine or end . Quare wherefore illis praetermissis those being passed over , jam accingamut let us now prepare ourselves ad aperiendas quantitates to open ( or declare ) the quantities ultimarum syllabarum of the last syllabels . 

Quanquam although ultimae syllabae the last syllablis aut either aequant do match , aut etiam superant or do moreover exceed numerum ipsum the very number literarum of the letters , tamen notwithstanding non pigebit it shall not irk us etiam also perourrere ilias to run them over ordine in order . Primum first of all a finita words ending in a producuntur are made long : ut as , Amā love thou , contrā against , ergā towards . Excipias thou mayest except pută that is to say , it● s● , quiă because . Item also nominativos the nominative cases in a ending in a , cujuscunque genoris of whatsoever gender , numeri number , aut or declinationis declension fuerine they shall be , praeter vocativos except the vocative cases in a ending in a , à Graecis of the Greek words in as ending in as : ut as , O Aeneā O Aeneas , ● Thomā OH Thomas ; & also ablativum the ablative case primae declinationis of the first declension : ut as , ab hac mu●ā from this song . Numeralia words of number in ginta ending in ginta , habent have finalem the syllabel at the end communem common , ( that is to say , both long and short , ) said but frequentiùs more often longam long : ut as , trigintā thirty , quadragintā forty , Desinentia words ending in b , d , t , brevia sunt are short : ut as , ăb from , ●d to , capŭt an head . Desinentia inc words ending in the latter ● producuntu● are made long● ut as āc and , ●ic so & and adverbium hic the adverb hic here . Sed but tria in c three words ending in● ● semper contrahuntur are always contracted ut as , ●ăc milk , nĕc neither donĕc until . Duo two words sunt communia are common , sic● do thou , & and pronomen hic the pronoun hic signifying this , or that ; & and neutrum hoc the neuter hoc this , on that , modo so that now sit it be not ablativi casus of the ablative case . E finita words ending in e brevia sunt are short : ut as , marĕ the sea● almost , legĕ road thou . Omnes voces all words quintae inflectionis of the fifth decla●nsion in e ending in e sunt excipiendae are to be except ut as , diē in the day , sidē the ablative case of sides faith unà together cum adverse with the adverbs enatis ibde sprung from thence ( or derived of them ) ut as , holi● to day , quotidiē daily , prid● the day before , postridiē the day after , quarē for what cause ( or wherefore , ) qua de rē wherefore , ) ea rē for that cause ( or therefore , ) & and siqua sunt similia if there be any like them . Et item and also , secundae perionae singulares the second persons singular secundae conjugationis of the second conjugation imperativotum of the imperative moods activorum of verbs actiute : ut as , Docē teach thou , mouē move thou , manē tarry thou , cauē take thou heed ; Etiam also monosyllaba in e words , of one syllabel in e producuntur are made long : ut as , men me , tē thee , ●ē a syllabel added to words [ as hiccē . ] praeter except quĕ and , or both , nĕ whether , uĕ or [ or either ] conjunctiones encliticas the conjunctions enclitical . Quin & yea , and that more is [ or more over ] quoque also adverbia adverbs inc ending in c , deducta derived ab adjectivis of adjectives habent have e the letter e longum long : ut as , pulchre goodly [ beautifully , ] doctē learnedly , valdē pro for validē mightily . Quibus unto which fermē & and ferē the adverbs , fermè and ferè , signifying almost accedunt are added . Tamen notwithstanding benĕ well , & and malĕ ill omnino corripiuntur are made short always [ or altogether . ] Postremo last of all , [ finally , ] quae words which scribuntur are written per● with the Greek letter nà Graecis of the Greeks producuntur are made long naturâ by nature cujuscunque casus of whatsoever case , generis gender , aut ornumeri number fuerint they shall be : ut as , Lethē a river of Hell [ feigned by the poets ] causing forgetfulness Anchisē the father of Aane● cetē pl. num . n. g. as , cete immania great whales , Tempē a fair field in Thessaly . I finita words ending in in longa sunt are long : ut as , Domini of a lord , magistri of a master , amarī to be loved , docerī to be taught . Praeter except mihi to me , tibi to thee , sibi to himself [ or themselves , ] ubi where or when , ibi there , quae which sunt are communia common , Verò but nisĭ except & and quasĭ as it were corripiuntur are made short : cujus sortis of which sort [ or manner ] eti am also sunt are dativi & vocativi the dative and vocative cases Graecorum of the Greeks quorum genitive singularis whose genitive case singular exit in os endeth in os breve being short : ut as , huic Palladi to Minerva [ the feigned goddess of wisdom , ] Phillidi to Phillis [ Lycurgus daughter ] Minoidito Minois [ the daughter of Minos' King of Cretes : ] vocativo in the vocative case Ô Amarillĭ O Amarillis , Ô Alexĭ O Alexis , Ô Daphnĭ O Daphnis . L finita words ending in I , corripiuntur are made short , ut as , animăl a living creature [ that hath life and sense , ] Hannibăl a Carthaginian captain , mĕl honey , pugil a champion , săl salt , consŭl a consul . Praeter nil except the word nil contractum a contracted word à of nihil signifying nothing , & and Sōl the Sun. Et also Hebraea quaedam certain Hebrew words in ● ending in● ● : ut as , Michaēl a name of Christ , [ signifying , Who like God ? ] [ when men are so named , there it is another meaning of the word , ] Gabriēl the name of an Angel , Raphaēl the name of an Angel , Daniēl the name of a Prophet . N finita words ending in n producuntur are made long : ut as , Paān one name of Apollo , Hymen the feigned God of marriage , quīn but [ or but that , ] Xenophon the name of a man so called , nōn no [ or not , ] daemōn a devil . Excipe except thou forsăn per adventure , forsit ān per adventure , ăn whether , tamĕn notwithstanding , attam ĕn but yet [ or notwithstanding , ] veruntamĕn nevertheless . Et also in the preposition in corripitur is made short cum compositis with his compounds : ut as , exĭn from henceforth , or afterwards subĭn ever now and then , deĭn afterwards , proĭn therefore . Et also illae voces these words accedunt his are added to these quae which castrantur are cut short per apocopen by the figure Apocope : ut as , mĕn ' what , me ? vidĕn ' dost thou not see ? audĭn ' dost thou not hear ? nemŏn is there no body ? Item also nomina in en nouns ending in en , quoram genitivus whose genitive case habet inis correptum hath inis made short : ut as , carmĕn a verse [ or song , ] crimĕn a fault , pectĕn a comb . tibicĕn a player on the flute , make ĭnis in the genitive case . Etiam also Graeca Greek words in on ending in on , per o parvum written with little oh , cujuscunque casus fuerinc of whatsoever case they shall be : ut as , iliŏn one name of the city Troy , Peliŏn an hill in Thessaly , nominativo in the nominative case : Caucasŏn the name of a mountain , Pylŏn the name of a town where Nestor was born , accusativo in the accusative case . Etiam also quaedam some nouns 〈◊〉 in ending in in , ut as , Alexin Alexis , ( the name of diverse men . ) In yn ending in yn : ut as Ityn Itys , ( the son of Tereus and Progne , ) Quoque also in an words ending in an , a nominativis in a of the nominative case ending in a : ut as , nominativo in the nominative case , Iphigenia Aganum● daughter , Aegina the daughter of Aesopus a certain King , Accusativo in the accusative cases , Iphigeniăn Aegin●n , Nam in an and as touching words ending in an ( Holyoke so consteveth the word nam ) à nominativis in as of the nominative cases ending in as ; producuntur are made long : ut as nominativo in the nominative case Aeneas a noble man of Troy , Marsyas the name of a famous Historiographer . Accusativo in the accusative case , Aeneān Marsyān . OH finita words ending in oh , communia sunt are common ; ut as , amo to love , Virgo a virgin , porrò moreover , docendo in touching : legendo in reading , eundo in going , & and aliae voces other voices gerundii in do of the gerund in do ( or other words being gerunds in do ) [ But yet remember that adjectives like gerunds are only made long ] Praeter except obliquos in o the oblique cases ending in oh , qui which semper producuntur are always made long : ut as , huic Dominō to this Lord , subaudi huic understand this word huic ) seruō to this servant . Ab hoc templō from this Temple , ( subaudi ab hoc understand these words ab hoc ) damnō from this loss . Et also adverbia adverbs derivata derived ab adjectivis of adjectives ut as , tantō by so much , quantō by how much , liquid clearly , falsō falsely , primō first & foremost , manifestō plainly or clearly , etc.  Praeter except sedulò diligently , mutuò mutually , crebro frequently ( or often , ) serò late in the evening , quae which communia sunt are common . Caeterum but yet modŏ now of late , & and quomodŏ how corripiuntur are made short semper always . Quoque also cito quickly ut & as also , ambo both , duo two , ego I , atque also , homo a man or woman , vix leguntur producta are scarcely read ( made ) long , Tamen yet monosyllaba in o words of one syllabel in oh producuntur are made long : ut as , dō to give , sto to stand , ut & as also ergō pro causa for a cause . Item also Graeca Greek words per ω written with great OH subaudi producuntur are made long , cujuscunque casus of whatsoever case fuerint they shall be : ut as , haec Sapphō this Sapph ( a famous Poetress ) haec Didò this Dido ( the daughter of Pelus King of Tyre : ) hujus Androgeō of this Androgius ( the son of Minos' King of Crete , ) hujus Apollō of this Apollo's , ( the name of a man : ) hunc Athō this Athos ( a wonderful high hill in Thracia , ) hunc Apollō this apollo [ for Apollona , as Dispauter writes , of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 as Also Camden in his Greek Grāmar : ] ( the name of the feigned heathenish god of wisdom . ) R finita words ending in r corripiuntur are made short : ut as , Caesăr the surname of the Julian's in Rome , torçulăr a wine press , pĕr by , uĭr a man , uxŏr a wife , turtŭr a bird called a turtle . Cor the heart semel legitur is once read productum made long apud Ovidium by Ovid ut as , Meum molle cōr my soft heart violabile est is to be broken , or hurt levibus telis with light darts , or slender weapons . Etiam also subaudi haec verba understand th●se words , producuntur are made long , Lār a god of the household , city , or fields , ( as heathen people believed . ) Nār , a river running into Tiber , uēr the spring , fūr a thief , cūr wherefore . Quoque also pār equal , or like cum compositis with his compounds : ut as compār equal , impar unequal , dispār unlike . Graeca quaedam certain Greek words in oer ending in er , quas illis that among them desinunt in 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , d● end in 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : ut as for example , Aer the air , cratēr a great cup ( or goblet , ) character a mark , sign , seal or print of a thing , aether the firmament or sky , 〈◊〉 saviour . Praeter except pater a father , & and mater a mother , quae which apud Latino's among the Latinists ( or Latin Authors , ) habent ultimam have the last syllabel brevem short . s finita words ending in the letter s , habent have pares terminationes the like terminations ( or end ) cum numero vocalium with the number of the vowels , nempe that is to wit , As , es , is , os , us , Primo first and foremost , As finita words ending in as producuntur are made long : ut as , amās thou lovest musās songs , majestas majesty ( or honourable dignity , ) bonitās goodness . Praeter except Graeca Greek words quorum of which genitivus singularis the genitive case singular [ or whose genitive case singular ] exi in dos doth end in dos : ut as , Archăs the son of Jupiter , Pallăs Minerva ( the goddess of wisdom ; ) genitivo in the genitive case Archadŏs , Palladŏs . Et also , praeter except accusativos plurales the accusative cases plural nominum crescentium of nouns increasing : ut as , Heros a noble man Heroŏs in the genitive case . Phillis King Lycurgus his daughter , Phillidŏs in the genitive case . Accusativo plurali in the accusative case plural Heroăs , Phillidăs . Es finita words ending in es longa sunt are long : ut as , Anchisēs' Aeneas father , sedēs' thou fittest , docēs' thou teachest , patrēs' fathers , Nomina in es nouns ending in es , tertiae inflectionis being of the third declension excipiuntur are excepted , quae corripiunt which do make short penultimam the last syllabel saving 〈◊〉 genitivi crescentis of the genitive case increasing ; ut as , milĕs a soldier , segĕs standing corn , diuĕs rich : Sed but ariēs' a ram , abiēs' a firtree , pariēs' a wall of an house , Cerēs' the feigned goddess of corn ; & also pēs' a foot , unà together cum compositis with the compounds of it : ut as , prepēs' light in flying ( or swift , ) bipēs' having two feet , tripēs' having three feet , quadrupes having four feet ( or four footed , ) sunt longa are long . Quoque also es the verb es à sum coming of the verb sum to be corripitur is made short , unà together cum compositis with his compounds : ut as potĕs thou canst ( or art able , ) adĕs thou are present , prodĕs thou profitest [ or art profitable , ] obĕs thou hinderest [ or hurtest . ] Quibus to which words penĕs in the power potest may adjungi be adjoined [ or annexed ] unà together cum neutris with words of the neuter gender , ac and nominativis pluralibus to the nominative cases plural Graecorum of the Greeks : ut as , Hippomanĕs a venomous humour coming from a mare , cacoethĕs an evil custom , Cyclôpĕs giants with one eye , Naidĕs fairies haunting rivers and fountains . Is finita words ending in is brevia sunt are short : ut as , Parĭs Priamus [ King of Troy ] his son , panĭs bread , tristĭs sad , hilarĭs merry . Excipe except obliquos plurales the oblique cases plural in is ending in is , qui which producuntur are made long : ut as , Musis the dative or ablative case plural of musa a song [ or of Musae the Muses , ] [ which were feigned goddesses of learning , ] mensis the dative or ablative plural of mensa a table , dominis the dative or ablative plural of dominus a lord , templis the dative or ablative plural of templum a Church . Item also queīs pro for quibus the dative or ablative of qui which , cum producentibus with words making long penultimam the last syllabel saving one genitivi crescentis of the genitive case increasing ut as , Samnīs a Samnite , Salamīs an●le by Athens , genitivo in the genitive case Samnîtis , Salamînis . Add huic add hither [ or to this place ] quae words which dosinunt do end in diphthongum ●is in the diphthong eyes , ●i●e Graeca whether they be Greek words sieve Latina or Latin , cujuscunque numeri of whatsoever number aut casus or case fuerint they shall be : ut as , Symocīs a river in Troy , Pyrocīsone of the horses of the sun , parteīs put for parts the parts , omneis put for omnes all . Et item and also omnia monosyllaba all words ; of one syllabel : ut as , vis strength , power or force , līs strife , or contention , praeter nominativos except these nominative cases ĭs signifying he & and quĭs who , & also bĭs twice apud Ovidium in Ovid. Secundae personae singulares the second person singular verborum in is of verbs ending in is , accedunt istis are added to these , quorum secundae personae plurales whose second persons 〈◊〉 desinunt in itis do end 〈◊〉 , penultimâ the last syllabel saving one producta being made long , unà together cum futuris with the faure tenses subjunctivi . in ●is of the subjunctive mood innis ●is : ut as , audis thou hearest , velis thou mayest or canst be willing , dederis thou shalt or wilt give pluraliter plurally ( or in the plural number , ) audîtis ye hear , velîtis ye may or can be willing , dederîtis when ye shall or will give . Os finita words ending in os producuntur are made long : ut as , honos honour , nepōs a nephew , Dominōs lords , servos servants . Praeter except compŏs he that hath ability or power in something , impŏs that is unable ( not having power , ) & and ŏs ossis a bone Et also Graeca Greek words per oh parvum written with little oh : ut as , Delŏs an Isle in the Aegean sea , where Apollo and Diana were born , Chaŏs a confused heap of all things , whereof poets conceived all things to have come in the beginning , Palladŏs the genitive case of Pallas , Minerva , Phyllidŏs the genitive case of Phyllis King Lycurgus' daughter's ●s finita words ending in 〈◊〉 ●orripiuntur are made short : ut as , famulŭs an household manservant , regiŭs royal , tempŭs time , amamŭs we love . Producentia words making long penultimam the last syllabel saving one genitivi crescentis of the genitive case increasing excipiuntur are excepted : ut as , salūs a saluting ( or health , ) tellūs the earth ( the ground ) genitivo in the genitive case salûtis , tellûris . Etiam also omnes voces all words quartae inflectionis of the fourth declension in us ending in us , sunt longa are long , praeter except nominativum & vocativum singulares the nominative and the vocative case singular : ut as , hujus manus of this hand , hae manus these hands , Ô manus O hands . Etiam also monosyllaba words of one syllabel accedunt his are added to these : ut as , Crūs the leg , ( from the knee to the ankle , ) thūs frankincense , mūs a mouse , sūs a sow , etc , and so forth . Et item and also , Graeca Greek word's per diphthongum 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 with the diphthong ous , cujuscunque casus fuerint of whatsoever case they shall be : ut as , hic panthūs this Panthus , ( a Trojan , the son of Otreus , ) Melampūs a famous Soothsayer : Hujus Sapphūs of this Sapph ( a great Poetress , ) Cliūsthe genitive case of Clio being the name of one of the Muses . Atque and nomen JESUS the name JESUS venerandum that is worthy to be reverenced , ( or aught , or is to be reverenced ) piis cunctis of all godly ( or religious ) persons . Postremò last of all omnia ufinita all words ending in u , producuntur are made long : ut as , manū the ablative case of manus an hand , genū a knee , amatū to be loved , diū a long time , ( or long time of continuance . ) 

Finis Grammatices the end of the Grammar . 

