A MORAL ESSAY Concerning the Nature and Unreasonableness OF PRIDE : IN WHICH The most plausible Pretences of this VICE are examined , IN A CONFERENCE BETWEEN Philotimus and Philalethes . 

Licenced August 17. 1689.  

London : Printed for joseph Hindmarsh , at the Golden Ball in Cornhill . 1689.  

TO THE READER . 

I Easily foresee some People will be disobliged with the Freedom of these Papers , and think themselves treated with too little Ceremony ; But unless they can disarm their pretended Adversary , and confute his Arguments , I would desire them by all means to smother their Resentments : For as bad as the World is , to appear in defence of Pride , and turn Advocate for the Devil , looks like an untoward sort of an Employment . However to sweeten their Humour as much as may be , they may please to consider that there was no good to be done in this Case without plain dealing ; This Malady of all others must be well examined , otherwise it 's in vain to expect a Cure. 't is to no purpose to declaim in general against a Proud man , and to give him a great many hard Names ; for unless you point directly upon his Vice , distinguish its Nature , and discover the weakness of that which he builds upon . Every one will be sure to avoid the Charge and parry against the Application . Farther , to abate their Censure I think it not improper to acquaint them that here are no particular Characters attempted , nor is there the least intention to provoke or expose any Person Living . Besides when a Piece like this is drawn from so many different Faces ; the mixing of Features and Complexions , will keep the Originals from being discovered . In short the Design of this small Discourse is only to make Men more useful and acceptable to Society , and more easy to themselves than they generally are : And that those who overtop their Neighbours upon any considerable account ; may manage their Advantage with that Modesty and good Humour , that none may have any just occasion to wish them lesle . 

A Moral Essay UPON PRIDE , IN A CONFERENCE Between PHILOTIMUS and PHILALETHES . 

Philot.   Philalethes , I am glad to see you , though you are so wrapped up in Speculation that I scarce knew you at first sight ; pray why so thoughtful ? you don't use to have so much Philosophy in your Face . 



Philal.   I have a particular reason to look a little pretendingly at present ; therefore I hope you will excuse it . 



Philot.   With all my heart , for I suppose you will not make a practice of it : But whatever Emergency you may be under , I would advice you to appear in your old shape again ; for in my Judgement that contemplative Figure does not become you . 



Philal.   I am sorry to hear Thinking agrees so ill with my Constitution ; but I hope this Alteration does not arise from any natural Antipathy I have to Sense , but from the unacceptableness of the subject I am upon . 



Philot.   Pray if it be not too free a Question , what were you musing upon ? 



Philal.   Why last night I happened to light upon an overgrown Fop , who plagued the Company with such an impertinent History of his Quality and Performances , and was so vain and insolent in all his behaviour , that as soon as I was delivered from him , I had a plentiful occasion to consider the unreasonableness of Pride ; which is the present Employment of my Thoughts , and upon a full view , I find so much folly , and ill humour , and Monster , in the Composition of this Vice , that I am ashamed , and almost afraid , of the Idea I have raised . 



Philot.   't is somewhat hard you can't stand the charge of your own Imagination ; But though I shall not dispute your Courage , yet I much question your Mortification . 



Philal.   The Reason of your censure ? 



Philot.   Because I have observed it 's but a bad Sign of Humility to declaim against Pride ; for he that is really humble will be unconcerned about Respect and Applause ; such a Person values himself upon nothing but his Conscience and Integrity , and therefore the haughtiness of another can't make him uneasy ; so that if he finds himself wince upon the account of neglect , he may be pretty well assured he has a fore place . 



Philal.   I think you are somewhat out in your notion of Humility ; for that virtue does not make us either servile or insensible , it does not oblige us to be ridden at the pleasure of every Coxcomb . We may show our dislike of an imperious humour , as well as of any other foolish Action , both for the Benefit of others , and in vindication of our own right . 



Philot.   I am glad to hear this concession from you , because from hence it follows that a man may have a just esteem of himself without being proud : Now if this observation was remembered and rightly applied , men would not be so censorious in this point , nor mistake their own Pride for their neighbours so often as they do . For instance , a man whom the Law has made my Superior , may take notice of his Quality if he pleases ; but this can't well be done , except he makes me an abatement of the regard he receives from me , therefore I ought not to interpret the Reserve or Familiarity of his Carriage as a Neglect , for provided he keeps within his proportion , he challenges nothing but his own ; so that if I am displeased , the Pride lies on my side , for affecting to have an equal Regard paid to persons who are unequal . 



Philal.   I have nothing to object against the main of your discourse , and conceive that the best way to know whether we are guilty or not , and to prevent charging this odious Imputation unjustly upon others , is to state the Nature of Pride , and to inquire into the Grounds of it . 



Philot.   I confess that is the way to pinch the Question , therefore let what will come of it , I will stand the Test of your Method , though I am afraid you will say some unacceptable things . 



Philal.   Suppose I do ; if the subject leads me to it , the fault is not mine : But to come to the point : Pride has a very strong Foundation in the mind ; it 's bottomed upon Self-love . 



Philot.   then I find there is somewhat to work upon . — 



Philal.   Pray give me leave , I say Pride is originally founded in Self-love , which is the most intimate and inseparable Passion of human Nature . The kindness men have for themselves , is apt to put them upon overvaluing their own things : which humour unless checked in time , will make them take most delight in those Circumstances and Actions which distinguish them from their Neighbours ; and place their supposed Advantages in the best light . Now this design is best pursued by being Master of uncommon Excellencies , which though desired by all , are possessed but by a few ; for the Rareness of things raises their Esteem , and draws a general Admiration . And their desire of being distinguished , is one reason why they love to keep the odds in their own hand , and to make the distance between themselves and their Neighbours as wide as may be , which often runs them upon a vain , and tyrannical Ostentation of their Power , Capacity , etc.  For this magnificent discovery makes the difference between them and their Neighbours the more apparent , and consequently occasions their own Greatness to be the more remarkable . 



Philot.   I think you have said something very remarkable , and I don't know but you may grow considerable by it , if you can prove your Assertion . 



Philal.   Pray what rising Doctrine have I laid down ? 



Philot.   You say that Pride is founded in Self-love , which is an unseparable Passion of human nature ; from whence I gather , that it 's impossible for a man not to be proud , because it 's impossible for a man not to love himself . We are like to have an admirable Preservative from you at this rate . 



Philal.   Not so fast , If you had attended to the whole , you might have observed that by self-love I meant the Excesses of it . 



Philot.   I thought a Man could not have loved himself too well . 



Philal.   If by loving you mean wishing himself happy , I agree with you ; for we may , or rather we must desire to be as happy as is possible , provided it be without prejudice to another . But then if Esteem is understood by Love , it 's easy ( without care ) to exceed in our own behalf ; and in this sense we certainly do love ourselves too well , as often as we set an overproportioned and unusual value upon any thing because it 's our own ; as if our fondness and partiality was the true Standard of worth , and we had the faculty of turning every thing we touched into gold . 



Philot.   I will not contest this point any farther with you ; but as I remember you started another Paradox , by intimating that it was a sign of Ambition to esteem any Excellency the higher for being uncommon : Now since the value of an Advantage is enhansed by its scarceness , and made more reputable to the owner ; I think it somewhat hard not to give a man leave to love that most which is most serviceable to him , 



Philal.   So it would if he had no body to love but himself ; but since he is both obliged and naturally inclinable to universal Benevolence , this altars the Case : for he who values any thing the more for being uncommon , will desire it should continue so , which is no kind Wish to his Neighbours , and is an Argument that a man does not delight in an Advantage so much for itself , as for the Comparison ; not so much for its own irrespective goodness , as because others want it . Now it affords a more generous , and I believe , a more transporting pleasure , to converse with universal Happiness , though we make no greater figure in it , than the rest of our Neighbours ; than to be gazed at , and admired by a Crowd of indigent and inferior People . 



Philot.   The World does not seem to be of your opinion ; however I will let your Argument pass for the good nature of it . But after all let me tell you , though I have no mind to be counted proud , yet I have a strong fancy for myself , and therefore if you will not allow me to be civil to my Person , we might even as good dispute no farther , for — 



Philal.   Don't trouble yourself , if your Terms are moderate , we 'll never break off upon the score , therefore I will offer at a short negative description of Pride , in which if it 's possible , I will give you Satisfaction . 



Philot.   Pray let us see how liberal you will be . 



Philal.   First it 's no part of Pride to be conscious of any perfections we have , whether intellectual or moral ; for this is in many Cases necessary , and impossible to be avoided . He that is wise or learned must know it , otherwise he can't understand when he judge's true or false , nor distinguish difficult and noble Speculations , from trifling and vulgar Remarks , nor tell when he acts rationally or not . Now a Man that is ignorant of these things can neither be wise nor knowing : Therefore as he that has a just and vigorous sense of the Magnitude , Distance and Colours of Objects , must conclude that he has eyes whether he will or not ; so these perfections of the mind discover themselves by their own Light. The Possessor can no more be ignorant of them , than he can doubt of his Existence when he is awake . To give one instance more ; How can any Person have true Fortitude , who does not know how far he ought to hazard himself , and wherein the baseness of Cowardice consists ? So that to affirm a Man may be ignorant of his own considerableness , is to make him wise and great , and good by Chance , which is a contradictition to the Excellencies supposed in him . 



Philot.   Right . And since I like the Frankness , and tendency of your Argument , I 'll try if I can reinforce it : I say then , supposing it was possible for a man to be ignorant of his good Qualities ; it was by no means convenient : For if he carried such a Treasure about him , without knowing how well furnished he was ; it 's somewhat hard to conceive , how he could either improve or use it . If it lay thus close , it would be little better , than a Mine undiscovered , for which neither the owner of the Ground , or any Body else are ever the richer , 



Philal.   You say well , and therefore I shall venture in the second place to affirm , That as we may be acquainted with our own Accomplishments , without being guilty of Pride , so neither is it any branch of this sin to discover that they are greater than some of our Neighbours enjoy . If we have a real Advantage over another , it 's no sin to be sensible of it ; to apprehend otherwise , is to judge contrary to the Reason of things , when the Case is plain , we may believe we have more Honesty , Sense , etc. than some others . This is as allowable as it is for us to think , that we have better Complexions than Moor , and are taller than Pigmies . 



Philot.   Can you go on ? 



Philal.   Yes , I 'm not afraid to add , Thirdly , that we don't fall into the sin of Pride , by being delighted with those Advantages of Mind , Body or Fortune , which Providence has given us ; these things in the very notion of them are supposed to be beneficial . Now it 's natural and necessary for us to be pleased with the Enjoyment of that which is good ; of that which is agreeable to our Faculties , and an Advancement of our Nature : To speak strictly , when the Faculty and the Object are rightly proportioned , Satisfaction follows of course , and it 's as impossible for us not to be pleased , as it is for fire not to ascend : Farther , if we are not allowed to take any Satisfaction in our condition , we are not bound to give God thanks for it , ; for we are not obliged to be thankful for that which does us no good : But nothing can do us any good , except it be by giving us a pleasure either in hand or in prospect . Fourthly , it is no part of Pride , to be more pleased with having an Advantage ourselves , than by seeing one of the same value possessed by another . 



Philot.   Make this out and you will oblige me . 



Philal.   Very well : I prove my Proposition thus . First , Because that which is in our Possession , or incorporated into our Essence , is always in our Power , and ready to be made use of when we think fit . But that which belongs to another is often at a distance , and out of our reach , and can't be communicated to us , though the owner was never so willing . Secondly , it must be more agreeable to be Master of any perfection ourselves , than to contemplate one of the same nature in another ; because every one is more certain of the kind Inclination he has to himself , than he can be of the Affection of any other Person whatever : That I will be always kind to myself , I am as well assured of , as that I have a being ; but that another will be so , is impossible for me to know : And therefore let a man be never so good natured , it must be somewhat more satisfactory to him , to see himself well furnished in any kind , than his Neighbour . Thirdly , that which is our own and in our Nature , we have the most intimate and vigorous sense of ; for the presence of any desirable Object , we know is more acceptable and entertaining than either the notion or Prospect of it : Possession gives us the Life of the thing , But hopes and Fancy can furnish out no more at the best than a Picture finely drawn . So that , for Example , let a man be of never so generous and disinterested a Spirit , yet it 's natural for him to be better pleased , with being rich himself ( if he has any value for riches ) than in having the bare Idea of an Estate : Besides as I observed , that which is our own , is always at our disposal , and does not depend upon the uncertain Inclination and humour of another . 



Philot.   Very comfortably argued . I find then by your discourse that a Man may without vanity be pleased with his Circumstances , and have good Thoughts of himself too , if he deserves it . Now some People are so unreasonable , that they will neither give Men leave to love , nor understand themselves ; if they are conscious of any commendable Quality , they must be sure to lay it out of the way that they may not see it ; nay if a Man has taken never so much care to make himself insignificant , in order to the promoting of Humility , they will scarce let him know he is good for nothing , for fear he should grow conceited of his Virtue . But I perceive you are not so straight laced , and pedantic in your Notions . Therefore if you can recover us no more Ground , let us know directly what Pride is , and be as fair as you can . 



Philal.   Why Pride in the plainest words which I can think of , is too high an Opinion of our own Excellency . 



Philot.   How shall we know when we overrate ourselves ? 



Philal.   That is a very seasonable question , and absolutely necessary to the state of the Case : Therefore I shall lay down some indisputable Marks of this Vice , that whenever we see the Tokens we may conclude the Plague is in the House . 



Philot.   Let us hear your Diagnosticks . 



Philal.   First , then we may be assured we have this Disease , when we value any Person chiefly because his advantages are of the same nature with those we enjoy , neglecting others who have an equal right to Regard , only because their Privileges are of a different kind from our own . For instance , when Men who derive their considerableness from the Sword , the Gown , or their Ancestors , think none worthy their Esteem but such as claim under their own Pretences ; In this case it 's evident it can be nothing but Partiality and Conceitedness which makes them give the Pre-eminence . 



Secondly , We may certainly conclude ourselves infected with this Vice , when we invade the Rights of our Neighbour , not upon the account of Covetousness , but of Dominion ; only that we may have it in our power to create Dependencies , and to give another that which is already his own . 

Thirdly , When Men don't measure their civil Advantages by the Laws of their Country , but by their own fancies , and the submissions of Flatterers ; this is another infallible sign they are Proud.  

Fourthly , to mention no more , When Men love to make themselves the subject of discourse : To con over their Pedigrees , and obtrude the Blazon of their exploits upon the company ; this is an argument they are overgrown with conceit , and very much smitten with themselves . 

Philot.   Though I think you have hit the symptoms pretty well , yet except they are marked somewhat more distinctly , 't is possible for a Man to have most of them without being ever the wiser . For unless we are able to draw up a just State of the Degrees of merit , we can never take the true height of our Pretensions , and being in this uncertainty its odds if self Love does not make us determine to the prejudice of our Neighbours . Now I would gladly know how we must go to work to be sufficiently informed in this Point . 



Philal.   We must endeavour to get right apprehensions of the several Excellencies of human Nature , and what proportion they hold to each other : In order to the assisting our Judgement in this case I shall lay down these general rules . 



First , Those advantages which spring from ourselves , which are the effects of our power and courage , of our Industry or Understanding , are more valuable than those which are derived , and borrowed , because they are a sign of a Richer and more active nature . 

Secondly , Those Qualities which are most useful aught to have the Preference : for since acknowledgements ought to be suitable to the nature of benefits received , those who have the largest Capacity of obliging , may fairly challenge the Perheminence in our Esteem ; and therefore in the third place the duration of an advantage ought to be considered ; And that which has the firmest Constitution and is most likely to continue , aught to be preferred to others which are brittle and short lived . These rules carefully applied will snew us how far our pretensions to Regard are short of , or exceed other men's , and so prevent an overweening opinion of ourselves . However , we are to observe that outward Respect ought to be given according to the Distinctions of ; Law , and though a Man may happen to be very defective in point of merit , yet we ought to take notice of the value Authority has set upon him . 

Philot.   Give me leave to put in a word , which is to tell you , that though I am not satisfied with your Instances , yet I am glad to find you will allow us different degrees of worth . I was almost afraid you would have set all Mankind upon a Level . 



Philal.   To deliver you from such apprehensions , I freely grant you that the Distinctions of Quality ought to be kept up for the Encouragement of Industry , and the support of Government . I hope now you have the reason of my Concession , you will not be so suspicious for the future . 



Philot.   no , not till you give me a farther occasion ; especially since the inference of your discourse is not unacceptable : from whence it followeth , that when a Man sees plainly that he has the Advantage of his Neighbour , he may let him understand so much without any offence to humility . 



Philal.   no doubt of it , especially when his station is public ; but then the discovery of his superiority ought to be managed with a great deal of Art and good nature , to which we are obliged not only in point of Complaisance but Justice . For though there is often a real difference between one Man and another , yet the party who has the advantgae usually magnifies the inequality beyond all Sense , and Proportion . Men don't consider that the great privileges of human Nature are common to the whole Kind ; such as being equally related to God and Adam , Reason and Immortality , the same number of Senses , and much of the same perfection and continuance . And as for those things which are the peculiar Advantages of a few ; they are either acquired and enjoyed by the strength of those general ones I have mentioned , or else they are foreign and in a great measure Chimerical , and therefore can be no real enrichments of our nature . They are often no more than the Blessings of Chance , of Flattery , and Imagination . And though they may set us upon higher Ground , yet they can add nothing to the true Stature of our Being . But to combat this Vice more successfully , we 'll examine its most plausible Pretences , and see if we can discover the weakness of them . 



Philot.   What pretences are those ? 



Philal.   I mean Learning , Nobility , and Power ; for these you know are accounted the brightest and most distinguishing Advantages . But though they ought all to be considered , yet I believe there is much more Weight laid upon them , than in strict reason they will bear . 



Philot.   You talk as if you were retained by the Mobile , and had a Mind to bring us back to our original State of Ignorance and Peasantry . 



Philal.   I tell you once again you are much mistaken . I have no design to lessen the value of any man's Honour , or Understanding : Let People have as much Sense and Quality as they please , provided they don 't grow troublesome and ridiculous about it . 



Philot.   I somewhat suspect you have a mind to engross this Vice of Pride to yourself . This sort of discourse looks like declaiming against Arbitrary Power , where the sharpest Invectives are commonly made by the most Enterprizing , and unmortifyed Men , who are only angry that they are not possessed of that absoluteness themselves , which they endeavour to render odious in others . 



Philal.   Ha ! you are somewhat smart . However let me tell you , if I have any such project as you imagine , you have me upon a fair Dilemma . For , if my reasons against Pride hold good , they will stand upon record against myself , which I suppose will be no unacceptable revenge for you : if they are insignificant , you will have the diversion of laughing at the folly of the attempt : and which is more considerable , you may keep your good opinion of yourself into the bargain . 



Philot.   Pray begin your attack as you think fit , and for disputes sake I 'll try how far I can maintain the ground against you . 



Philal.   First then , Learning ( to begin there ) and High Conceit agree very well together : for a Man of Letters may have a clearer notion of the stupidness and deformity of this Vice , and being better acquainted with the frame and passions of human Nature , he can't choose but discover how unacceptable it must make him to all Mankind . Besides he is supposed to know that nothing in strict reason deserves a true Commendation , but a right use of the Liberty of our Will , which is in every one's power to manage to advantage . 

Secondly , Learning gives us a fuller conviction of the imperfection of our nature , which one would think might dispose us to Modesty . The more a Man knows the more he discovers his ignorance . He can scarce look upon any part of the Creation , but he finds himself encompassed with doubts and difficulties . There is scarce any thing so trifling or seemingly common , but perplexes his Understanding , if he has but sense enough to look into all the objections which may be raised about it . He knows he has a being 't is true , and so does a Peasant , but what this thing is which he calls himself , is hard to say . He has reason to believe , that he is compounded of two very different Ingredients , Spirit , and Matter ; but how such unallyed and disproportioned substances should hold any Correspondence and act upon each other , no man's Learning yet could ever tell him . Nay how the parts of Matter cohere , is a Question which it 's likely will never be well answered in this life . For though we make use of the fairest Hypotheses , yet if we pursue the Argument home , we shall go nigh to dispute away our Bodies , and reason ourselves all in pieces . Insomuch that if we had nothing but Principles to encourage us , we might justly be afraid of going abroad , lest we should be blown away like a heap of dust : For it 's no solution to say the greater parts of Matter are connected with hooked particles ; for still the difficulty returns how these Hooks were made ? Quis custodiet ipsos Custodes ? What is it that fastens this Soder , and links these first Principles of Bodies into a Chain ? And as the more refined Understandings know little or nothing of themselves , and of the material World ; so upon Enquiry we shall find them as defective in their Skill about Moral Truths : ( excepting those who are taught by Revelation , which supernatural Discoveries the unlearned are capable of understanding , as far as their happiness is concerned . ) Those who made Laws in their respective Countries , we have reason to believe had their minds polished above the vulgar rate : And yet we see how unaccountably the public Constitutions of Nations vary . The Persians and Athenians allowed Incest , the Lacedæmonians Stealing , and some Indians Herodotus mentions , used to bury their best Friends in their Stomaches . In short , the Rules of Decency , of Government , of Justice itself , are so different in one place from what they are in another , so particoloured and contradictious , that one would almost think the Species of men altered , according to their Climates ; and that they had not the same Nature in common . One would almost think that Right and Wrong lay rather in the Fancies of men , than in the reason of things , and was bounded more by Seas and Rivers , than by any unalterable limits of Nature ; that Virtue and Vice were minted by the Civil Magistrate , and like Coins would pass for Currant only in his own Dominions . The Heathen Philosophers may fairly be granted to have as good pretences to Learning , as any other sort of men among them : And yet we may observe from Tully and Laertius what a small Proportion of solid Knowledge they were Masters of ; how strangely did they differ in Matters of the highest Import ? How eagerly did they dispute , and not without probability on both sides : Whether there was any thing certain ? Whether the Criteria of Truth and Falsehood were clear and indubitable or not ? Whether the Government of the World was casual , fatal , or providential ? How many Summum Bonums have they presented us with , some of them only fit to entertain a Brutus , others noble enough for a Spirit of the highest Order ? It were tedious to recount the differences one Sect had with another , their Inconsistences with themselves , and the ridiculous and ill supported Tenets some of the most famous of them have held . Insomuch that Tully takes notice that there was no opinion so absurd , but was held by some Philosopher or other . 't is true they could wrangle and Harangue better than the common People ; they could talk more plausibly about that they did not understand ; but their Learning lay chiefly in Flourish , and Terms , and Cant ; for as for any real Improvements in Science they were not much wiser than the lesle pretending Multitude . Indeed the more modest of them would confess that the chief use of Learning was to give us a fuller discovery of our Ignorance , and to keep us from being peremptory and dogmatical in our determinations . Now one would imagine the more intimate Acquaintance we had with the Imperfections of our Nature , the greater reason we should have to be humble . Is Weakness a proper Foundation to erect our lofty conceits upon ? Indeed he that has not the leisure or capacity to examine how it 's with him , may be fond persuaded to fancy himself somebody , and grow vain upon the kind presumption ; but for a man to be proud who can demonstrate his own poverty , is little lesle than Madness . 



Philot.   If the case stands thus , to make all sure , we had best get an order to burn the Twenty four Letters , and hang up Cadmüs in Effigy ; for — 



Philal.   Pray don't interrupt me , and I will try if I can give you a little Ease . Granting therefore , as we may , that Learning does give some advantage , and that our Understandings are really enriched by it ; yet in regard we have but a few Principles to build upon , the greatest part of our Knowledge must consist in Inferences , which can't be wrought out without great Labour and Attention of mind : And when we are at any distance from self-evident Truths , the mind is not only perplexed with the Consideration of a great many Circumstances , but which is worse , Forgetfulness or Mistake in the least of them , frustrates our whole Design , and rewards us with nothing but Error for our trouble . 

Now he that is so liable to be imposed upon , who rises but by Inches , and enriches himself , by such slow and insensible Degrees ; 't is a Sign that his Stock was either very small , or that he is unskilful in the management of his Business , and therefore he has no reason to be proud of what he has gotten : Besides it 's an humbling consideration to reflect what pains we are obliged to take to muster up our Forces , and to make that little reason we have serviceable . How fast does Obscurity , Flatness and Impertinency flow in upon our Meditations ? 't is a difficult Task to talk to the purpose , and to put life and perspicuity into our Discourses ; those who are most ready and inventive have not their best Thoughts uppermost : no , they must think upon the Stretches , ransack , and turn over their mind , and put their Imagination into a kind of Ferment , if they intent to produce any thing extraordinary : So that considering the Trouble and almost Violence we are put upon , one would think that Sense and Reason was not made for Mankind , and that we strive against our Natures , when we pretend to it . 



Philot.   Well ; What though our Minds were poor , and unfurnished at first , is it any disparagement to us to have more Wit than we were born with ? What though we can't strike out a Science at a Heat , but are forced to polish ourselves by degrees , and to work hard for what we have ? The lesle we were assisted by Nature , the greater commendation it is to our Industry , and our attainments are so much the more our own . And since we have thus fairly distinguished ourselves by Merit , why should we seem unapprehensive of our Performances ? since we have paid so dear for the Improvements of our understanding , and our advantages are gained with so much Difficulty , what harm is it to make our best of them ? Why should we not oblige the negligent to Distance and Regard , and make those who are younger or lesle knowing than ourselves sensible of their Inferiority ? 



Philal.   I agree with you as I have already hinted , that a Man may lawfully maintain his Character and just pretences against Rudeness and Ignorance , especially when the public Good is concerned in his Reputation . But when he acts a private part , and converses with People of Sense and Modesty , he should give them but very gentle remembrances of his Prerogative : his Opinion of his own worth should but just dawn upon them , and at the most give them but an obscure and remote notice , that he expected any singular Acknowledgement : He should take the respect that is paid him rather as a Present than a Debt , and seem thankful for that which is his own : But to be stiff and formally reserved as if the Company did not deserve our Familiarity ; to be haughty and contemptuous , and to make scanty and underproportioned returns of Civility : this is a downright Challenge of Homage , and plainly tells people , they must be very mannerly : 't is in effect to say , Gentlemen , I have more Learning , and have done the public greater Service than you , and therefore I expect to be considered for it : you may possibly say that I have more preferment too , and am paid for my merit in money , but that shall not serve your turn ; for except you show yourselves very dutiful , I shall give you broad Signs of my dissatisfaction , and never let you have the Honour of my converse again . Now such a Man if he went much abroad , would plague mankind more with his Company , than he could oblige them with his writings , though they were never so considerable . Such People seem to own their parts to their ill Temper : Their Industry is malicious , and they have taken pains not so much to oblige the World , as to get an Opportunity of trampling upon their Inferiors . Had they been good-natured , they would have been as dull and insignificant as their Neighbours . But their imperious Carriage is just as reasonable as it would have been for the old Athletae to have drudged hard in Eating and Exercise , that they might employ their Bulk and Activity in beating every one who was weaker , and lesle skilful than themselves . 



Philot.   By your discourse you seem to mistake the matter , and not to weigh things rightly . 't is not Superiority that these Gentlemen of Learning are so solicitous about ; 't is not personal Advantage which they chiefly intent by their Reservedness : They have no doubt a more public and generous Design ; for you may observe they usually bear hardest upon those of their own Order and Profession , which is nothing but a forced and politic stateliness for the promoting of Knowledge in others . The young Fry , whether you know it or not , must be held at a Distance , and kept under the Discipline of Contempt . If you give them any tolerable Quarter , you indulge them in their Idleness , and ruin them to all intents and purposes . For who would be at the trouble of Learning , when he finds his Ignorance is caressed , and that he is easy and acceptable enough in the Company of the best Authors of the Town ? But when you browbeat them and maul them , you make them Men for ever ; for Vexatio dat intellectum ; though they have no natural Metal , yet if they are spurred and kicked they will mend their pace , if they have any feeling . Such rigorous usage will make them study night and day to get out of this ignominious Condition , in hopes that it may come to their own turn to be proud one day . Take my word for it , there is no such way to make a Scholar , as to keep him under while he is young , or unpreferred . 



Philal.   Notwithstanding your Flourish I can't persuade myself that this Dispensation of Pride is so mighty useful as you pretend . I should think such an untoward management of any Accomplishment should rather discourage others from attempting such dangerous circumstances . If Sense and Learning are such unsociable imperious things , a good-natured Man ought to take especial care not to improve too fast . He ought to keep down the growth of his Reason , and kerb his Intellectuals when he finds them ready to outstrip his Neighbours . I assure you , if I was of your opinion , and thought myself near the temptation to so much ill humour , I would never look on a Book again . 



Philot.   Come when you have said all , there is no keeping up the Credit of Learning without that which you call a reserved behaviour . For if those who are eminent this way should condescend to those Familiarities which you seem to desire , the honour of their Profession would suffer much by it ; if they should converse upon the Level , the veneration which their Inferiors have for them would quickly wear off : And if the vulgar observed there was no distinction kept up amongst the Men of Letters ; they would suspect there was nothing extraordinary in any of them . Pray who are supposed to be the best Judges of Learning , those who have it or others ? 



Philal.   no doubt those who have it . 



Philot.   then if they seem to undervalue it themselves , is not this the way to bring it into a general disrepute ? I tell you once again , if the privileges of Merit are not insisted upon all , must go to wrack . If a Man who has digested all the Fathers , and is ready to add himself to the Number , shows any tolerable countenance to one who has scarce rubbed through Ignatius , and let's a pure English Divine to go cheek by jowl with him , the Commonwealth of Learning will grow almost as contemptible as that of the Pigmies , and be only fit to write Romances upon . 



Philal.   I shall not inquire how far this lofty method may advance the Reputation of Learning , but I am pretty sure it 's no great addition to theirs who use it ; for it only makes others more inquisitive into their defects , and more inclinable to expose them . If they take them tardy they endeavour to humble them by way of Reprisal . Those slips and mismanagements are usually ridiculed and aggravated , when such persons are guilty of them , which would be overlooked or excused in others of a more modest and affable Conversation . If they hap to be found inconsistent with themselves : If their vanity of appearing singular puts them upon advancing Paradoxes , and proving them as Paradoxically . If a presumption upon their own strength , and a desire of greater triumph makes them venture too far into the enemy's Quarters , and take up a Post which they can't maintain ; they are usually laughed at for their folly and left to shifted for themselves ; for Pride never has any friends , and all Men are glad of a just occasion to lessen his Reputation who makes such an illnatured use of it . 



Philot.   I conceive you harp a little too much upon one string : do you think the inferior Clergy for whom you are now pleading , are discouraged by none but those of their own Profession ? 



Philal.   no , I grant there is another sort of People who use them with neglect enough : But then they are somewhat more to be excused . They have not such fair opportunities to understand the just pretences of a liberal Education , and a Religious employment . They are apt to fall under unfortunate hands in their minority : The vanity of their Parents , and the Knavery of Flatterers often gives them a wrong notion of themselves , and makes them admire nothing but Wealth hand Greatness , and think no condition deserves regard but that which resembles their own . Besides their neglect looks lesle unaccountably by reason of their Quality , and their Breeding makes their Pride sit more decently upon them . They usually contemn with a better Grace than others : for there is a great deal of Art and Mystery in Pride to manage it handsomely : A man might almost as soon learn a Trade : and if we observe we shall find that those who were not brought up to it , seldom prove their Craftsmaster or practice with any sort of address . To which I may add , that such persons are usually willing to pay for their imperiousness , so that a Man is not made a Fool for nothing . But when this lofty humour is clumsily and inartificially managed , when it 's affected by those of a selfdenying and mortified Profession , and who get their Living by declaiming against it . When it 's taken up by Men of Sense , who may well be expected to see through the folly of this Vice , and who generally have not those pretences of a biased Education to misguide them : especially when they play it upon persons of their own Order who were born and bred to as fair Expectations of Regard as themselves , and are sometimes their Inferiors in nothing so much as in Success ; this is such a singular Practice that I had rather leave it undescribed than be forced to give it its proper Character . 



Philot.   I believe you will be willing to abate , if not to retract your censure when you consider that these Gentlemen of the Gown , whom you think too much depressed , are many of them Curates ; and is it not very reasonable there should be a distance observed between Masters and Servants ? If you confound these two Relations by lavish and indiscreet Familiarities , you destroy the respect , and by degrees the very notion of Superiority . If there is not a due Homage paid in Conversation , those who are in a state of subjection will neither know their Condition nor their Duty : They will be apt to forget they hold by a servile Tenure , and think themselves enfranchised from all manner of Suit and Service . Besides , if the Parson should use his Curate with that freedom which you insinuate , as if there was neither dependence nor obligation between them ; this might be of very ill example to the Parish , and make all other servants challenge the same liberty , and grow pert upon their Masters : And when this Sauciness became universal , as it 's likely it might do in a short time , what lesle Mischief could be expected from it , than an old Scythian Rebellion ? 



Philal.   I confess , I was not aware the being of Government depended so much upon the distinction between Rector and Curate , and that if the modern way of Distance and Subordination was not kept up , we must presently return to Hob's state of Nature . If a Curate be such a dangerous thing , that a little civil Usage to him is ready to make the World fall about our Ears , I wonder why so many of them are suffered . Now without raising the posse Comitatus , if the Pluralists would but do their best to suppress them , their Number might quickly be so retrenched , that they would not be in the least formidable . But you seem to argue all this while upon a wrong Principle , you take it for granted , that Curates are Servants ; now if this proves a mistake , you will own they may be treated with a little more freedom , without any danger to Authority . 



Philot.   Who doubts of their being Servants ? 



Philal.   I do , and for very good reasons . 



Philot.   See how a Man may be mistaken ! I thought the English of Curate had been an Ecclesiastical Hireling . 



Philal.   no such matter , the proper import of the Word signifies one who has the Cure of Souls ; therefore in France all Parochial Priests are called Curates , as they are likewise in our Rubric and Common-prayer . 



Philot.   I find then there lies no Servitude in the Name , so that it must be either the Deputation , or Salary which they receive from the Instituted Priest , which sinks them into this condition . 



Philal.   That there is no Servitude in either of these , I am ready to make good . 1.  Not in the Office ; and here I must crave leave to ask you a few Questions . 



Philot.   Take your own method . 



Philal.   What in your apprehension is a Curate's Employment ? 



Philot.   To serve God in the public Offices of Religion , and to take care of the Parish . 



Philal.   then he is not entertained to serve the Rector . 



Philot.   Go on . 



Philal.   In the next place I desire to know whether Authority is not essential to a Master ? 



Philot.   Who questions it ? 



Philal.   Has the Curate his Authority to Preach , and Administer the Sacraments from the Rector ? 



Philot.   no , from the Bishop . 



Philal.   May not a Master turn away his Servants when he pleases ? 



Philot.   I think so . 



Philal.   But the Rector has no power to remove the Curate after he is Licenced and Fixed by the Bishop . To sum up the Evidence therefore ; if the Curate was not entertained to wait upon the Rector , nor has his Authority from him , nor can be removed from his Employment , I think it is pretty plain he is none of his Servant . 



Philot.   Well , but does not the Parson make choice of him , and pay him ? 



Philal.   Don't a Corporation choose a Mayor ? 



Philot.   What then ? 



Philal.   Pray who 's Servant is he after his Election ? 



Philot.   None but the Kings that I know of : but you have not answered the latter part of my objection about his being paid by the Rector . 



Philal.   If you had not called for my answer , I had waved it for your sake , because I think your objection borders somewhat upon Treason . 



Philot.   How so ? 



Philal.   Why , is it not of kin to Treason to say the Subjects are Masters over the Supreme Authority ? 



Philot.   If Nonsense will not excuse a Man , I think it is . 



Philal.   But your Argument proves the King a Servant to the People . 



Philot.   How ? 



Philal.   Because they pay him Taxes , and that among other reasons , by way of acknowledgement of the benefits of his Government , and that they may show themselves willing , if it was in their power , to requite him for his care of the State.  



Philot.   Pray why so much concerned to prove Curates no Servants ? 



Philal.   Because I am willing to rescue them from that contempt , which they will certainly fall into , as long as they pass under this notion : which considering the number of persons Officiating , this way , must be very prejudicial to Religion . Besides it makes some persons , who are fit to do the Church service , suspend themselves , and show their Priesthood only by their Habit , rather than serve God under such uncreditable circumstances : and for the same reason others are tempted to grow too fond of a Presentation , and choose rather to court it by Flattery , or other indirect practices , than be condemned to the servile condition of a Curate . For let me tell you , it is no ordinary piece of Selfdenial , for a Man of a generous Education , who has been trained up all along to Freedom and good Usage , to be degraded in his Manhood , when the mind is most in love with Liberty , and to enter upon Business with marks of disadvantage , when he stands most in need of Reputation . To my thinking this is a very discouraging and preposterous way of Educating the Clergy . If a Man must go to service , he had better begin with it as they do in Trades , and not be Master at first , and then be forced to turn Apprentice , or Journyman afterwards . Of such ill consequence it is to miscall things , and as Plato observes , that an alteration of the Notes in Music is apt to produce an Innovation in the Laws and Customs of a Country : so by changing the names of Offices for others of lesle Repute , we change the Uses and Designs of them , and make them lesle satisfactory to those engaged , and lesle serviceable to the Public than they would have been , if the Character of their Institution had been kept up . 



Philot.   Granting at present what you say to be true , yet a Curate seems to lie under another disadvantage , which makes him considered with Abatement . 



Philal.   What is that ? 



Philot.   Why , People are apt to fancy that it is the want either of Parts or Conduct , which keeps him without a Patron . 



Philal.   If People think so , I am sorry their Sense and Charity is no greater ; for if they examined things fairly , they would find that the being a Curate is no Argument of a Man's insignificancy , nor any just blemish to his Reputation . For it is often the integrity and generous temper of his mind which hinders him from a better Provision ; it is because he will not flatter the Pride of some , nor keep pace with the Bigotry of others : because he will neither court Greatness nor Faction , nor make himself popular to the disadvantage of his Audience . Because he cannot digest a Simoniacal Contract , nor charge through Perjury with the courage of an Evidence . In short , it is his plain and impartial dealing with the People , his resolution to preserve the Decency of his Character , and the Innocence of his Conscience which bars his promotion : so that if he was mean enough to complain , he might have the satisfaction to apply this Sentence of Tully to himself , Non nos vitia sed virtutes afflixerunt . 



Philot.   What a broad Innuendo is here upon the beneficed Clergy ? 



Philal.   I am glad you have given me an opportunity of explaining myself . My meaning is not that those who are possessed of livings have gained them , by such indirect Courses : God forbid ! I only say , that all Men are not so lucky as to have the offer of fair Conditions , and those who have not , must be Curates if they will be honest ; or else lay by the use of their Priesthood , which I am afraid is not very accountable . 



Philot.   I confess you have brought yourself off well enough : But now I think on 't you must try to maintain the liberty of your Curate a little more convincingly . For some say there lies Prescription and immemorial Custom against it , and then you know he is a Servant by Common Law.  



Philal.   Not at all : For as we are lately told by a great Lawyer , Prescription is good for nothing where there are any Records to the contrary . 



Philot.   What Records can you produce ? 



Philal.   Why , to mention no more , the 18th of the Apostles Canons , and the 80th of the Council of Eliberis , are , I think , considerable Evidence ; the first of which forbids the ordaining of those who had married a Servant , and the other excludes manumized persons , while their Patrons were living , from the Priesthood . 



Philot.   Say you so ? then I fancy those who drew up Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions knew nothing of this piece of Antiquity you mention . 



Philal.   Your Reason ? 



Philot.   Because by those Injunctions a Clergyman could not lawfully marry till he had gone and made his complaint against Celibacy , before two Justices of the Peace , and gained their consent , and the good will of the Master , or Mistress where the Damsel served . 



Philal.   And then I suppose if he could not prevail by his Rhetoric they gave him a Warrant to distrein . 



Philot.   Or possibly if he courted in forma pauperis they assigned him a Wife gratis out of an Hospital . 



Philal.   Upon my word this Order , take it which way you will , has a singular aspect , and looks as if it intended to put the Clergy in mind , that they ought not to aspire above an Abigail . Certainly Discretion and Merit ran very low in the Church at that time , or else , some People were willing to make the Nation believe so . But to return to the Canons , the design of which was to secure the Reputation of the Clergy ; but according to the modern opinion , this provision signifies nothing ; for if a man must go to Service after he is in Orders , had he not as good do it before ? In your sense he often only changes his Lay for an Ecclesiastical Master , which sometimes might be so far from an advantage that it would make the Servitude the more uneasy , by being subjected to one no more than equal to himself . 



Philot.   I grant you in the Primitive Times the advantage of Priesthood was equally shared among all the Order , and none of that Character had any Superiority over another . For then the Revenues of the Church consisted only in the voluntary Offerings of the People , which were all deposited with the Bishop , who assigned every one his respective portion ; so that no Priest had any dependence upon another for his maintenance ; but now the case is otherwise , and a man ought to be subject to him that supports him . 



Philal.   it 's somewhat hard , that the bare alteration of the Church Revenues should make so wide a difference between those who were equal before ; that a man must lose his freedom only for want of a Presentation , and he made a Servant because he does not take Tithes , though he has as much spiritual Authority as if he did . But I perceive you think there is no consideration equivalent to a little money , and that he who receives it must be no longer at his own disposal , though he makes never so valuable a return . Since therefore you insist so much upon maintenance , what if it appears that the Curate maintains the Parson ? 



Philot.   That would be strange indeed . 



Philal.   To what end were the Church Revenues intended ? 



Philot.   To keep up the worship of God.  



Philal.   Which way ? 



Philot.   By settling a competent maintenance upon the Ministers of Religion , that they may be in the better capacity to discharge their Office , and not be obliged to lose their time , and lessen their Character , by engaging in Laborious or Mechanical Employments . 



Philal.   By your arguing there should be something for them to do . 



Philot.   Yes , they are to take care of that Precinct to which their Endowment is annexed . 



Philal.   I hope you don't mean not to come at it . 



Philot.   I mean they are to take care of the performance of the duties of their Office.  



Philal.   then ought not he to have the Revenues who performs these Duties ? 



Philot.   I am not willing to grant that . 



Philal.   Have a care of denying the conclusion ; you grant the Revenues of the Church were designed for the support of the Clergy . 



Philot.   Yes . 



Philal.   Of what Clergy ? Those who live many miles distant from the Premises ? 



Philot.   no , I 'm afraid they were intended for those who live upon the place , otherwise methinks Endowments are a very slender Provision for the benefit of the Parish . 



Philal.   then if the Curate does all the work , ought he not to have the reward for his pains ? In short , either he is qualified to undertake the Parish or not ; if not , with what sincerity can he be employed ? If he is qualified , why is he barred the profit when he only performs the Conditions upon which they were settled , when none but himself answers the design they were intended for ? To speak properly , the Rector seems to live out of the labours of another , he is maintained by the perquisites of the Curates Office ; and therefore is in effect but a kind of Pensioner to him . 



Philot.   I see you are an everlasting Leveller , you won't allow any encouragement to extraordinary Industry and Merit . 



Philal.   You mistake me . I would have the best men have the best livings , but then before we go to doubling of Preferments , possibly it were not amiss to examine whether the number of Benefices exceeds the persons who are capable of them . Let us first examine whether they will hold out one apiece , and when every man has one , than the supernumerary livings may be divided amongst those who are most deserving . 



Philot.   In good time , when it 's likely there there will be none left ! Now do you imagine the Church can be defended against her Adversaries by the strength of a single Parsonage ? But it may be you will say all our Plurality-men are not Writers . 



Philal.   no , nor Readers neither . Besides , we may observe that Heresy and Schism were very successfully combated before Unions , Dispensations , and Consolidations were heard of . If you consult Father Paul's History of the Council of Trent , ( p. 216. ) he will inform you that Nonresidence and Pluralities are things of no very primitive establishment . I confess some of the Lay-managers of our Reformation have not been over-kind to the Church , so that Affairs are not in so good a posture as they might have been : But God be thanked there is still some provision left for the Ornament and Defence of Religion . 



Philot.   What Provision do you mean ? 



Philal.   Why , to speak to your Case , there are Dignities , to which those Gentlemen who are prepared to engage in the Controversy have a good right : And with submission to better Judgements , I think it would not be amiss if all dignified persons held their Preferments by a new Tenure . 



Philot.   What Tenure ? 



Philal.   By Knight's Service ; pursuant to which they should be obliged to draw their Pens in the Cause , when ever their Superiors required them : to appear in the Field upon an Invasion with their Quota , and in short , to maintain any Post that shall be assigned . 



Philot.   What if a man has not a mind to quarrel , must he be turned out of his Dignity for being of a peaceable Disposition ? 



Philal.   Those peaceable men you speak of , are none of the most useful in a time of War , and therefore a smaller Gratification should content them . 



Philot.   What if they are disabled by age ? 



Philal.   then they should be continued for their past Services . 



Philot.   Truly this is a good probable Expedient to keep the Church Militia in Discipline , and might for aught I know , very much improve the noble Science of Controversy . But to return to the old Argument , if you intent to bring me over to your opinion of the Curate , you must clear the business of his Salary a little better , for I am afraid where he has his money he ought to own he has his Master too . 



Philal.   I confess there would be a great deal in what you say , if the Rector had the right of Coinage . If the Money had his Image , and Superscription upon it , the Curate's taking it for currant , would conclude him under his Jurisdiction : but that the bare receiving a sum should sink a Man into a servile state , is past my comprehension . For considering that Money is a thing of such quality , and sovereign sway in the World , one would imagine it should bring Power and Reputation along with it , and rather enlarge than abridge a Man's Liberty by receiving it . And to mention nothing farther , the nature of the Contract between the Rector and Curate , is sufficient to give you satisfaction ; for there , as has been observed , the Curate undertakes no other Employment but the Instruction and Government of the Parish . There is no attendance upon the Parson , no running upon his Errands , nor subjection to his Humour indented for . 



Philot.   Methinks it is a little hard a Curate must not be called a Servant , as well as a Cook , or a Footman , since he has Wages as much as the other . 



Philal.   Possibly not always so much neither ; but waving that , if you had remembered what I urged to you before , this Objection would have been no difficulty . 



Philot.   What was that ? 



Philal.   Why , that the Curate is to wait upon none but God Almighty , that the manage of his Employment is not prescribed by the Rector , but by the Rubric and Constitutions of the Church , and that he is not removable at pleasure . I suppose by this time you apprehend there is a difference between him and a Footman , or a Steward either . 



Philot.   Well! Notwithstanding your subtlety , this notion of Wages sticks in my Stomach still . 



Philal.   I wonder the glitter of a little Money should dazzle your Eyes at that rate , that you cannot see so plain a distinction . You don't seem to understand Commerce , if you think that something of Authority and Dominion is always given in exchange for Mony. Now I am of Diogenes his mind , and believe it possible for one to buy a Master , as well as a Servant . 



Philot.   As how ? 



Philal.   Why , for the purpose , if a person of twenty one puts himself Apprentice to another , you know this is seldom done without charge : now what does a Man do in this case but purchase his subjection , and hire himself a drubbing upon occasion ? To give one instance more . When a Woman of Fortune marries a Man with nothing , does she not give him Meat , Drink , and Wages to govern her ? And to end this dispute , you know Physicians , and Lawyers , and Judges , have Fees or Wages , either given , or assigned them by Law , without being thought Servants to those they are concerned with . Now , what reason is there a Curate should have worse luck with his Money than other People ? 



Philot.   To deal plainly , I suppose it is because he does not get enough of it . If his Fees were as considerable as any of those Gentlemen you speak of , I question not but his Office would be much more reputable . 



Philal.   Well guessed , and therefore what Character do they deserve who confine him to this scandalous Pittance . I believe you can scarcely name any sort of Injustice which has a more malignant influence upon Religion than this oppresion of Curates . 



Philot.   Why so Tragical ? 



Philal.   Because their Poverty exposes them to Contempt , which renders their Instructions insignificant , and which is worse , makes them lesle considerable in themselves , as well as in the opinion of others . 



Philot.   I hope Poverty is no crime . 



Philal.   no , but it 's a scurvy temptation , especially to those who have lived freely , and been bred to better Expectations . For when a man finds his hopes disappointed , himself unsupported , and topped upon by persons of meaner Pretences and Employments ; this is apt to palls his Spirits , and check the courage of his thoughts , so that his Compositions and Fortune will seem to be much of a piece . 



Philot.   I thought straight circumstances had been none of the worst promoters of Learning , according to the old saying , Ingenii largitor Venture . 



Philal.   I grant there is some truth in your observation , and that it is Want which often reconciles men to Labour and Letters ; but this is at their first setting out , when though they have not gained their point , yet they are full of hopes , which pricks them on , and puts them upon their utmost . but after they are once qualified for success , and find their industry discouraged , this makes them sink in the socket , and fret away their strength and Spirits ; so that either out of impotence , or disgust , or despair , they give over the fruitless pursuit , and seldom make any generous attempt ever after . 't is true , there are some hardy souls that won't be beaten off by ill usage , but these are very rarely to be met with . 



Philot.   then you think there would be a strange improvement in the unbeneficed Clergy , if they had a better Salary . 



Philal.   Yes ; I think they would have more Books , and more Learning , and more Credit . They would not be so easily obliged to improper Compliances , nor so liable to several other miscarriages in their Conduct . 



Philot.   By your discourse the slender provision which is made for them , should be very Criminal . 



Philal.   Doubtless so it is . For pray consider . 



Philot.   Pray be as brief as you can . 



Philal.   I say then , for a Clergyman to enrich himself by the labour and necessities of one of his own Order , and make his Figure out of the Church without performing the Services required , is a direct translating the holy Revenues to a Foreign and secular use , and consequently besides other aggravations is no better than sacrilege , which is a very uncanonical Sin , and unless we are very much in the dark will be accounted for afterwards . In short this Practice has been the main ground of the Contempt of the Clergy , making one part of them grow cheap by their Poverty , and the other by their Covetousness . 



Philot.   Pray what allowance would you oblige the Rector to , if you had the Regulation of that Affair ? 



Philal.   To speak within Compass , in my Opinion the Curate ought to have half the profits , let the value of them be never so considerable ; for if the Parson has the other moiety for doing nothing , I think he has no reason to complain . But if the Living be small , than he that supplies it should have two thirds assigned him , because he cannot be decently supported under that proportion . 



Philot.   Well , I am not disposed to examine that matter any farther . But I beseech you what is all this to the business of Pride ? I think your Zeal for the Curates has transported you a little out of your Subject . 



Philal.   no such matter ; for it is generally nothing but Ambition which makes Men Covetous and Mean : besides , if it is a Digression it is a very seasonable one . However I am willing to take my leave of this part of the Argument , therefore if you please we will call a new Cause . 



Philot.   I think it is best to adjourn at present , and when we meet again I will venture the other Brush with you . 



Philal.   Till than Farewell . 



A SECOND CONFERENCE BETWEEN Philotimus and Philalethes . 

Philal.   WELL met ! I am glad the opportunity you mentioned is so quickly returned . 



Philot.   So am I , and therefore if you please without any further Ceremony , let us pursue the Argument we were last upon . 



Philal.   With all my Heart , and since ( as has been showed ) Learning and Conceit , make so odd a Figure ; let us proceed to examine the pretences of Nobility , for I am afraid the Vulgar Notion of it is screwed somewhat too high , and that it has not , Ballast enough to carry all the Sail which is commonly made out . 



Philot.   I must tell you , you are upon a touchy Point , and therefore I hope you will treat so nice a subject as this is with proportionable caution . 



Philal.   I am sensible of what you say , and shall manage my enquiry with all the fairness , and decency , the free discussion of the Question will allow . To begin , you know all Men were equally Noble , or if you will , equally Plebeian at first : now I would gladly understand how they came to be so much distinguished afterwards , for there are different reasons assigned . 



Philot.   I suppose the distinctions you mention , were founded upon extraordinary performances , and wone at the expense of Industry and Merit . For how can you imagine any persons should emerge out of the common Mass of Mankind , unless by the advantages of Capacity , Labour , and Resolution ? Their mounting , argues that Fire was the ruling Element in their Composition ; and that they were of a more vigorous and enterprizing Spirit than their Neighbours . 



Philal.   I am willing to suppose with you , that they made a generous use of these advantages , and employed them for the benefit of Mankind : being as remarkable for their Justice , Fidelity , and good Humour , as for their Conduct and Courage ; and therefore I am not willing to believe the account which some pretend to give concerning the Original of Nobility . 



Philot.   What is that ? 



Philal.   They will tell you that it has been often founded upon Rapine and Injustice . It seems they have observed out of Thucydides , that in ancient times it was counted an Heroic Atcheivement to Plunder lustily , and he was a Man of the best Quality , who was able to steal most dattle . These Nimrods' ( say they ) grew great by the strength of their Limbs and their Vices , engraved their Murders upon their Shields , and Hectored all the little and peaceable People into Peasantry . 



Philot.   This looks so like a Chimerical and ill natured Opinion , that I shall not do it the honour of a Confutation . 



Philal.   I have no exceptions to your Resentment , but to go on , for the more distinct consideration of the Argument , we will divide Nobility into two kinds , Hereditary , or Acquired . The first is transmitted to us from our Ancestors , the other is immediately conferred by the favour of the Prince . 



Philot.   Proceed upon the several parts of your Division . 



Philal.   1.  then , Hereditary Nobility seems no just ground for a high Opinion , because it is borrowed . Those great Actions which we had no share in , cannot properly be any part of our Commendation , especially if we want abilities to imitate them . 't is true , they ought to be taken notice of by others for the encouragement of Virtue , and the ornament of Society . But then he that depends wholly upon the worth of others , ought to consider that he has but the honour of an Image , and is worshipped not for his own sake , but upon the account of what he represents . To be plain , it is a sign a Man is very poor when he has nothing of his own to appear in ; but is forced to patch up his Figure with the Relics of the Dead , and rifle Tombstones and Monuments for Reputation . 



Philot.   Notwithstanding your rallying , I cannot conceive what crime it is to possess the Inheritance of our Forefathers . Now Honour is part of their Estate , which was raised on purpose that we might be the better for it . And since their Children were the occasion of their merit , and pushed them on to generous undertake , ought they not to share in the glory of the Success ? 



Philal.   Yes . But it should be managed with great modesty , because though an honourable Title may be conveyed to Posterity , yet the ennobling Qualities which are the Soul of Greatness , are a sort of incommunicable perfections , and cannot be transferred . Indeed if a Man could bequeath his Virtues by Will , and settle his Sense , and Learning , and Resolution , upon his Children , as certainly as he can his Lands , a brave Ancestor would be a mighty privilege . 



Philot.   I hope those fine Qualities are not so incommunicable as you suppose , for methinks there is a je ne scay quoi , in persons well born : there is a peculiar Nobleness of Temper in them , their Conversation is inimitably graceful , and a Man may distinguish their Quality by the Air of their Faces . 



Philal.   I wish that Spirit of Honour and Bravery you mention , was inseparable to their Quality ; but it is too plain that great Minds , and great Fortunes don't always go together ; however I grant there is some Truth in your observation , but am afraid the distinction does not always spring from the cause you assign . For by the gracefulness of Conversation , I suppose you mean a decent Assurance , and an Address in the Modes , and Gestures of Salutation . Now these are pretty accomplishments I confess , and recommend a Man to Company with some advantage ; but then they are easily gained by Custom and Education , and therefore we need not fetch them ex Traduce . And moreover , these little Formalities are often magnified beyond all Sense and Reason , and some People are so Fantastically fond of them , as if they were the topper perfections of Human Nature ; and that it were in reality a more valuable and gentile quality to Dress well , and come handsomely into a Room , than to take a Town , or to be fit to discharge the Office of a Privy Counsellor . Now with submission to these Ceremonious Gentlemen , I am not of their mind in this matter , but think it much better for a Man's Parts to lie in his Head , than in his Heels . 



Philot.   I think so too , but you have not answered the whole . 



Philal.   True ! Your Air was omitted : now if this was a constant privilege of Birth , which you know it is not , yet in this deceitful Age of ours , there is no Arguing from an Outside . Besides , I doubt this Advantage is sometimes the effect of a slothful and Effeminate Life . When Men will attempt nothing either in the Field , or in their Closets : when they will neither trouble themselves with Thinking , nor endure to be exposed to the Wether : This Niceness , though it renders them insignificant to the great purposes of Life , yet it Polishes their Complexion , and makes their Spirits seem more moving and transparent . Sometime this Sprightliness and Grandeur of Face , is Painted by Flattery : for when Men are once made to believe they are very Considerable , they are presently for trying to write the Inscriptions of their Quality upon their Forehead . Now Conceit when it is Corrected with a mixture of Gravity , is an admirable Wash , and will make one look as Wise , and as Great as you would wish . 



Philot.   This Grandeur of Face , as you call it , may possibly be explained upon kinder Principles ; for I am apt to believe that a quick Sense of Honour , a Consciousness of Worth , an Elevation of Thought , will sometimes break out into a Lustre , and make the great Soul sparkle in a Man's Eyes . 



Philal.   I cannot deny what you say , and therefore the best Construction aught to be made , where the known Character of the person does not disallow it . 



Philot ,  I see you can be fair when you list , therefore I shall venture to go on with you to another Advantage of Nobility , viz. Antiquity . Now to begin in your own way , Don't you think it is a great addition to ones Birth to stand at the bottom of long Parchment Pedigree , and be some yards removed from the first Escocheon ? Is not that Family substantially Built which can stand the shock of Time , and hold out against all varieties of Accidents ? How generous must that Blood be , which has been so long Refining , and run through the Channels of Honour for so many Ages , where it is sometimes as hard to come to the Plebeian Fountain : as to find out the Head of Nilus ? 



Philal.   Not so hard neither , For if you go but one Inch farther than the Gentleman at the Top you spoke of , it is ten to one but you take old Goodman , etc. by the Leathern Breeches . And as for the Antiquity of a Family , though it looks prettily at first sight , yet I fear it will abate upon examination . 



Philot.   Pray try your skill upon it , for I am not of your mind . 



Philal.   then to deal plainly with you , I conceive the Antiquity you talk of , is commonly nothing but ancient Wealth , and therefore the chief commendation of this Privilege consists in the long continued Frugality of the Family , who after they were once possessed of an Estate , had the Discretion to keep it . 



Philot.   Is it nothing then for a Man's Ancestors to have lived in Reputation , and to have had Interest and Command in their Country for so many Generations ? 



Philal.   I suppose the English of all this is no more than that they have lived in good Houses , Eat and Drank better , and born higher Offices than those who have wanted a Fortune . Now Money , and a moderate share of Sense , will furnish any Man with all these Advantages . And as to the holding out against so many Accidents , and Alterations of State , I am afraid it sometimes proceeds from shifting and indifferent Principles , and from a servile compliance with whatever is Uppermost . So that what my Lord Bacon mentions in reference to Notions and Inventions , may be sometimes applicable to Families ; where he tells us , that Time is like a River , in which Metals and solid Substances are sunk , while Chaff and Straws swim upon the Surface . 

Secondly , You are to consider that an ancient Gentility does not necessarily convey to us any advantage either of Body or Mind : and to speak like Philosophers , these are the only two things in which we are capable of any real improvement . I confess , if every Generation grew Wiser , Stronger , Handsomer , or longer Lived than the other : if the Breed of a Man's Family was thus improved , the farther it was continued ; then indeed the quality of an Escocheon would be exactly contrary to that of Clotheses , and the one would always grow better , as the other does worse , by wearing . From whence it would follow , that if the seven Sleepers had been made Gentlemen immediately before they entered their Cave , and had held on their Nap from seventy , to seven hundred years , they had most undeniably slept themselves into a considerable degree of Quality . 



Philot.   You may talk as subtly as you please , but you must not think to baffle established and uncontested Opinions , with a few Logical quirks . 



Philal.   Pray don't grow warm , and I will endeavour to satisfy you , and in order to it , I observe in the third place , That an ancient Gentility , makes a Man Superior only to those of the same Quality , ( viz. an Esquire , to an Esquire , and so in the rest ) and that in nothing but in point of Precedency . The reason , I suppose , why those which are placed in any degree of Honour , precede others who are afterwards raised to the same Height , is for the encouragement of Industry . To make Men forward to exert their earliest Endeavours to deserve well of the State ; for this reason there is a distinction made between Merit , otherwise equal , only upon the account of the Priority of Time.  



Philot.   Is this all you can afford ? 


Philal.   Look you ! We that pretend to be subject to a Constitution , must not Carve out our own Quality , for at this rate a Cobbler may make himself a Lord  



Philot.   And what then ? 


Philal.   Why , then I say , it is Vanity for any Man to have a better Opinion of his Family than the Law allows : my Reason is , because the Law is the measure of Honour , as well as of all other Civil Rights . Besides , I must tell you that it is both reasonable , and the Interest of the State that Merit should be considered , of what date soever it is . A worthy Action ought to be as much rewarded now , as one of the same kind was a thousand years since . The prospect of Honour , to a generous Mind , is the chief incitement to all great Undertake . This consideration Polishes Arts and Sciences , makes Men Industrious in improving their Understandings , and Resolute in exposing their persons , for the Public Service . If therefore we dote upon Antiquity so far , as to undervalue the Merit of the present Age , the Government must necessarily suffer by it : for such a Partiality will slacken the Nerves of Industry , and occasion a negligence both in those who have an ancient Title to Honour , and in those who have not . The first will grow sluggish , because they have a sufficient share of Reputation already ; and therefore need not run any hazards about getting more . The latter will abate in their forwardness to oblige their Country , because they know their Service , though never so great , will be contemned , and for that very Reason which ought to make them the more valued , that is , because their Considerableness came from themselves . Moreover , If the Inheritors of ancient Honour , have not by Personal Additions improved that Stock which was granted to their Ancestors ; there is no reason it should be rated above the same Degree ( Precedency excepted ) which is given now . For to affirm that a Family raised to Nobility by this King , is not as good as one raised by the Conqueror , is a reflection upon his present Majesty : it supposes his Judgement , or his Authority , lesle considerable than that of his Predecessors ; and that the Fountain of Honour is almost dried up , and runs more muddy than in former Ages . 



Philot ,  How plausibly soever you may make your opinion look , I 'm sure it has the disadvantage of being Singular . For you know a plain Gentleman of an ancient Family is accounted a Person of better Quality than a new made Knight , though the reason of his dubbing was never so Meritorious . Honour like China Dishes must lie some Ages under Ground before it comes to any Perfection . And to carry on your own Figure , the greater distance from the spring always makes the Stream the more considerable . 



Philal.   This it is to be wiser than the Laws ! And since you are for Illustrations I reply , that to suppose an ancient Title ( though lesser in degree ) is preferable to a greater of late Creation , is as if one should affirm that an old shilling is better than a new half-crown , though the Alloy and Impression are the same in both . Nay from your Argument a man may conclude that a coarser metal only by being digged and refined in the Days of our Great Grandfathers , ( though perhaps it has contracted some rust by lying ) is more valuable than the same weight in Gold but lately separated from the Oar . And that an ancient Estate is really better than one newly purchased , though the Lands of the latter are richer , and the Surveyed larger than the other . Now if a man should prove so fanciful as to demand a greater Rent for his Farm because it has been in the Possession of his Family for some hundred of years , I believe the want of Tenants would soon convince him of his Error . From whence it 's evident that in taking an Estimate of Nobility we are not so much to consider its Antiquity , as the Merit of the first Grantee , and the distinction the Prince has put upon it ; which like Figures or other marks upon Money , stamp the value , and tell the Subject for how much it is to pass . 



Philot.   Pray by your favour are not Medals , and Coins valued more for their Antiquity than their Metal ? 



Philal.   That Question is to the point ; and therefore I answer , 

First , That Coins , etc. though they are valuable as rarities , yet they signify little in Exchange and common use ; And if a man has any debt to pay , or Commodities to buy , K. Charles his Image , and superscription will do him much more service than Ce'sar's . 

Secondly , The Reason why these things are sometimes so much valued , is not because they are old but useful : They often rectify Chronology , and explain History , and retrieve us several material parts of Learning , which might otherwise have been irrecoverably lost . 

Thirdly , There is a disparity in the case of ancient Coins and Families ; For in the first you have the same numerical piece , in the latter nothing but the Name or Relation , so that the change and succession of persons seems to destroy the notion of Antiquity . To make the Instance parallel we must suppose a Gentleman as old as Methusalem , and then I confess he would be a great Curiosity , and aught to be valued accordingly . 



Philot.   As I remember you were saying , the merit of the first Gentleman of the House ought to be considered . 



Philal.   Yes , I conceive that circumstance very material , and that if upon enquiry it proves unintelligible , or unlucky , it 's no small abatement to the Family . For if he Advanced himself by a voluntary engaging in unjust Quarrels , he has no better pretence to Honour than what a resolute and successful Padder may Challenge . If he owes his Heraldry to a servile Flattery , and a dextrous Application to the vices of Princes , the marks of their Favour are rather infamous than Honourable to his Posterity , because he is ennobled for those qualities , for which he ought to have been punished . 



Philot.   What if the Gentility was purchased , I hope we may make the best of what we have paid for ? 



Philal.   By all means ! But then this is a sign that Worth and distinguishing Qualities were wanting , otherwise the Honour had been conferred Gratis . The same may be said when Arms or Titles are given at the Instance or recommendation of a Favourite , for this is downright begging for Quality , and looks more like an Alms than an Honour . Farther it 's a lessening to a man's Nobility , when the Reason and Grounds of it are unknown , for if his Rise had been derived from worthy and creditable Causes , he would in all likelihood have been as certainly acquainted with them , as with his Arms ; It being both easy and for the Reputation of the Family , that Records of this nature should have been preserved , and therefore the loss of them seems rather to proceed from Design than Neglect . In short , if the first Principles of Honour happen to be thus corpse , or sergeant , it 's not in the power of time to mend them : A Pibble or Bristol stone will not change their natures , and improve into Diamonds , though they are laid up a thousand years together . 



Philot.   Hark you Mr. I doubt your Effects ( if you have any ) have lain but a little while in the Heralds Office.  



Philal.   Probably as long as your Worships : But I take it to be much more a Gentlemanly quality to discover such unsociable mistakes than to abett them . If we are capable of understanding any thing , it must undoubtedly be more creditable to promote good humour and modesty in Conversation , and give men right Apprehensions of themselves ; than to flatter them into groundless Conceits , and make them believe they may be truly Great , and yet good for nothing . To maintain such indefensible and dangerous Principles of Honour , which not only impose upon our Understandings , but emasculate our Spirits , and spoil our Temper , and tend only to the nourishing of Idleness and Pride ; is in my opinion no very Heroical undertaking . 



Philot.   then I find we must come to the Merits of the Cause as you call them , and examine upon what foundation the Family stands . 



Philal.   I think that is the only way to know what we have to trust to , and how far we may insist upon the advantages of Birth . 



Philot.   What are the usual steps to Honour ? 



Philal.   I suppose one of these three , Learning , Commerce or Arms. The pretences of Learning have been examined already ; To which I shall only add , that if a Person whose mind is enlarged , and beautified with all sorts of useful Knowledge , is notwithstanding obliged to Modesty , and Sobriety of thought , then certainly those who claim under him , and are wise only by Proxy , ought not to grow too big upon their Relation to the Muses . To Proceed , Commerce is another Expedient which often distinguishes a man from the vulgar . For Trading raises an Estate , and that procures Honour , so that in this Case Wealth is the main of the merit , and that which is chiefly insisted on by those who inherit it . But here we ought to be very cautious and meek-spirited , till we are assured of the honesty of our Ancestors , for Covetousness and Circumvention make no good Motto for a Coat . And yet your men of Trade are too often assisted in their Fortunes by these Qualities . 



Philot.   I think you are too hard upon them , and believe they may come into their Estates by more accountable methods , viz. by their Industry , by Understanding how to make use of all fair advantages , and by the luck of a good Acquaintance . 



Philal.   I grant there is a great deal of Good Faith , Frankness and Generosity to be found among Tradesmen , and that such Professions are necessary to the convenience and splendour of Life , and being thus useful aught to be esteemed Honourable . But their being used to value small gains is apt ( without care ) to make them contract a narrowness of Spirit , and to stand too much to the point of Interest . 



Philot.   What is that which they call the Mystery of Trade ? 



Philal.   A great part of it consists in the skill of overreaching their Customers , which Science , I fear is not learned merely for Speculation . 



Philot.   Possibly it may be for Caution , that they may not be imposed on by others . 



Philal.   I am willing to think so , however these Arcana Officinae , are counted such Essentials , that except an Apprentice is fully instructed how to Adulterate , and Varnish , and give you the Go-by upon occasion , his Master may be charged with Neglect , and sued for not teaching him his Art , and his Trade . 



Philot.   It seems than he cannot be an Honest Man , except he teaches his Servant to play the Knave . 



Philal.   Granting your Inference , yet you know a Man may understand his Weapon better than his Neighbour , and notwithstanding be of a very peaceable inoffensive Temper . However , when the Rise of the Family is owing to such an Original , a Man has a particular Reason not to flourish too much upon the glitter of his Fortune , for fear there should be too much Alloy in it . For some People are forced to climb in a very mean and servile posture . They must Flatter , Deceive , and Pinch ; use their Neighbours , and themselves too , very unkindly , before they can gain their Point . So that if the Ancestor had not been remarkably Little , his Posterity had never been reputed Great . 



Philot.   But what needs all this Scruple ? Why should I inquire so anxiously how my Ancestors came by their Estate ? Let their Merit be as small as you please , the Revenue will not sink upon this Score . Now , if you considered the Sovereignty of Money , how it commands Honour , and Beauty , and Power , how much of Ornament , and Defence , and Pleasure there is in it ; you would allow us to be a little Uppish upon the Matter : for when a Man has such a Universal Instrument of Delight , and is Master of that , which is Master of every thing else , he ought visibly to Congratulate his Happiness , and pay himself a particular Respect . 



Philal.   If I could purchase a parcel of new Senses , and some pretty undiscovered Curiosities to please them with , I confess I should be more desirous of growing Rich than I am . 



Philot.   What though you cannot buy any new , you may please the old ones better , and make one Sense go as far as two , with Poverty . 



Philal.   I am not altogether of your mind ; besides if my Understanding does not improve proportionably , I am only in the fairer way to be more a Brutus . 



Philot.   Understanding ! Money will buy good Books , and though the Owner should should not know how to use them , yet if has an Estate , he will never want People to make him believe he has Sense , which will be in a manner as well , for Pleasure consists mostly in Fancy . 



Philal.   I don't envy such a one the entertainment of his Imagination , though I believe it is much short of the transports of Lunacy : but withal I think that folly and madness are no proper Judges to pronounce upon the Advancements of human Nature . But to return to the Argument , no person can be Great by being Owner of those things which wise Men have always counted it a piece of greatness to despise . To which I must add , that it is not the possessing , but the right management of any valuable Advantage which makes us Considerable . He that does not employ his Fortune generously , is not to be respected merely because he has it . Indeed if a Man gives me part of his Estate , I am bound to make him an acknowledgement ; but I am not obliged to honour him because he is pleased to keep it to himself . 



Philot.   Well! Since Merchandise is sometimes liable to exceptions , and ancient Wealth has no right to challenge Worship , and Homage . Pray what do you think of Nobility raised by Arms ? I hope here you will grant the Materials are all shining , and solid . And when an Ancestor works out his Fortune by great and hazardous Undertake , by contempt of Danger and Death , and all the instances of an Heroic Gallantry ; is it not highly reasonable his Descendants should share his Honour , as well as his Inheritance ? Nay , they seem obliged , in justice to his Memory , to have some strokes of Greatness and Reserve in their Carriage . They might better be Profuse in their Expenses , than their Familiarities . The wasting his Estate , and razing him out of the Herald's Books , is scarce more injurious to his Name , than the heedless Condescensions of his Family . For by such ill managed Humility , they do as it were Prostitute his Quality , mingle his Ashes with ignoble Dust , and deface the Monuments and Distinctions of his Merit . 



Philal.   I confess a Man ought to be civil to his Generation , but not to that degree as to plague the Living , only in Ceremony to the Dead . And I may say farther , that a Noble Ancestor , does not desire his Posterity should pretend to honour him this way , except his Qualities , as well as his Name descend upon them . A person truly Great , is never fond and unreasonable ; he hate's to see Folly Idolised , though it be in his own Children ; and had rather have his Memory buried in Oblivion , than his Honour should be Usurped by a Degenerate insignificant Offspring . Besides , the reasons you assign why Martial Men ought to be valued by after-ages , seem to be common to other pretences to Nobility . 



Philot.   I am sorry if they appear so , since I designed them chiefly for the advantage of Arms. For in my judgement , the Profession of a Soldier has a particular , and paramount Title to Honor. For can there be a more extraordinary instance of Greatness , than for a Man to be undismayed amid so many horrible Instruments and Images of Death ? To expose his person as freely as if he knew himself immortal , and to fear nothing but Obscurity and Disgrace ? And therefore though there are many other creditable Employments and Accomplishments , yet there is a transcendent , and almost an astonishing Greatness and Gracefulness in Valour . It has something more illustrious and sparkling , more Noble and Majestic than the rest . 



Philal.   Hold ! You are going to describe Alexander or Cesar ; do you think that every Field , or Charge in Gules , can pretend to all these fine things ? This must be examined farther by and by : at present I shall only observe to you , that though I have a great esteem for a Gentleman of the Sword , and don 't in the least intent to lessen the just Character of Military Glory ; yet I conceive there is another Profession , which possibly does not glitter altogether so much upon the Sense , but for all that , if you touch it 't will prove right Sterling . 



Philot.   What Profession do you mean ? 


Philal.   That of Learning ; therefore if you please , I will just glance upon the Advantages of Learning without interposing my judgement by way of comparison . 



Philot.   Do so , for I think you had need say some kind things upon this Argument , to make amends for the freedom you took with it in our former Conference . 



Philal.   Don't mistake me , I am conscious of no Injury , and therefore design nothing by way of Reparation . 



Philot.   Take your Course . 


Philal.   1.  Than not to mention that Learning is an improvement of our Minds , which is the noblest part of us . I say not to mention this , you may please to take notice , that without some share in this accomplishment , War itself cannot be successfully managed . Without the assistance of Letters , a Man can never be qualified for any considerable Post in the Camp. For Courage and Corporal Force , unless joined with Conduct , and reach of Thought ( which are the usual effects of Contemplation ) is no more fit to command than a Tempest ; doing for the most part more harm than good , and destroying itself by its blind and ill directed motion . It is Learning which teaches a General the successes and events of Action in former Ages , which makes him better able to judge of his present preparation . It instructs him how to take advantage of his Enemies , and avoid those miscarriages which have been fatal to others before him . It teaches him how to Fortify and Assault , how to manage the difference of Ground and Wether . It let's him into the knowledge of Human Nature , and shows him how to understand the Tempers of other men , and to govern his own . It discovers by what secret Spring's the Passions are moved , what are the most probable Causes of Hope and Fear , of Resolution and Cowardice ; and how strangely they are mixed , and varied according to the difference of Climates , Governments , Conditions , and Occupations , especially according to the different Age , Temper , Interest , and Experience of those who are in Power . 



Philot.   Yes , no doubt it teaches a Man to take a Soul in pieces , as easily as a Watch ! If ever I heard such Conjuring ! 



Philal.   Pray be not so sharp , the Discourse is not so Romantic as you suppose . 



Philot.   Go on . 


Philal.   Secondly , I observe that the Advantages of Learning are more lasting and extensive than those of Arms. The Courage of a Soldier , does his Country not much service after his death , the benefit of it being usually confined to one Age : whereas by the knowledge of Men and Things , Public Provisions for Society are framed , and the Constitution adjusted to the Temper , and Convenience of the People ; of the happy effects of which , remote Posterity is often sensible . And as the Consequences of Valour , seldom reach beyond the death of him who showed it , so there are few the better for it , except those a Man engages for ; which are commonly none but his Countrymen . But Learning , by inventing and improving Arts and Sciences , scatters its Favours in a much larger compass ; becomes a universal Benefactor , and obliges mankind in its most comprehensive Latitude of Place and Time.  



Philot.   I hope you will grant that Learning must fly to the Protection of the Sword to secure its quiet , and all the profits accrueing from thence . For in earnest , Notions , and Syllogisms , are very defenceless things against Violence . If we had nothing but Philosophy , Statutes and Reports , to secure the Peace ; our Meum and Tuum were but in an ill condition . 



Philal.   I agree with you , and shall just add in the third place , That the successes of Learning are naturally of a very innocent Tendency , and under good management prejudicial to none . The Conquests of Arts are not like those of Arms , gained by slaughter , and attended with ruin and desolation . no , Here is nothing routed but Ignorance and Error , nothing destroyed but obstinate Humour , and savage Disposition : Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros . 

But a Martial Man , except he has been sweetened , and polished by a Lettered Education , is apt to have a tincture of sourness , and incomplyance in his Behaviour . And therefore if you observe your old Heroes in Homer , ( for want of being Book-learned ) were none of the Gentilest Men. What a rugged tempestuous , unconversable Mortal was Achilles ; I could never fancy that same 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 



Philot.   Well! I perceive it is requisite for a Man to get some Sense to his Courage if he can : but have we not lost all our Pride , and gone somewhat off from the Point ? 



Philal.   no , We have only fetched a Compass , and thrown our reasoning more into a Circle to invest the Place ; and now we will come on directly , and make a little Assault , only to try the strength of the Garrison . 



Philot.   Very Soldierlike ! In plain English I doubt you are attempting to show that it is not so much the Profession of Arms , as the unexceptionable management of that Profession which makes a Family honourable . 



Philal.   Yes . Therefore before we fall too much in love with the Buff in the Wardrobe ; we should examine whether the War was just , whether our Ancestor fought in defence of his Prince and Country , or let himself out to any person who would hire him to murder . We should consider whether the Enterprise was Great and Dangerous ; whether the Advantages were gained by open Bravery and Resolution , or were no more than the effects of Chance , of Treachery , or Surprise . And though a Man can give a creditable Answer to all these Questions , he should then remember there are a great many persons who have ventured as far as himself , and yet continue in their first Obscurity : so that had it not been his good Fortune to have fallen under the Notice of his General , his Merit had been unrewarded . There are many persons who perform signal service in a Breach , or Scalado , and yet their Courage is often unregarded , and lost in the Crowd , and Tumult of the Action , so that they get nothing but Blows for their Pains . To wind up this part of the Discourse : let the Rise of the Family be never so considerable ( I mean none but Subjects ) it ought not to supersede the Industry , or stop the Progress of those who are thence Descended . For if we rely wholly upon the Merit of others , and are Great only by imputation , we shall be esteemed by none but the injudicious part of the World. To speak out , if neither the advantages of Fortune and Education ( which often concur in these Cases ) the expectation of others , nor the Memory of worthy Ancestors , if none of these Motives can prevail with a Man to furnish himself with Supravulgar and Noble Qualities , this is an argument that he is either under a natural incapacity , or else has abandoned himself to Sloth , and Luxury . And without dispute he is most emphatically mean , who is so under the greatest advantages and arguments to the contrary . So that the Lustre of his Family serves only to set off his own Degeneracy , it does Facem proeferre pudendis and makes him the more remarkably Contemptible . 



Philot.   You are smart upon the empty Sparks ! And I perceive by your discourse that if we intent to set up strong , we must do something for ourselves . 



Philal.   Yes : And therefore I presume that Women have more reason to insist upon their Birth than Men : because they have not so fair a trial to discover their worth . They are by custom made incapable of those employments by which Honour is usually gained . They are shut out from the Pulpit and Barr , from Embassies , and State Negotiations , so that notwithstanding ( as I believe it often happens ) their Inclinations are generous , and their Abilities great , to serve the public ; yet they have not an opportunity of showing it . 



Philot.   Truly I think you need not have been so liberal to the Beau-sex ; you know they have enough to be proud of besides Heraldry . 



Philal.   What do you mean ? 


Philot.   Their Beauty Man  


Philal.   Right , I believe that may disturb them sometimes ; but they have no great reason for it . For Beauty though it 's a pretty varnish , yet it 's of a frail Constitution , liable to abundance of Accidents , and but a short lived Blessing at the best . And waving this Consideration , it seems to be made chiefly for the entertainment of the lookers on . Those who are so much admired by others , can't share the pleasure of the Company without the help of a Glass ; for the Eyes which show us other Objects cannot see themselves . Nature seems to have laid the most graceful parts of our Fabric out of our way ; to prevent our vanity . For could some People always command a sight of their Faces , they would Narcissus like be perpetually poring upon their Handsomeness , and so be neither fit for Business , nor Company . 



Philot.   To my thinking you have not cleared the Point ; For why may we not insist upon the privileges of Nature ? Why should a fine Woman be so prodigal of her Beauty , make strip and waste of her Complexion , and squander away her Face for nothing ? There is no reason persons of a lesle agreeable aspect ( except they have some other advantage ) should converse with beauty upon a Level . For those who cannot furnish out an equal proportion towards the pleasure of Conversation , aught to pay for their insufficiency in Acknowledgements . Beauty without doubt was designed for some advantage , and if so , certainly the Owners have the best right to it . 



Philal.   I grant it ; and therefore it 's allowable for them to set a value upon their persons , for the better disposal of them . And farther if they have a mind to it , they may please themselves , because they are acceptable to others , which is a generous satisfaction : But when they grow humoursom they spoil all ; For Pride not only raises a prejudice against their Beauty , but really lessens it . For if you observe , it paints an illnatured Air upon their Face ; and fills them with spleen and peevishness and passion , which exhausts their Spirits , and makes their blood lesle florid , so that their Beauty is neither so agreeable nor lasting as otherwise it would be . And if the present inconvenience will not cure them , they will do well to remember that they must of necessity grow humble when they are old ; unless they are so fanciful as to dote upon Rubbish and Ruins . 



Philot.   Pray let us take leave of the Ladies , and proceed to the other branch of your Division , viz. to acquired Nobility . And here methinks every thing looks unexceptionable and fine upon your own Principles . For here we are beholden to none but ourselves ; we are not thrown up the Hill by another's Arms , and made considerable by Diversion , or Chancemedly ; but climb the ascent by plain Strength , and indesatigable Activity . Is it not a singular commendation to have our circumstances not only large and Honourable , but Independent ; and almost to create the privileges we enjoy ? Here is no gild of a corpse substance , no borrowed Glory , no faint Reflection from an Ancestor , but the Man is all bright and luminous to the Centre , and shines and sparkles in his own worth . He is not Great by Genealogy and ancient Title , by the Favour of Fortune and the Labours of those he never helped , but by Nature and Performances , by having Greatness incorporated in himself . Now may not a Person who has thus distinguished himself by his Merit , make use of the Honour which has been so justly conferred upon him , and put the Lazy and lesle significant in mind of their Defects ? 



Philal.   If you recollect yourself you will find that this point concerning Acquired Nobility has been occasionally discoursed already : Therefore I shall only add that upon supposition a Man has obliged the Public , and is remarkable for great Abilities and a generous Use of them ; he would do well to remember that there are others who have ventured as far , and performed as considerably as himself , whose Services all miscarried as to any private Advantage , because they were not so lucky as to act under the Notice of those who were able to reward : And that many persons well furnished for Employment and Honour , go out of the World as obscurely as they came in ; only for want of a proper opportunity to bring them into Light , and public View . 



Philot.   What though some People are unlucky , ought their misfortunes to be pleaded to the prejudice of Desert in others ? 



Philal.   No. But when a man has received so valuable a consideration for his Service as Honour and Estate , he ought to acquiesce , and not press too arbitrarily for Submission . He should not set a tax upon his Conversation , and put the Company under Contribution for Respect . Besides a Gentleman of the first Head has a particular reason to manage his Advancement obligingly : For by treating the little People roughly , he does in effect but expose his Ancestors and reproach his own former Condition . 



Philot.   You have so many fetches with you ! But what do you think of Magistrates ? In my opinion those who represent their Prince , and are the Ministers of Justice , cannot practise that Humility and Condescension you seem to admire , with any manner of Decency , or Security to the public . For if they don't oblige their Inferiors to Distance , their Reputation will sink , and the Majesty of the Government will be lessened , and then it 's easy to guests what the consequence must be . 



Philal.   I agree with you : Magistrates ought to assert their Office , and not make themselves cheap by improper Familiarities . But their Character may be over-strained . To prevent which inconvenience they may please to remember that their power was given them upon a public account , more for the benefit of others than themselves . They are deputed by their Prince , for the countenancing of Virtue , for the ease and Protection of the People , and therefore they should discourage none who are regular and fair , they should show their Authority upon nothing but Insolence and Injustice , Thiefs and Malefactors ; upon those who affronted the Government , or break the Peace . There is no necessity they should bring the Air of the Bench into common Conversation , and wear their Commissions always upon their Faces . To manage their Power thus singularly looks like a little private Design of setting up for themselves ; as if they procured their Authority to fright the King's Liege Subjects , and to over-awe the Neighbourhood into a greater Reverence . 



Philot.   But if they should happen to take too much upon them , are the People to slight them upon this account ? 



Philal.   By no means : the Authority ought to be considered let the Men be what they william However in general I observe that the best way to secure Observance , is not to insist too violently upon it . For Pride is a most unfortunate Vice , other Immoralities usually gain their Point , though they lose more another way ; but a Proud man is so far from making himself Great by his haughty and contemptuous Port , that he is usually punished with Neglect for it : and that Disdain with which he treats others , is returned more justly upon himself : which may be done without much difficulty , in regard Honour is not become a property so far as to have all its Appurtenances bounded and fixed by Law. The Circumstantials and oftentimes the most pompous part of Ceremony , are arbitrary and undetermined . For we are not told either by Statute , or Common Law how many Bows a Superior of such a degree may expect from us , nor how low we are to make them , nor how often the terms of Respect are to be used in our Application . 



Philot.   What do you mean ? 



Philal.   I mean that it is not settled by Act of Parliament , how many Sirs and Madams , a Discourse of such a length is to be sprinkled with ; and therefore a cross-grained Fellow , will tell you he has his Betters upon their Good Behaviour : if he likes their humour , he will be as liberal to them in acknowledgements as they please ; if not , he shall take the freedom to hold his hand , and let them help themselves how they can . 



Philot.   Well! I cannot reconcile this selfdenying Humour you are contending for to the Character of a Gentleman . Such an untoward management of Fortune and Honour as this is , argues either that a Man wants Sense to understand his Condition , or Spirit to maintain it . To throw away the Prerogatives of our Birth , or the rewards of our Industry , at such a careless Cynical rate , is a sign of a Rustic inapprehensive meanness , and that we have not the least inclination to Greatness in us . For those who desire to be Great , will endeavour to excel , and those who excel will be sure to show it ; for the Essence of Greatness lies in Comparison . A tall Man loses the advantage of his Stature , unless he stands straight , and overlooks his Neighbour . 



Philal.   Methinks you are somewhat out in your notion of Greatness . 



Philot.   Let us hear if you can hit it better . 



Philal.   To speak freely , I conceive it a much more substantial and better natured thing than you have made it . Greatness certainly does not consist in Pageantry and Show , in Pomp and Retinue ; and though a person of Quality will make use of these things to avoid Singularity , and to put the Vulgar in mind of their obedience to Authority , yet he does not think himself really the bigger for them : for he knows that those who have neither Honesty nor Understanding , have oftentimes all this fine Furniture about them . Farther , To be Great , is not to be starched , and formal , and supercilious , to swagger at our Footmen , and browbeat our Inferiors . Such a Behaviour looks as if a Man was conscious of his own insignificancy , and that he had nothing but Outside , and Noise , and ill Humour , to make himself Considerable with . But he that is truly Noble , has far different Sentiments , and turns his Figure quite another way . He hate's to abridge the Liberties , to depress the Spirits , or any ways to impair the satisfaction of his Neighbour . His Greatness is easy , obliging , and agreeable , so that none have any just cause to wish it lesle . And though he has a general kindness for all Men , though he despises not the meanest Mortal , but desires to stand fair in the Opinion of the World , yet he never court's any Man's Favour at the Expense of Justice , nor strikes in with a Popular Mistake . no , He is sensible it is the part of true Magnanimity to adhere unalterably to a wise Choice : not to be overrun by Noise and Numbers , but to appear in defence of injured Right , of neglected Truth , notwithstanding all the Censure and Disadvantage they may sometimes lie under . To conclude his Character , A Great Man is affable in his Converse , generous in his Temper , and immoveable in what he has maturely resolved upon . And as Prosperity does not make him haughty and imperious , so neither does Adversity sink him into meanness and dejection : for if ever he shows more spirit than ordinary , it is when he is ill used , and the World frowns upon him . In short , he is equally removed from the extremes of Servility and Pride ; and scorns either to trample upon a Worm , or sneak to an Emperor . 



Philot.   In earnest , you have described a Person of Honour : And I am so far pleased with the Character , that I would give all I am Master of to make it my own . But can we receive no other Advantages from Nobility , but what have been hinted already ? 



Philal.   All that I can think of at present , are these following . 

First , It gives a fair occasion to excite the generosity of our Minds , and disposes us to the imitation of great Examples , that so we may not seem unworthy our Predecessors . Indeed , a Man is bound in justice not to impair the Reputation , not spoil the Breed of the Family : but to hand down the Line to his Posterity , at least with the same good Conditions he received it . 

Secondly , These Privileges of Birth may serve to check an insolent Humour in others , who behave themselves contemptuously towards us upon lesser , or but equal pretences . 

Thirdly , A Man may make some Advantage this way , when he falls undeservedly under Public Disgrace , or is unrighteously Oppressed . For in such a Case , the mention of his Ancestors seems free from all suspicion of Vanity , and may fairly be interpreted to proceed either from self-defence , or greatness of Spirit . 

Fourthly , The same may be done when any Office or Promotion , may Legally be claimed by virtue of an honourable Condition . For example , If a Man should put in to be one of the Knights of Malta , he might modestly enough publish his Pedigree , and prove his six Descents , against a lesle qualified Competitor . 



Philot.   If you are at a stop , I think I can carry your concessions somewhat farther . For , as I remember , it has been granted already , that the common People may pay a Respect to Quality , though you mortify the Pleasure a little severely in those who receive it . 



Philal.   May pay a Respect , call you it ? I say they must . For not to mention that Gentlemen have generally a greater share of Fortune and Sense too , than those of vulgar Condition ; not to mention this I say , if they had nothing to pled but their Quality , they ought to be regarded upon that Score , because the State sets a value upon it , and that for public and considerable Reasons . 



Philot.   I perceive if a Man will but stay and hear you out , you are civil enough at the last . Pray what are we to do next ? 



Philal.   Why , now I could run a Discourse with you upon the inconveniences of Pride : and snew you in particular , what an unconquerable Aversion it gives all Mankind against us , when we are overgrown with it . How it multiplies , and conceals our Defects from us , and makes us do a thousand silly things , without taking notice of them . How it makes us a Prey to Flatterers , and puts us to great Expenses only to be laughed at . I might debate with you , how it spoils Conversation , and takes away the pleasure of Society . How often Families , Kingdoms , and Churches are embroiled , and the World turned topsiturvy by this Vice. These and many other ill consequences of Pride might be enlarged upon ; but this part of the Argument is , I conceive , more proper for Divines , and therefore I shall pursue it no farther . 



Philot.   Well moved ! For now I think it is almost time to give over . 



Philal.   I won't tyre you . 



Your humble Servant . 

THE CONTENTS . 

Some mistakes concerning Conversation removed Page 3 
The Grounds of Pride enquired into , and shown to be founded in Self-love , and why p. 5 
The due bounds of Self-love briefly examined p. 6 , 7 
Pride described , 1.  By way of Negation p. 8 
2.  The Positive marks of it are laid down p. 13 
The principal pretences to this Vice , viz. Learning , Nobility , Wealth , Power , and Beauty p. 17 
The pretences of Learning considered p. 18 
The Office of Curates generally misunderstood ; the mistakes about it rectified pawn 31 
The depressing their Character , and streitning them in point of Maintenance , of ill Consequence to Religion p. 35 
The case of Nobility considered p. 51 
Nobility divided into Hereditary or Acquired pawn 53 
The Privileges of Antiquity examined p. 57 
Families generally raised either by Commerce , Arms , or Learning p. 66 
The pretences of Commerce enquired into , where likewise those of Wealth , are occasionally handled p. 66 , 69 
The Merit of Arms debated pawn 70 
The Advantages of Learning , and Arms compared pawn 73 
The Plea of Beauty argued , and that of Acquired Nobility p. 79 
The difference between Pride and Magnanimity p. 86 
The just Advantages of Nobility p. 88 
Some of the unhappy Consequences of Pride hinted . p. 89 
THE END . 

