The parliaments thanks to the city : for their kind compliance with them in all their treasons from time to time committed against his majesty's honour , crown and dignity . 

Dedicated . to the loyal and treacherous citizens ; the valiant and cowardly citizens ; the wise and foolish citizens ; the wealthy and poor citizens ; the square and round-headed citizens ; the honoured , and the horned citizens . 

by mercurius melancholicus : You loyal citizens , 
I call you as you were , 
In times of old till now , 
For many a hundred year . 
What is the reason now 
You are disloyal grown , 
And have forsaken quite 
The royal English crown ? 
You treacherous citizens , 
I call you , as you are , 
How comes it so to pass 
That you with Indas' share ? 
Blot out your dagger now 
Your arms their chiefest grace ; 
Jack Straw in stead shall put 
His thatching-knife in place . 
You valiant citizens , 
I call you , as you were , 
Time out of mind , until 
This present conquering year : 
It pities me to see 
How heartless you are grown , 
That dare not budge nor stir 
For to preserve your own . 
You cowardly citizens , 
I call you a• you are , 
Our miseries they increase , 
Be sure you shall have share : 
How beardless boys do tread , 
( The world will laugh to see ) 
Your honour in the dust , 
With shame and obloquy . 
You wise grave citizens , 
I call you as you were , 
Whilst you yourselves maintained 
Your privileges clear : 
My heart doth burst to see 
Your King , your laws , your rights , 
Abused , infringed , o'erthrown 
All by your oversights . 
You foolish citizens , 
I call you , as you are , 
Of goods , of rights , of lives , 
You shall be stripped bare ; 
Where are your eyes become ? 
You cannot see at all 
How near you are unto 
A lamentable fall . 
You wealthy citizens , 
I call you as you were , 
Whilst in protection you 
Were of your sovereign dear : 
But now the case is altered 
The clean contrary way , 
Your riches are become 
The plundering soldiers prey . 
You poor base citizens , 
I call you as you are , 
In what a case are you ? 
How mean , how vile , how bare ? 
What you yourselves have got , 
Nor you , nor yours enjoy . 
Dam-me it 's mine will swear 
Some upstart soldier's boy . 
The second part.  

To the same tune . 

Square-headed Citizen• , 
I call you as you were , 
Whilst you the helm of justice 
Most equally did steer , 
But now your giddy heads 
Have turned you all so round , 
Of law , or of r•lig•on 
We can have nothing found . 
Round-headed citizens , 
I call you as you are , 
For by your orbed forms , 
You put all out of square : 
The kingdom quite undone , 
Yourselves shall not escape , 
Expect no further bliss , 
But murder , theft and rape . 
You honoured citizens . 
I call you as you were , 
Whilst you reserved a strength , 
To keep yourselves from fear ; 
But all your holds are lost , 
By your grave wisdom's pates , 
If you your houses keep , 
it 's more than is your fates . 
You horned citizens , 
I call you as you are , 
What cockolds could endure 
corrivals thus to share ? 
Content i do confess , 
It is a wittols part , 
Let nothing i have said , 
Pray strike you to the heart . 
Farewell kind citizens , 
All things but horns are dear , 
And no one May we thank 
But you , for this same gear . 
A challenge from Kent , and the counties of Surrey , Sussex , Essex and Hertford-shire ; to the city of London , for her treachery ready to be undone . 

Tame , cowardly , kuckoldly citizens ; that for your treachery and disloyalty are grown shameless before men ; perjured before God , traitors to your King ; robbers and murderers to your country ; a reproach to your religion , a dishonour to your nation , and a hissing to the whole world ; the chief protectors , upholders , and abbetors of traitors , murderers , thieves , and schismatics ; and a paymaster unto them that are over head and ears in blood , tyranny rapine and oppression ; that have made London ( Once the phoenix of the world , that burned in loyal flames to sovereignty , till it renewed its honour with its age , and its prosperity with its peace ; a city at unity with itself , that feared God , honoured the King , were obediently governed by his laws , and became rich and happy in all blessings whatsoever ; ) till you with the superfluity of your moneybagges have waged traitors in rebellion against your lawful King , to the undoing of all the kingdom ; turned your city ( Once the paragon of Beaut• , ) into the pa•tern of deformity ; your phoenix into an owl , to be whooted at by all nations , and made the crown and pride of England , ( By your treachery ) to be the scarecrow , and scorn of the world . 

We the long abused persons of England , that now justly take up arms to redeem our King , religion , laws and liberties of the subject from the tyranny and arbytrary cruelties of a factious and overawing prvalent party ; Will and require you the citizens of London ( As you will recover your cracked credits ) to do the like with all convenient speed ; else we shall do our utmost to stop all provisions from coming to your city ; and use the uttermost of our endeavours to reduce both you and your city to the obedience of his majesty , and all criminaries whatsoever to the trial of the known laws of the land . 

God save the King . 

Finis . 

Printed in the year , 
When the city stinks for fear . 
1648.  








