POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS By the Right Honourable , THE E Of R — 

Printed at ANTWERPEN . 

An Epistolary Essay from M. G. to O. B. upon their Mutual Poems . 

Dear Friend , 

I Hear this Town does so abound 
With saucy Censurcrs , that faults are found 
Which what of late we ( in Poetic rage ) 
Bestowing , threw away on the dull Age ; 
But ( howsoe'er Envy , their spleens may raise , 
To Rob my Brows of the deserved Bays ) 
Their thanks at least I merit , since through me , 
They are partakers of your Poetry : 
And this is all I 'll say in my defence , 
TO obtain one Line of your well-worded sense , 
I 'd be content to have written the British Prince . 
I 'm none of those who think themselves inspired ; 
Nor write with the vain hope to be admired ; 
But from a Rule I have ( upon long trial ) 
TO avoid with care all sort of self denial . 
Which way soe'er desire , and fancy lead , 
( Contemning Fame ) that Path I boldly tread ; 
And if exposing what I take for wit , 
To my dear self a pleasure I beget , 
no matter though the cens'ring Critics fret . 
These whom my Muse displeases , are at strife , 
With equal spleen against my course of life , 
The least delight of which , I 'll not forgo , 
For all the flattering praise , Man can bestow . 
If I designed to please , the way were then , 
To mend my Manners , rather than my Pen : 
The first 's unnatural , therefore unfit , 
And for the second , I despair of it , 
Since Grace is not so hard to get as Wit. 
Perhaps ill Verses , aught to be confined 
In mere good breeding like unsav'ry Wind : 
Were reading forced , I should be apt to think , 
Men might no more write scurvily than stink : 
But 't is your choice , whether you 'll read , or no , 
If likewise of your smelling it were so . 
I 'd Fart just as I write for my own ease , 
Nor should you be concerned unless you please , 
I 'll own , that you write better than I do , 
But I have as much need to write as you . 
What though the Excrements of my dull Brain , 
Flows in a harsh insipid strain ; 
Whilst your rich head , eases itself of Witgood 
Must none but Civit Cats have leave to shit ? 
In all I write , should Sense , and Wit , and Rhyme , 
Fail me at once , yet something so sublime , 
Shall stamp my Poem , that the World may see , 
It could have been produced by none but me ; 
And that 's my end , for Man can wish no more , 
Than so to write , as none ever written before . 
Yet why am I no Poet of the times ? 
I have Allusions , Similes , and Rhymes , 
And Wit , or else 't is hard that I alone , 
Of the whole Race of Mankind should have none . 
Unequally the partial hand of Heaven , 
Has all but this one only blessing given . 
The World appears like a great Family , 
Whose Lord oppressed with Pride and Poverty . 
( That to a few great bounty he may show ) 
Is fain to starve the num'rous Train below . 
Just so seems Providence , as poor , and vain , 
Keeping more Creatures than it can maintain . 
Here 't is profuse , and there it mainly saves , 
And for one Prince , it makes ten thousand Slaves . 
In Wit , aloneed has been Magnificent , 
Of which so just a share to each is sent , 
That the most Avaricious are content . 
For none ever thought ( the due divisions such ) 
His own too little , or his Friends too much . 
Yet most Men show , or find great want of Wit 
Writing themselves , or judging what is written . 
But I , who am of sprightly vigour full , 
Look on Mankind , as envious and dull , 
Born to myself , myself I like alone , 
And must conclude my judgement good , or none . 
For could my sense be naught , how should I know , 
Whether another man 's were good or no ? 
Thus I resolve of my own Poetry , 
That 't is the best , and there 's a Fame for me . 
If then I 'm happy , what does it advance , 
whither to merit due , or Arrogance ? 
Oh! but the World will take offence hereby , 
Why then the World shall suffer for 't , not I 
Did ever the saucy World , and I agree 
To let it have its beastly will on me ? 
Why should my prostituted sense be drawn , 
To every Rule their musty Customs spawn ? 
But Men , will censure you , 't is two to one , 
When ever they censure , they 'll be in the wrong . 
there 's not a thing on Earth , that I can name , 
So foolish , and so false , as common Fame . 
It calls the Courtier Knave , the plain Man rude , 
Haughty the grave , and the delightful lewd . 
Impertinent the brisk , Moross the sad , 
Mean the familiar , the reserved one mad . 
Poor helpless Woman , is not favoured more , 
she 's a sly Hypocrite , or public Whore. 
then who the Devil , would give this — to be free 
From th' innocent reproach of infamy . 
These things considered , make me ( in despite 
Of idle Rumour ) keep at home and write . 
SATYR . 

Were I ( who to my cost already am 
One of those strange prodigious Creatures Man ) 
A Spirit free , to choose for my own share , 
What case of Flesh , and Blood , I pleased to wear , 
I 'd be a Dog , a Monkey , or a Bear. 
Or any thing but that vain Animal , 
Who is so proud of being rational . 
The senses are too gross , and he 'll contrive 
A sixth , to contradict the other Five ; 
And before certain instinct , will prefer 
Reason , which fifty times for one does err . 
Reason , an Ignis fatuus , in the Mind , 
Which leaving light of Nature , sense behind ; 
Pathless and dan'grous wand'ring ways it takes , 
Through errors , Fenny-boggs , and Thorny Brakes ; 
Whilst the misguided follower , climbs with pain , 
Mountains of whimsies , heaped in his own Brain : 
Stumbling from thought to thought , falls headlong down , 
Into doubts boundless Sea , where like to drown . 
Books bear him up a while , and makes him try , 
To swim with Bladders of Philosophy ; 
In hopes still t'oretake th'escaping light , 
The Vapour dances in his dazzling sight , 
Till spent , it leaves him to eternal Night . 
then Old Age , and experience , hand in hand , 
Led him to death , and make him understand , 
After a search so painful , and so long , 
That all his Life he has been in the wrong ; 
Huddled in dirt , the reas'ning Engine lies , 
Who was so proud , so witty , and so wise , 
Pride drew him in , as Cheats , their Bubbles , catch , 
And makes him venture , to be made a Wretch . 
His wisdom did his happiness destroy , 
Aiming to know what World he should enjoy ; 
And Wit , was his vain frivolous pretence , 
Of pleasing others , at his own expense . 
For Wits are treated just like common Whores , 
First they 're enjoyed , and then kicked out of Doors , 
The pleasure past , a threatening boubt remains , 
That frights th'enjoyer , with succeeding pains : 
Women and Men of Wit , are dangerous Tools , 
And ever fatal to admiring Fools . 
Pleasure allures , and when the Fops escape , 
't is not that they 're beloved , but fortunate , 
And therefore what thy fear , at least they hate . 
But now methinks some formal Band , and Beard , 
Takes me to task , come on Sir , I 'm prepared . 
then by your favour , any thing that 's written 
Against this gibeing jingling knack called Wit , 
Likes me abundantly , but you take care , 
Upon this point , not to be too severe . 
Perhaps my Muse , were fitter for this part , 
For I profess , I can by very smart 
On Wit , which I abhor with all my heart : 
I long to lash it in some sharp Essay , 
But your grand indiscretion bids me stay , 
And turns my Tide of Ink another way . 
What rage ferments in your degen'rate mind , 
To make you rail at Reason , and Mankind ? 
Bless glorious Man ! to whom alone kind Heaven , 
An everlasting Soul has freely given ; 
Whom his great Maker took such care to make , 
That from himself he did the Image take ; 
And this fair frame , in shining Reason dressed , 
To dignify his Nature , above Beast . 
Reason , by whose aspiring influence , 
We take a flight beyond material sense . 
Dive into Mysteries , than soaring pierce , 
The flaming limits of the Universe . 
Search Heaven and Hell , find out what 's acted there , 
And give the World true grounds of hope and fear . 
Hold mighty Man , I cry , all this we know , 
From the Pathetic Pen of Ingello ; 
From PEA — Pilgrim , S — replies , 
And 't is this very reason I despise . 
This supernatural gift , that makes a Mite - , 
Think he is the Image of the Infinite : 
Comparing his short life , void of all rest , 
To the Eternal , and the ever blessed . 
This busy , puzzling , stirring up of doubt , 
That frames deep Mysteries , then finds 'em out ; 
Filling with Frantic Crowds of thinking Fools , 
Those Reverend Bedlams , Colleges , and Schools 
Born on whose Wings , each heavy Sot can pierce , 
The limits of the boundless Universe . 
So charming Ointments , make an Old Witch fly , 
And bear a Crippled Carcase through the Sky . 
't is this exalted power , whose business lies , 
In Nonsense , and impossibilities . 
This made a Whimsical Philosopher , 
Before the spacious World , his Tub prefer , 
And we have modern Cloistered Coxcombs , who 
Retire to think , cause they have naught to do . 
But thoughts , are given for Actions government , 
Where Action ceases , thoughts impertinent : 
Our Sphere of Action , is life's happiness , 
And he who thinks Beyond , thinks like an Ass. 
Thus , whilst ' 'gainst false reas'ning I inveigh , 
I own right Reason , which I would obey : 
That Reason that distinguishes by sense , 
And gives us Rules , of good , and ill from thence : 
That bounds desires , with a reforming Will , 
To keep 'em more in vigour , not to kill . 
Your Reason hinders , mine helps t' enjoy , 
Renewing Appetites , yours would destroy . 
My Reasons is my Friend , yours is a Cheat , 
Hunger calls out , my Reason bids me eat ; 
Perversely yours , your Appetite does mock , 
This asked for Food , that answers what 's a Clock ? 
This plain distinction Sir your doubt secures , 
't is not true Reason I despise but yours . 
This I think Reason righted , but for Man , 
I 'll ne'er recant defend him if you can . 
For all his Pride , and his Philosophy , 
't is evident , Beasts are in their degree , 
As wise at least , and better far than he . 
Those Creatures , are the wisest who attain , 
By surest means , the ends at which they aim . 
If therefore Jowler , finds , and Kills his Hares , 
Better than M — , supplies Committed Chairs ; 
Though one 's a Satesman , th' other but a Hound . 
Jowler , in Justice , would be wiser found . 
You see how far Man's wisdom here extends , 
Look next , if human Nature makes amends ; 
Whose Principles , most generous are , and just , 
And to whose Morals , you would sooner trust . 
Be Judge yourself , I 'll bring it to the test , 
Which is the basest Creature Man , or Beast ? 
Birds feed on Birds , Beast on each other prey , 
But Savage Man alone , does Man betray : 
Pressed by necessity , they Kill for Food , 
Man , undoes Man , to do himself no good . 
With Teeth , & Claws : by Nature armed thy hunt , 
Nature's allowance , to supply their want . 
But Man , with smiles , embraces Friendships , praise . 
Unhumanely his Fellows life betrays ; 
With voluntary pains , works his distress , 
Not through necessity , but wantonness . 
For hunger , or for Love , they fight , or tear , 
Whilst wretched Man , is still in Arms for fear ; 
For fear he Arms , and is of Arms afraid , 
By fear , to fear , successively betrayed 
Base fear , the fource whence his best passion came , 
His boasted Honour , and his dear bought Fame . 
That lust of Power , to which he 's such a Slave , 
And for the which alone he dares be brave : 
To which his various Projects are designed , 
Which makes him generous , affable , and kind . 
For which he takes such pains to be thought wise , 
And screws his actions , in a forced disguise : 
Leading a tedious life in Misery , 
Under laborious , mean Hypocrisy . 
Look to the bottom , of his vast design , 
Wherein Man's Wisdom , Power , and Glory join ; 
The good he acts , the ill he does endure ; 
't is all for fear , to make himself secure . 
Merely for safety , after Fame we thirst , 
For all Men , would be Cowards if they durst . 
And honesty's against all common sense , 
Men must be Knaves , 't is in their own defence . 
Mankind's dishonest , if you think it fair ; 
amongst known Cheats , to play upon the square , 
you 'll be undone — 
Nor can weak truth , your reputation save , 
The Knaves , will all agree to call you Knave . 
Wronged shall he live , insulted o'er , oppressed . 
Who dares be lesle a Villain , than the rest . 
Thus Sir you see what human Nature craves , 
Most Men are Cowards , all Men should be Knaves : 
The difference lies ( as far as I can see ) 
Not in the thing itself , but the degree ; 
And all the subject matter of debate , 
Is only who 's a Knave , of the first Rate ? 
All this with indignation have I hurled , 
At the pretending part of the proud World , 
Who swollen with selfish vanity , devise , 
False freedoms , holy Cheats , and formal Lies 
Over their fellow Slaves , to tyrannize . 
But if in Court , so just a Man there be , 
( In Court , a just Man , yet unknown to me . ) 
Who does his needful flattery direct , 
Not to oppress , and ruin , but protect ; 
Since flattery which may so ever laid , 
Is still a Tax on that unhappy Trade . 
If so upright a Statesman , you can find , 
Whose passions bend to his unbyased Mind ; 
Who does his Arts , and Policies apply , 
To raise his Country , not his Family ; 
Nor while his Pride , owned Avarice withstands , 
Receives Aureal Bribes , from Friends corrupted hands . 
Is there a Churchman who on God relies ? 
Whose Life , his Faith , and Doctrine Justifies ? 
Not one blown up , with vain Prelatique Pride , 
Who for reproof of Sins , does Man deride : 
Whose envious heart with his obstrep'ous saucy Eloquence , 
Dares chide at Kings , and rail at Men of sense . 
Who from his Pulpit , vents more peevish lies , 
more bitter rail , scandals , Calumnies , 
Than at a Gossipping , are thrown about , 
When the good Wives get drunk , and then fall out . 
None of that sensual Tribe , whose Talents lie , 
In Avarice , Pride , Sloth , and Gluttony . 
Who hunt good livings , but abhor good Lives , 
Whose lust exalted , to that height arrives , 
They act Adunltery with their own Wives . 
And ever a score of years completed be , 
Can from the lofty Pulpit proudly see , 
Half a large Parish , their own Progeny . 
Nor doting B — who would be adored , 
For domineering at the Council Board ; 
A greater Fop , in business at fourscore , 
Fonder of serious Toys , affected more , 
Than the gay glitt'ring Fool , at twenty proves , 
With all his noise , his tawdrey Clotheses , and loves , 
But a meek humble Man , of modest sense , 
Who Preaching peace , does practice continence ; 
Whose pious life 's a proof he does believe , 
Mysterious truths , which no Man can conceive . 
If upon Earth there dwell such God like Men , 
I 'll here recant my Paradox to them . 
Adore those Shrines of Virtue , Homage pay , 
And with the Rabble World , their Laws obey . 
If such there are , yet grant me this at least , 
Man differs more from Man , than Man from Beast , 
A Ramble in St. JAMES' PARK . 

Much Wine had passed with grave discourse , 
Of who Fucks who , and who does worse ; 
Such as you usually do hear , 
From them that diet at the Bear ; 
When I , who still take care to see , 
Drunkenness relieved by Lechery ; 
Went out into St. James' Park , 
To cool my Head , and fire my Heart : 
But though St. James has the honour on 't , 
't is consecrate to Prick and Cunt. 
There by a most incestuous Birth ; 
Strange Woods , , spring from the teeming Earth 
For they relate how heretofore , 
When Ancient Pict , began to whore , 
Deluded of his Assignation , 
( Jilting it seems was then in fashion . ) 
Poor pensive Lover , in this place , 
Would Frigg upon his Mother's Face : 
Whence Rows of Mandrake's tall did rise , 
Whose lewd Tops Fucked the very Skies . 
Each imitative Branch does twine , 
In some loved fold of Aretine . 
And Nightly now beneath their shade , 
Are Bugg'ries , Rapes , and Incests made . 
Unto this All-sin-sheltring Grove , 
Whores of the Bulk , and the Alcove . 
Great Ladies Chambermaid's , Drudges ; 
The Rag-picker ; and Heiress trudges ; 
Carmen , Divines , great Lords , and Tailors , 
Prentices , Pimps , Poets and Gaolers ; 
Footmen , fine Fops , do here arrive , 
And here promisculously they strive . 
Along these hollowed Walks it was , 
That I beheld Corinna pass ; 
Who ever had been by to see , 
The proud disdain she cast on me . 
Though charming Eyes , he would have sworn , 
She drapt from Hea'vn that very hour ; 
Forsaking the Divine abode . 
In scorn of some despairing God. 
But mark what Creatures Women are . 
So infinitely vile , and fair . 
Three Knights , o' th' Elbow , and the slur , 
With wriggling Tails , made up to her . 
The first was of your Whitehall Blades 
Near kin to th' Mother of the Maids , 
Graced by whose favour he was able , 
To bring a Friend to th' Waiters Table . 
Where he had heard Sir Edward S. — 
Say how the k — loved Bansted Mutton . 
Since when he 'd never be brought to eat , 
By 's good will any other Meat . 
In this , as well as all the rest , 
He ventures to do like the best . 
But wanting common Sense , th'ingredient , 
In choosing well , not least expedient . 
Converts Abortive imitation . 
To Universal affectation ; 
So he not only eats , and talks , 
But feels , and smells , sits down and walks . 
Nay looks , and lives , and love's by Rote , 
In an old tawdrey Birth-day-coat . 
The Second was a Gray's Inn Wit , 
A great Inhabiter of the Pit ; 
Where Critick-like , he sits and squints , 
Steals Pocket-handkerchiefs , and hints , 
From 's Neighbour , and the Comedy , 
To Court and pay his Landlady . 
The Third a Lady's elder Son , 
Within few years of Twenty One ; 
Who hopes from his propitious Fate , 
Against he comes to his Estate . 
By these Two Worthies to be made 
A most accomplished tearing Blade . 
One in a strain betwixt Tune and Nonsense , 
Cries , Madam , I have loved you long since , 
Permit me your fair hand to kiss . 
When at her Mouth her C — says yes . 
In short , without much more ado . 
Joyful , and pleased , away she flew ; 
And with these Three confounded Asses , 
From Park , to Hackney-coach , she passes . 
So a proud Bitch does lead about , 
Of Humble Curs , the Amorous rout : 
Who most obsequiously do hunt , 
The savoury sense of Salt-swolne Cunt. 
Some Power more patient now relate ; 
The sense of this surprising Fate . 
Gods ! that a thing admired by me , 
Should taste so much of Infamy . 
Had she picked out to rub her Arse on , 
Some stiff-pricked Clown , or well hung Parson . 
Each job of whose Spermatick Sluice , 
Had filled her C — t with wholesome Juice . 
I the proceeding should have praised , 
In hope she had quenched a Fire I raised : 
Such natural freedoms are but just , 
there 's something generous in mere Lust. 
But to turn damned abandoned Jade , 
When neither Head nor Tail persuade ; 
To be a Whore , in understanding , 
A Passive Pot for Fools to s — in . 
The Devil played booty , sure with thee , 
To bring a blot of infamy . 
But why was I of all Mankind , 
To so severe a fate designed ? 
Ungrateful ! why this Treachery 
To humble fond , believing me ? 
Who gave you Privileges above , 
The nice allowances of Love ? 
Did ever I refuse to bear , 
The meanest part your Lust could spare ? 
When your lewd C — t , came spewing home , 
Drenched with the Seed of half the Town . 
My Dram of Sperme , was supped up after , 
For the digestive Surfeit Water . 
Full gorded at another time , 
With a vast Meal of Nasty Slime ; 
Which your devouring C — t had drawn 
From Porter's Backs , and Footman's Brawn . 
I was content to serve you up , 
My B-lock full , for your Grace Cup ; 
Nor ever thought it an abuse , 
While you had pleasure for excuse . 
You that could make my Heart away , 
For Noise and Colours , and betray , 
The Secrets of my tender hours , 
To such Knight Errand Paramours ; 
When leaning on your Faithless Breast , 
Wrapped in security , and rest . 
Soft kindness all my powers did move , 
And reason lay dissolved in Love. 
May stinking Vapour choke your Womb , 
Such as the Men you dote upon ; 
May your depraved Appetite , 
That could in whiffling Fools delight , 
Beget such Frenzies in your Mind , 
You may go mad for the Northwind . 
And fixing all your hopes upon 't ; 
To have him Bluster in your C — t. 
Turn up your longing Arse to th' Air , 
And perish in a wild despair . 
But Cowards shall forget to Rant , 
Schoolboys to Frigg , old Whores to Paint : 
The Jesuits Fraternity , 
Shall leave the use of Buggery . 
Crablowse , inspired with Grace Divine , 
From Earthy Cod , to Heaven shall climb ; 
Physicians , shall believe in Jesus , 
And disobedience cease to please us . 
Ever I desist with all my Power , 
To plague this Woman and undo her . 
But my revenge will best be timed , 
When she is Married that is lymd ; 
In that most lamentable State , 
I 'll make her feel my scorn , and hate ; 
Pelt her with Scandals , Truth , or Lies , 
And her poor Cur with jealousies . 
Till I have torn him from her Breech , 
While she whines like a Dog-drawn Bitch . 
Loathed , and deprived , kicked out of Town , 
Into some dirty hole alone , 
To Chew the Cud of Misery , 
And know she owes it all to me . 
And may no Woman better thrive , 
Who dares profane the C — t I S — 
A Letter fancied from Artemisa jam the Town , to Cloe in the Country . 

Cloe , by your command in Verse I write , 
Shortly you 'll bid me ride astride and Fight ; 
Such Talents better with our Sex agree , 
Than lofty flights of dangerous Poëtry , 
Among the Men , I mean the Men of Wit , 
( At least they passed for such before they written . ) 
How many bold adventurers for the Bays , 
Proudly designing large returns of Praise . 
Who durst that stormy Pathless World explore , 
Were soon dashed back , & wrecked on the dull shore , 
broke off that little stock they had before . 
How would a Woman's tottering Bark be tossed , 
Where stoutest Ships , the Men of Wit are lost ? 
When I reflect on this I strait grow wise , 
And my own self I gravely thus advice . 
Dear Artemisa , Poetry's a Snare , 
Bedlam , has many Mansions ; have a care , 
Your Muse diverts you , makes the Reader , sad 
You think yourself inspired , he thinks you mad 
Thus like an Arrant Woman as I am , 
no sooner well convinced writin'gs a shame , 
That Whore , is scarce a more reproachful name 
Than Poetess — 
Like Men that Mary , or like Maids that woe , 
Because it is the worst thing they can do . 
Pleased with the contradiction , and the Sin , 
Me thinks I stand on Thorns till I begin . 
You expect to hear at least , what love has passed 
In this lewd Town , since you , and I saw last 
What change has happened of Intriqus , and whether , 
The old ones last , and who , and who 's together ? 
But how ( my dearest Cloe ) should I set 
My Pen to write , what I would fain forget ? 
Or name the lost thing Love , without a Tear , 
Since so debauched by illbred Customs here ? 
Love , the most generous passion of the Mind , 
The softest refuge innocence can find , 
The safe director of unguided Youth , 
Fraught with kind wishes and secured by Truth ; 
That Cordial drop , Heaven in our Cup has thrown , 
To make the naus'ous draught of life go down ; 
On which one only blessing , God , might raise , 
In Lands of Atheists , Subsidies of praise ; 
For none did , ever so dull , and stupid prove , 
But felt a God , and blessed his power in love : 
This only joy , for which poor we were made , 
Is grown like play , to be an Arrant Trade ; 
The Rooks creep in , and it has got of late , 
As many little Cheats , and tricks as that : 
But what yet more a Woman's heart would vex , 
't is chiefly carried on by our own Sex. 
O silly Sex ! though born like Monarches free , 
Turn Gipsies , for a meaner liberty , 
And hate restraint , though but from infamy . 
They call what ever is not common , nice , 
And deaf to Nature's Rule , or Love's advice , 
Forsake the pleasure , to pursue the Vice. 
To an exact perfection they have brought , 
The action Love , the passion is forgot ; 
't is below Wit , they say , if we admire , 
And even with approving , they desire : 
Their private wish , obeys the public voice ; 
Betwixt good , and bad , whimsy decides , not choice ; 
Fashion grown up to taste , at forms they strike , 
They know what they would have , not what they like . 
Bovy's , a Beauty , if some few agree 
To call him so , the rest to that degree , 
Affected are , that with their Ears they see . 
Where I was visiting the other Night , 
Comes a fine Lady , with her humble Knight ; 
Who had prevailed with her , through her own skill , 
At his request , though much against his will 
To come to London — 
As the Coach stopped , I heard her voice more loud , 
then a great Bellied Woman's , in a Crowd ; 
Telling the Knight , that her affairs require , 
He for some hours , obsequiously retire . 
I think she was ashamed he should be seen , 
Hard fate of Husband , the Gallant had been , 
Thought a diseased , ill favoured Fool , brought in 
Dispatch says she , the business you pretend , 
Your Beastly visit , to your drunken Friends ; 
A Bottle , ever makes you look so fine ; 
Methinks I long to smell you stink of Wine : 
Your Country drinking Breathes enough to Kill ; 
Sour Ale , corrected with a Lemon Pill . 
Prithee farewell , we 'll meet again anon , 
The necessary thing , bows , and is gone . 
She fly's up stairs , and haste does show , 
That silly Antic Postures will allow . 
And then burst out — And Madam am not I , 
The strangest altered Creature ! let me die , 
I find myself rediculously grown , 
Fmbarrast , with my being out of Town . 
Rude , and untaught , like any Indian Queen , 
My Country nakedness , is strangely seen . 
How is Love governed , Love that rules the state 
And pray who are the Men most worn of late ? 
When I was married , Fools , were A-la-mode , 
then Men of Wit , were then held incommode , 
Slow of belief , and sickle in desire , 
Who ever they 'll be persuaded , must inquire , 
As if they came to spy , not to admire . 
With searching wisdom , fatal to their ease , 
They find out why , what may , and should not please . 
Nay take themselves for injured , when we dare , 
Make 'em think better of us than we are : 
And if we hide our frailties from their sights , 
Call us deceitful Jilts , and Hypocrites ; 
Thy little guess ( who at our Arts are grieved ) 
The perfect joy of being well deceived : 
Inquisitive , as jealous Cuckolds grow . 
Rather than not be knowing , they will know , 
What being known , creates their certain we . 
Women , should these of all Mankind avoid , 
For wonder by clear knowledge is destroyed , 
Women , who is an Arrant Bird of Night , 
Bold in the dusk , before a Fools dull sight , 
Must fly , when Reason brings the blazing light . 
But the kind easy Fool , apt to admire 
Himself , trust us ; his follies all conspire , 
To flatter his , and favour our desire : 
Vain of his proper merit , he with ease . 
Believes we love him best , who best can please : 
On him our gross , dull , common , flatteries , pass . 
Ever most happy , when most made an Ass ; 
Heavy to apprehend , though all Mankind 
Perceive us false , the Fop himself , is blind , 
Who doting on himself — 
Thinks every one that sees him of his Mind . 
These are true Woman's Men here foreed to cease , 
Through want of breath , not will to hold her peace ; 
She to the Window runs , where she had spied , 
Her much esteemed dear Friend , the Monkey eyed . 
With Forty smiles , as many Antic bows , 
As if 't had been the Lady of the House , 
The dirty chatt'ring Monster , she embraced ; 
And made it this fine tender Speech at last . 
Kiss me ! thou curious Miniature of Man 
How odd thou art ! how pretty ! how japan ! 
O I could live and die with thee ! then on 
For half on hour in Compliments she ran . 
I took this time to think what Nature meant , 
When this mixed thing into the World she sent , 
So very wise , yet so impertinent , 
One that knows every thing ; that God thought fit , 
Should be an Ass , through choich , not want of wit. 
Whose Foppery , without the help of sense , 
Could never have rise to such an excellence . 
Nature's as lame in making a true Fop , 
As a Philosopher ; the very top . 
And dignity of folly , we attain , 
By studious search , and labour of the Brain ; 
By observation , Council , and deep thought , 
God , never made a Coxcomb worth a groat ; 
We owe that Name to Inductry , and Arts , 
An eminent Fool , must be a Man of parts : 
And such a one was she , who had turned o'er , 
As many Books as Men , loved much , read more ; 
Haddit discerning Wit , to her was known , 
Every one's fault , or merit , but her own : 
All the good Qualities , that ever blessed , 
A Woman , so distinguished from the rest , 
Except discretion only , she possessed . 
But now Moncher , dear Pug , says she adieu , 
And the discourse broke off , does thus renew . 
You smile to see me , whom the World perchance 
Mistakes to have some wit , so far advance . 
The interest of Fools , that I approve , 
Their merit more , than Mens of wit , and love . 
But in our Sex , too may proofs there are , 
Of such whom Wits undone , and Fools repair : 
This in my time , was so observed a Rule , 
Hardly a Wench , in Town , but had her Fool ; 
The meanest common Slut , who long was grown , 
The jest , and scorn of every Pit Buffoon ; 
Had yet left charms enough , to have subdued , 
Some Fop , or other , fond to be thought lewd . 
F — , could make an Irish Lord , a Nokes ; 
And B — M — , had her City Coke 
A Woman's never so ruined , but she can , 
Be still revenged , on her undoer Man 
How lost soe'er , she 'll find some Lover , more , 
A more abandoned Fool , than she a Whores 
That wretched thing Corinna , who has run 
Through all the several ways of being undone , 
Cozened at first by love , and living then , 
By turning thee too dear-bought-cheat on Men. 
Gay were the hours , and winged with joy they slew , 
When first the Town , her early Beauties knew ; 
Courted admired , and loved , with Presents fed , 
Youth in her Cheeks , and pleasure in her Bed. 
Till Fate , or her ill Angel , thought it fit , 
To make her dote upon a Man of Wit , 
Who found 't was dull to love above a Day , 
Made his ill natured jest , and went away : 
Now scorned of all , for saken and oppressed . 
she 's a Memento mori , to the rest . 
Diseased , decayed , to take up Half a Crown , 
Must Mortgage her Long Scarf , & Mantoe-gown . 
Poor Greature ! who unheard of as a Fly , 
In some dark hole , must all the Winter lie . 
And want she must endure a whole half year , 
That for one Month , she Tawdry may appear : 
In Easter Term , she gets her a new Gown , 
When my young Master's Worship comes to Town ; 
From Pedagogue , and Mother , jest set free , 
The hopeful Heir , of a great Family ; 
Who with strong Beer , and Beef , the Country rules , 
And ever since the Conqnest , have been Fools . 
And still with careful prospect , to maintain , 
This Character , least crossing of the Strain . 
Should mend the Body Breed , his Friends provide , 
A Cousin of his own to be his Bride . 
And thus set out — 
With an Estate , no Wit , and a young Wife , 
The soled comforts , of a Coxcomb's life ; 
Dunghill , and Peas , forfook , he comes to Town , 
Turus' Spark , learns to be lewd , and is undone . 
Nothing suits worse with Vice , than want of sense , 
Fools are still wicked , at their own expense . 
This o'er grown Schoolboy , lost Corinna , wins , 
At the first dush , to make an Ass , begins . 
Pretends to like a Man , that has not known . 
The Vanilies , nor Vices of the Town . 
Fresh in his youth , and faithful in his love , 
Eager of joys , which he does seldom prove , 
Healthful , and strong , he does no pains endure , 
But what the fair one , he adores , can cure : 
Greateful for favours , does the Sex esteem , 
And Libels none , for being kind to him . 
then of the lewdness of the Town complains , 
Rails at the Wits , and Atheists , and maintains , 
't is better than good sense , than Paw'r , or Wealth , 
To have a Blood , untained , youth , and health . 
The illbred Puppy , who had never seen , 
A Creature look so gay , or talk so fine ; 
Believes , then falls in love , and then in debt , 
Mortgages all , even to the Ancient Seat , 
To buy this Mystriss , a new House , for life ; 
To give her Plate , and Jewels , Robs his Wife . 
And when to the height of fondness he is grown , 
't is time to poison him , and all 's her own . 
Thus meeting in her common Arms his Fate , 
He leaves her Bastard , Heir to his Estate ; 
And as the Race of such an Owl , deserves 
His own dull lawful Progeny he starves 
Nature , who never made a thing in vain , 
But does each Insect , to some end ordain . 
Wisely provides kind-keeping Fools , no doubt 
To patch up Vices , Men of Wit , were out . 
Thus she ran on Two hours , some grains of sense , 
Still mixed with Volleys of impertinence . 
But now 't is time I should some pity show , 
To Cloe , since I cannot choose but know ; 
Readers , must reap the dullness , Writers sow . 
By the next Post , I will such Stories tell , 
As joined to these , shall to a Valume swell ; 
Truer than Heaven , more infamous than Hall , 
But you are tired and so am I — 
Farewell . 

The Imperfect Enjoyment . 

Naked she lay , clasped in my longing Arms , 
I filled with Love , and she all over charms , 
Both equally inspired , with eager fire , 
Melting through kindness , flaming in desire . ; 
With Arms , Legs , Lips , close clinging to embrace , 
She eclipse me to her Breast , and sucks me to her Face . 
The nimble Tongue ( Love's lesser Lightning ) played 
Within my Mouth , and to my thoughts conveyed . 
Swift Orders , that I should prepare to throw , 
The All-dissolving Thunderbolt below . 
My fluttering Soul , sprung with the pointed kiss , 
Hangs hovering o'er her Balmy Limbs of Bliss . 
But whilst her busy hand , would guide that part , 
Which should convey my Soul , up to her Heart . 
In liquid Raptures I dissolve all o'er , 
Melt into Sperme , and spend at every Poor : 
A touch from any part of her had don 't ; 
Her Hand , her Foot , her very looks a Cunt. 
Smiling , she chids in a kind murmuring Noise , 
And from her Body wips the clammy joys ; 
When with a Thousand Kisses , wandering o'er , 
My panting Breast , and is there then no móre ? 
She cries . All this to Love , and rapture 's due , 
Must we not pay a debt to pleasure too ? 
But I the most forlone , lost Man alive , 
To show my wished Obedience vanly strive , 
I sing alas ! and Kiss , but cannot Swive . 
Eager desires , confound my first intent , 
Succeeding shame , does more success prevent , 
And Rage , at last , confirms me impotent . 
Even her fair Hand , which might bid heat return 
To frozen Age , and make cold Hermits burn , 
Applied to my dead Cinder , warms no more , 
Than Fire to Ashes , could past Flames restore . 
Trembling , confused , despairing , limber , dry , 
A wishing , weak , unmoving lump High , 
This Dart of love , whose piercing point oft tried , 
With Virgin blood , ten thousand Maids has died . 
Which Nature still directed with such Art , 
That it through every C — t , reached every Heart . 
Stiffly resolved , 't wou'd carelessly invade , 
Woman or Boy , nor ought its fury stayed , 
Where ever it pierced , a Cunt it found or made . 
Now languid lies , in this unhappy hour , 
Shrunk up , and Sapless , like a withered Flower . 
thou treacherous , base , and deserter of my flame , 
False to my passion , fatal to my Fame ; 
By what mistaken Magic dost thou prove , 
So true to lewdness , so untrue to Love ? 
What Oyster , Cinder , Beggar , common Whore , 
Didst thou ever fail in all thy Life before ? 
When Vice , Disease and Scandal lead the way , 
With what officious haste dost thou obey ? 
Like a Rude-roaring Hector , in the Streets , 
That Scuffles , Cuffs , and Ruffles all he meets ; 
But if his King , or Country , claim his Aid , 
The Rascal Villain , shrinks , and hides his head : 
Even so thy Brutal Valour , is displayed , 
Breaks every Stews , does each small Whore invade , 
But if great Love , the onset does command , 
Base recreant , to thy Prince , thou dar'st not stand 
Worst part of me , and henceforth hated most , 
Through all the Town , the common Fucking Post ; 
On whom each Whore , relieves her tingling Cunt , 
As Hogs , on Goats , do rub themselves and grunt . 
May'st thou to ravenous Shankers , be a Prey , 
Or in consuming Weep waste away . 
May Stranguries , and Stone , thy Days attend . 
May'st thou Piss , who didst refuse to spend , 
When all my joys , did on false thee depend . 
And may ten thousand abler Pricks agree , 
To do the wronged Corinna , right for thee . 
To LOVE . 

O! nunquam pro me satis indignate Cupido . 


O Love ! how cold , and slow to take my part , 
thou idle Wanderer , about my Heart . 
Why thy Old faithful Soldier , wilt thou see , 
Oppressed in thy own Tents ? they murder me . 
Thy Flames Consume , thy Arrows Pierce thy Friends , 
Rather on Foes , pursue more noble ends . 
Achilles' Sword , would gen'rously bestow , 
A Cure , as certain , as it gave the blow . 
Hunters , who follow flying Game , give o'er , 
When the prey 's caught , hope still leads on before . 
We thy own Slaves feel thy Tyrannic blows , 
Whilst thy tame Hands unmoved against thy Foes . 
On Men disarmed , how can you gallant prove , 
And I was long ago disarmed by Love. 
Million of dull Men , live , and scornful Maids , 
we 'll own Love valiant , when he these invades . 
Rome , from each Corner of the wide World , snatched 
A Laurel , or 't had been to this day thatched . 
But the Old Soldier , has his resting place , 
And the good battered Horse , is turned to Grass . 
The harassed Whore , who lived a wretch to please , 
Has leave to be a Bawd , and take her ease . 
For me then , who have freely spent my Blood , 
( Love ) in thy Service , and so boldly stood . 
In Celia's Trenches ; were 't not wisely done , 
Even to retire , and live at peace at home ? 
no — might I gain a Godhead , to disclaim , 
My glorious Title , to my endless flame : 
Divinity , with scorn , I would forswear , 
Such sweet , dear , tempting Devils , Women are . 
When ere those flames grow faint , I quickly find , 
A fierce black Storm , pour down upon my Mind . 
Headlong , I 'm hurled , like Horsemen , who in vain , 
Their ( fury foaming ) Coursers , would restrain , 
As Ships , just when the Harbour they attain . 
Are snatched by sudden Blasts , to Sea again : 
So Love's fantastic storms , reduce my Heart , 
Half-rescued , and the God resumes his Dart. 
Strike here , this undefended Bosom wound , 
And for so brave a Conquest be renowned . 
Shafts fly so fast to me from every part , 
you 'll scarce discern your Quiver , from my Hear 
What Wretch can bear a livelong nights dull rest 
Or think himself in lazy slumbers blessed ? 
Fool — is not sleep the Image of pale Death ? 
there 's time for rest , when fate has stopped you breath . 
Me , may my soft deluding dear deceive , 
I 'm happy in my hopes , whilst I believe . 
Now let her flatter , then as fond chide . 
Often may I enjoy , of 't be denied . 
With doubtful steps , the God of War does move 
By thy example , in Ambiguous Love. 
Blown to and from like Down from thy own Wing ; 
Who knows , when joy , or Anguish , thou wilt brings ? 
Yet at thy Mothers , and thy Slave's request , 
Fix an Eternal Fmpire in my Breast ; 
And let th' inconstant charming Sex , 
Whose wilful scorn , does Lovers vex ; 
Submit their Hearts before thy Throne , 
The Vassal World , is then thy own . 
The Maimed Debauchee . 

AS some brave Admiral , in former War , 
Deprived of force , but pressed with courage still ; 
Two Rival-fleets , appearing from a far , 
Crawls to the top of an adjacent Hill. 
From whence ( with thoughts full of concern ) he views 
The wise , and daring Conduct of the fight , 
And each bold Action , to his Mind renews , 
His present glory , and his past delight . 
From his fierce Eyes , flashes of rage he throws , 
As from black Clouds , when Lightning breaks away , 
Transported , thinks himself amid his Foes , 
And absent , yet enjoys the Bloody Day . 
So when my Days of impotence approach , 
And I 'm by Pox , and Wines unlucky chance , 
Drov'n from the pleasing Billows of debauch , 
On the dull Shore of lazy temperance . 
My pains at last some respite shall afford , 
Whilst I behold the Battles you maintain , 
When Fleets of Glasses , Sail about the Board ; 
From whose Broadsides Volleys of Wit shall rain . 
Nor shall the sight of Honourable Scars , 
Which my too forward Valour did procure . 
Frighten new listed Soldiers from the Wars , 
Past joys have more than paid what I endure . 
Should hopeful Youths ( worth being drunk ) prove nice , 
And from their fair Inviters meanly shrink , 
Twoved please the Ghost , of my departed Vice , 
If at my Council , they repent and drink , 
Or should some cold complexioned Sot forbid , 
With his dull Morals , our Night's brisk Alarms , 
I 'll fire his Blood by telling what I did , 
When I was strong , and able to bear Arms . 
I 'll tell of Whores Attacked their Lords at home , 
Bawds Quarters beaten up , and Fortress wone , 
Windows demolished , Watch's overcome , 
And handsome ills , by my contrivance done . 
Nor shall our Love-fits Cloris be forgot , 
When each the well-looked Linkboy , striven t' enjoy 
And the best Kiss , was the deciding Lot , 
Whether the Boy used you , or I the Boy . 
With Tales like these , I will such heat inspire , 
As to the important mischief shall incline . 
I 'll make them long some Ancient Church to fire , 
And fear no lewdness they're called to by Wine . 
Thus States-man-like , I 'll saucily impose 
And safe from danger Valiantly advice , 
Sheltered in impotence , urge you to blows , 
And being good for nothing else , be wise . 
The Argument . 

How Tall-boy , Kill-prick , Suck-prick , did contend , 
For Bridegroom Dildoe , Friend did fight with Friend ; 
But Man of God , by Law-man , called Parson , 
Contrived by turns how each might rub her Arse on . 
Say Heav'n-born Muse , for only thou canst tell , 
How discord dire , between Two Widows fell ? 
What made the Fair one , and her well shaped Mother , 
Duty forget , and pious Nature smother ? 
Who was most modest , virtuous , or fair , 
Was not the cause of contest I dare swear . 
Nor Wit , nor breeding , raised this emulation ; 
Those things with them are trifles out of fashion . 
Great was the strife , raised up by envious Fate , 
To ruin Pegos , happy Reign and State.  
When R — with every Eye beheld , 
The Three dear Friends , his Heart with rancour swelled . 
That in one House , they were of one accord , 
Wanton in Bed , and Riotous at Board , 
Preferring Brawny G — to Spiney Lord : 
He Vowed to break this Triple League , of Love , 
And from their Breasts , sweet Friendship to remove . 
In a foul day , from bawdy Bath , he fly's , 
To put in Act his hasted enterprise . 
I th' Bower of Bliss , where sacred Ballocks dwells , 
There life's a Hag , deep red in Charms , and Spells ; 
Philters , and Potions , that my Magic skill , 
Can give an Eunuch Stones , and Cunt its fill . 
Babes , at her call fly from the breeding Womb , 
With Neighbour T-rd , in loathsome Jakes to roam . 
As oft as Finger , Dildoe , Pego , Rape , 
The Virgin Hymen , she repairs the Gap : 
Famed through the World , for the C — t. mending Trade ; 
To her he goes to implore her mighty Aid , 
By Men she 's called the Mother of the Maids . 
Hail Worse . Dame ( said he ) replete with grace . 
Mother , o' th' Maids , Daughter of noble Race ! 
Whilst Men of God to Betty B — go . 
Whist Prick , and Pen , with White , and Black does flow , 
My lasting Verse , shall magnify the fame , 
And melting Tarse , adore thy holy name . 
Therefore dear Mother , lend thine equal Ear , 
To my complaint , and favour my just Prayer . 
There is a place , a down a gloomy Vale , the Bath 
Where burdened Nature , lays her nasty Tail ; 
then Thousand Pilgrims , thither do resort , 
For ease , disease , for lechery , and sport : 
Thither two Beldames , and a jilting Wife , 
Came to swive off , the tedious hours of life : 
I willing to contribute to their joy , 
Offered my Mite , to th' young unsatiate Toy , 
Who banished Cuck , cause Cunt he could not cloy . 
Here upright Dame , Kill-prick , the wise old Jew , 
Told me I must Twelve times her Womb bedew , 
Ever her Child Suck-prick , should her Buttocks show 
Resolved to win like Hercules , the Prize . 
Twelve times I scoured the Kennel 'twixt her Thighs , 
The cheating Jilt , at th' Twelft , a Dry-bob , cries . 
My Prick and I , thus cross , bitten in high rage , 
Appealed to th' skilful sticklees on the Stage . 
With that fair Tall-boy , and bold Suck-prick , come , 
To squeeze my Tarse , and pass their final doom : 
Saying if on Priapus , I could show , 
One holy Relic , of kind Pearly Dew , 
i' th' Twelth time , in Kill-pricks Arse , did Spew . 
To their deriding Test , I did submit , 
Priapus squeezed , a Snowball , did emit ; 
Yet these Two partial Dames , a dry Bob , cry , 
Perform your Bargain ( Peer ) or frigg , and die . 
Thus was I Rooked of Twelve substantial Fucks , 
By these base stinking , over it chink Nocks . 
Your aid , your aid , dear Mother me inspire , 
With apt revenge to feed my raging fire . 
The gracious Matron , smiling on him said . 
Be it as thou desirest my dear loved Lad ; 
For this abuse , the Rump-fed-runts shall mourn , 
Till slimey Cunt , to grimey Ace hole turn . 
By her Caves' Mouth , a verdant Myrtle grows , 
Bearing Love's Trophies , on his sacred Boughs . 
The Crowns of Kings , were offered to this Shrine , 
Dildo's and Merkins of thy Royal Line . 
Fair Ladies hearts , with Mitred Pricks transfixed , 
In Mystic manner , make the Crucifix . 
To th' Tree she leads him , from a Bough pulls down , 
A mighty Tool , a Dildoe of renown ; 
A Dildoe , long , and large , as Hector's Lance , 
Inscribed , Honi Soit Qui Mal ye pence . 
Knight of the Garter , made for 's vast deserts , 
As Modern Hero , was for 's monstrous parts . 
This pious Son ( said he ) nail up in Box , 
By Carrier , send it these salt burning Nocks , 
Directed thus . To the Lady most deserving 
who 's made most Slaves , and kept most Pricks from Starving . 
O'erjoyed with hoped success away he flies , 
To Bath , disguised , to bear the welcome Prize ; 
But when they saw the Image of the Blessed Man ! 
Who can express how fast , how swift they ran ! 
Each for herself to seize it ; no Dog at Deer , 
Nor Hawk , at Herne , showed such a swift carri'ere . 
At once they souse , on the beloved Prey 
And sworn Friends do engage in Mortal Fray. 
Old Kill-prick , dreadful to her Friends , and Foes , 
Like Luxenburgh , in Back , and Breastplate shows . 
Gygantick Tall-boy famed in the West , 
For Cornish Hugg , to th' fight herself addressed ; 
Whilst the Child Suck-prick , hoped to steal away , 
By Stratagem , the glory of the Day . 
But all in vain , Tall-boy , with one hand held , 
Jove's Prize , with th' other crafty Suck-prick selled : 
But looks , not Menaces , nor crashing blow , 
Could make stout Kill-prick , quit her loved Deldoe : 
Undaunted , she maintained a cruel fight ; 
For Conquest scratched . and tore . withal her might . 
So have I seen a crum-back Crab-louse stick , 
With fervent love , to lick creating Prick ; 
The more he pulls , the more the loving Wretch , 
Doea strive to stay , and each Hair does catch . 
Till murdering Man , enraged from Ballocks tears , 
The Nock-born-bratt , and ends his hopeful years . 
So hard it fared with Kill-prick , had not Fate , 
Scent Man of God , to end the dire debate , 
What rage , what fury ( said he ) do ye stir 
To shed the Blood of Saints , in civil War ? 
How well you make the Mother Church , to mourn , 
And to Fanatics be the public scorn ? 
For shame , dear Souls , reserve your noble blood , 
To spend with Man Abashed the Warriors stood 
To see the holy Father , in the place , 
But straight on the matter putting a good face ; 
Thus Kill-prick spoke . 
To you OH Reverend Sir 
The justness of this Cause I will transfer , 
A Cause too great for Laymen , vile to try , 
Fit for Plus Ultras , deep Divinity 
A Cause , for mhich blessed Saints , above would die ! 
The modest Tall-boy , so devote appears , 
Though stealing Prick , you 'd think she had her Prayers ; 
And thouhg she'had almost wone the bloody Field , 
With Suck-prick ( Babe of Grace ) to this does yield . 
The case being stated , holy Man does pray , 
For a Blessing on 's endeavours , then does say 
Whereas sage Matrons , you do all agree , 
Your case to yield to my integrity , 
fitter for general Council than weak me , 
Dildoe's a Lawful Tool , deny 't who can , 
I 'll prove 't is made for a meet help for Man ; 
As unto Rector , Curate , is Assistant , 
So Dildoe's to fallen Prick , when Cunt has pissed on 't . 
But here 's th' Elect , ordained for Propagation , 
Who trusts in this is blessed in Generation ; 
This has done more , than Turnbridge , Bath , or Epsom , 
Though never so barran this is sure to help ' 'em . 
then pulling out the Rector , of the Females , 
Nine times he bathed him , in their piping hot Tails . 
Panting ( quoth he ) now peace be on ye all , 
When I am absent then one Dildoe call ; 
As those in holy Church , to Image pray , 
When wonder-working Saint , out o' th' way , 
Thus all well pleased to Church away they go , 
To sing Te Deum , for their dear Dildoe . 
An Allusion to Horace . 

The 10th Satyr of the 1st . Book . 

Nempe incomposito Dixi pede , etc.  


Well Sir , 't is granted , I said D — Rhimes , 
Were stolen , unequal , nay dull many times : 
What foolish Patron , is there found of his , 
So blindly partial , to deny me this ? 
But that his Plays , embroidered up , and down , 
With Wit , and Learning , justly pleased the Town , 
In the same Paper , I as freely own . 
Yet having this allowed , the heavy Mass , 
That Stuffs up his loose Volumes , must not pass : 
For by that Rule , I might aswel admit , 
Crowns , tedious Scenes , for Poetry , and Wit. 
't is therefore not enough , when your false sense , 
Hits the false Judgement , of an Audience : 
Of clapping Fools , assembled a vast Crowd , 
Till the thronged Playhouse , crack with the dull load ; 
Though even that Talon , merit's in some sort , 
That can divert the Rabble , and the Court. 
Which blundring s — , never could attain , 
And puzzling OH — , labours at in vain . 
But within due proportions circumscribe 
What ever you write ; that with a flowing Tide , 
The Style may rise , yet in its rise forbear , 
With useless words , to oppress the wearied Ear. 
Here be your Language lofty , there more light , 
Your Rhetoric , with your Poetry unite : 
For Elegance sake , sometimes allay the force 
Of Epithets , 't will soften the discourse ; 
A jest in scorn , points out , and hits the thing . 
more home , than the Moros Satyrs sting . 
Shakespeare , and Johnson , did herein excel , 
And might in this be imitated well ; 
Whom refined E — , coppy's not at all , 
But is himself , a sheer Original . 
Nor that slow Drudge , in swift Pindaric strains , 
f — , who C — imitates with pains , 
And rides a jaded Muse , whipped with loose Rains. 
When Lee , makes temperate Scipio , fret , and rave 
And Hannibal , a whining Amorous Slave , 
I laugh , and wish the hot-brained Fustian Fool , 
In B — hands , to be well lashed at School . 
Of all our Modern Wits none seems to me , 
Once to have touched , upon true Comedy , 
But hasty Shadwel , and slow Wicherley 
Shadwells unfinished works do yet impart , 
Great proofs of force of Nature , none of Art ; 
With just bold strokes he dashes here , and there , 
Showing great Mastery , with little Care ; 
And scorns to varnish his good Touches o'er , 
To make the Fools , and Women , praise'em more . 
But Wicherley , earns hard , what ever he gains , 
He wants no judgement , nor he spares no pains ; 
He frequently excels , and at the least , 
Makes fewer faults , than any of the best . 
Waller , by Nature , for the Bays designed , 
With force , and fire , and fancy unconfined , 
In Panegyrics , does excel Mankind . 
He best can turn , enforce , and soften things , 
To praise great Conquerors , or to fiatter Kings . 
For pointed Satyrs , I would Buckhurst choose , 
The best good Man , with the worst natured Must. 
For Songs , and Verses , mannerly , obscene , 
That can stir Nature up , by spring unseen , 
And without forcing blushes worm the Queen . 
Sidley , as that prevailing , gentle Art , 
That can with a resistless Charm impart , 
The losest wishes , to the chastest heart . 
Raise such a conflict , kindle such a Fire , 
Betwixt declining Virtue , and Desire ; 
Till the poor vanquished Maid dissolves away , 
In Dreams all Night , in Sighs , and Tears , all day . 
D — , in vain tried this nice way of wit , 
For he to be a tearing Blade , thought fit , 
But when he would be sharp ; he still was blunt , 
To friskings his frollique fancy , he 'd cry C — t , 
Would give the Ladies , a dry Bawdy bob , 
And thus got the name of Poet Squab . 
But to be just , 't will to his praise be found , 
His Excellencies more than faults abound , 
Nor dare I from his sacred Temples tear , 
That Laurel , which he best deserves to wear , 
But does not D — , find even Johnson dull ? 
Fletcher and Beaumond , uncorrect , and full , 
Olewd Lines , as he calls ' 'em ? Shakespears style 
Stiff and affected ; to his own the while , 
Allowing all the justness that his Pride , 
So Arrogantly had to these denied ? 
And may not I , have leave impartially , 
To search , and censure D — , Works , and try , 
If those gross faults , his choice Pen does commit , 
Proceed from want of Judgement , or of Wit ? 
Or of his lumpish fancy , does refuse , 
Spirit and Grace , to his loose slattern Muse ? 
Five hundred Verses , every Morning written , 
Proves you no more a Poet , than a Wit : 
Such scribbling Authors , have been seen before 
Mustapha , the English Princess , Forty more , 
Were things perhaps composed in half an hour , 
To write what may securely stand the Test , 
Of being well read over thrice at least ; 
Compare each Phrase , examine every Line , 
Weigh every Word , and every Thought refine ; 
Scorn all applause , the vile Rout can bestow , 
And be content to please those few who know . 
Canst thou be such a vain mistaken thing , 
To wish thy Works might make a Playhouse ring . 
With the unthinking Laughter , and poor praise , 
Of Fops , and Ladies , Factious for thy Plays ? 
then send a cunning Friend to learn thy doom , 
From the shrewd Judges of the drawing Room . 
i  no Ambition on that idle score , 
But say with Betty M — , heretofore , 
When a Court Lady , called her B — , Whore ; 
I please one Man of Wit , am proud on 't too , 
Let all the Coxcombs , dance to Bed to you . 
Should I be troubled when the Purblind Knight , 
Who squints more in his Judgement , than his sight , 
Picks silly faults , and censures what I write ? 
Or when the poor-fed Poets of the Town 
For Scraps , and Coach-room cry my Verses down ? 
I loathe the Rabble , 't is enough for me , 
If s — , S — , S — , W — , 
G — , B — , B — , B — , 
And some few more , whom I omit to name , 
Approve my sense , I count their censure Fame . 
In defence of Satyr . 

When Shakes . Johns . Fletcher , ruled the Stage , 
They took so bold a freedom with the Age , 
That there was scarce a Knave , or Fool , in Town , 
Of any note , but had his Picture shown ; 
And ( without doubt ) though some it may offend , 
Nothing helps more than Satyr , to amend 
Ill Manners , or is trulier Virtue's Friend . 
Princes , may Laws ordain , Priests gravely Preach , 
But Poets , most successfully will teach . 
For as a passing Bell , frights from his Meat , 
The greedy Sick man : that too much would Eat ; 
So when a Vice , ridiculous is made , 
Our Neighbour's shame , keeps us from growind bad . 
But wholesome remedies , few Palates please , 
Men rather love , what flatters their Disease ; 
Pimps , Parasites , Buffoons , and all the Crew , 
That under Friendships' name , weak Man undo ; 
find their false Service , kindlier understood , 
Than such as tell bold Truths to do us good . 
Look where you will , and you shall hardly find , 
A Man , without some sickness of the Mind . 
In vain we wise would seem , while every Lust , 
Whisks us about , as Whirlwinds do the Dust.  
Here for some needless Gain , Wretch is hurled , 
From Pole , to Pole , and Slaved about the World ; 
While the reward of all his pains , and Care , 
Ends in that despicable thing , his Heir . 
There a vain Fop , Mortgages all his Land , 
To buy that gaudy Play-thing a Command , 
To ride a Cockhorse , wear a Scarf , at 's Arse , 
And play the Pudding , in a May-day-farce . 
Here one whom God to make a Fool , thought fit , 
In spite of Providence , will be a Wit. 
But wanting strength , t' uphold his ill made choice , 
Sets up with Lewdness , Blasphemy , and Noise , 
There at his Mistress Feet , a Lover lies 
And for a tawdrey , painted Baby dies . 
Falls on his Knees , adores , and is afraid , 
Of the vain Idol , he himself has made . 
These , and a thousand Fools unmentioned here , 
Hate Poets all , because they Poets fear 
Take heed ( they cry ) yonder Mad Dog will bite , 
He cares not whom he falls on in his fit ; 
Come but in 's way , and straight a new Lampoone 
Shall spread your mangled Fame about the Town , 
But why am I this Bugbear to ye all ? 
My Pen is dipped in no such bitter Gall. 
He that can rail at one he calls his Friend , 
Or hear him absent wronged , and not defend ; 
Who for the sake of some ill natured Jest , 
Tells what he should conceal , Invents the rest ; 
To fatal Midnight quarrels , can betray , 
His brave Companion , and then run away ; 
Leaving him to be murdered in the street , 
then put it off , with some Buffoon Conceit ; 
This , this is he , you should beware of all , 
Yet him a pleasant , witty Man , you call 
To whet your dull Debauches up , and down , 
You seek him as top Fidler of the Town . 
But if I laugh when the Court Coxcombs show , 
To see that Booby Sotns dance Provoe . 
Or chatt'ring Porus , from the Side Box grin , 
Tricked like a Lady's Monkey new made clean . 
To me the name of Railer , straight you give , 
Call me a Man that knows not how to live . 
But Wenches to their Keepers , true shall turn , 
stale Maids of Honour , proffered Husbands scorn , 
Great Statesman , flattery , and Clinches hate , 
And long in Ossice die without Estate . 
Against a Bribe , Court Judges , shall decide , 
The City Knav'ry want , the Clergy Pride . 
Ever that black Malice , in my Rhymes you find , 
That wrongs a worthy Man , or hurts a Friend . 
But then perhaps you 'll say , why do you write ? 
What you think harmless Mirth , the World thinks Spite . 
Why should your Finger's itch to have a lash . 
At Simius , the Buffoon , or Cully Bash ? 
What is 't to you , if Alidores fine Whore , 
Fucks with some Fop , whilst he 's shut out of Door ? 
Consider pray , that dangerous Weapon Wit , 
Frightens a Million , when a few you hit . 
Whip but a Cur , as you ride through a Town , 
And straight his Fellow Curs the Quarrel own , 
Each Knave , or Fool , that 's conscious of a Crime , 
Thomas he escapes now , looks for 't another time . 
Sir , I confess all you have said is true , 
But who has not some Folly to pursue ? 
Milo turned Quixot , fancied . Battles , Fights , 
When the fifth Bottle , had increased the Lights . 
Warlike Dirt Pies , our Hero Paris forms , 
Which desperate Bessus , without Armour storms . 
Cornus , the kind Husband , ever was born . 
Still Court's the Spark , that does his Brows adorn . 
Invites him home to dine , and fills his Veins , 
With the hot Blood , which his dear Doxy drains . 
Grandio thinks himself a Beau-garcon , 
Goggles his Eyes , writes Letters up and down ; 
And with his sawch Love , plagues all the Town . 
While pleased to have his Vanity thus fed , 
he 's caught with G — , that old Hag a Bed. 
But should I all the crying Follies tell , 
That rouse the sleeping Sayter from his Cell . 
I to my Reader , should as tedious prove , 
As that old Spark , Albanus making love : 
Or florid Roscius , when with some smooth flame , 
He gravely on the public , tries to shame . 
Hold then my Muse , 't is time to make an end , 
Lest taxing others , thou thyself offend . 
The world 's a Wood , in which all loose their way , 
Though by a different Path , each goes Astray . 
On the supposed Author of a late Poem in defence of Satyr . 

TO rack , and torture thy unmeaning Brain , 
In Satyr's praise , to a low untuned strain , 
In thee was most impertinent and vain . 
When in thy Person , we more clearly see , 
That Satyr's of Divine Authority , 
For God , made one on Man , when he made thee . 
To show there were some Men , as there are Apes . 
Framed for mere sport , who differ but in shapes : 
In thee are all these contradictions joined , 
That make an Ass , prodigious and refined . 
A lump deformed , and shapeless wert thou born . 
begot in Love's despit , and Nature's scorn ; 
And art grown up the most ungraceful Wight , 
Harsh to the Ear , and hideous to the sight , 
Yet love 's thy business , Beauty thy delight . 
Curse on that silly hour , that first inspired , 
Thy madness , to pretend to be admired ; 
To paint thy grizly Face to dance , to dress , 
And all those Awkward Follies that express , 
Thy loathsome Love , and filthy daintiness . 
Who needs will be a Ugly Beau-garcon , 
Spit at , and shunned , by every Girl in Town ; 
Where dreadfully Lovesscare-crow , thou art placed 
To fright the tender Flock , that long to taste : 
While every coming Maid , when you appear , 
Starts back for shame , and straight turns chaste for fear . 
For none so poor , or Prostitute have proved , 
Where you made love , t' endure to be beloved . 
' Twere-labour lost , or else I would advice . 
But thy half Wit , will never let thee be wise . 
Half-witty , and half-mad , and scarce half-brave , 
Half-honest ( which is very much a Knave . ) 
Made up of all these halfs , thou canst not pass 
For any thing entirely , but an Ass.  
The Answer . 

Rail on poor feeble Scribbler , speak of me , 
In as bad Terms , as the World speaks oh thee . 
Sat swelling in thy Hole , like a vexed Toad , 
And full of Pox , and Malice , spit abroad . 
thou canst hurt no Man's Fame , with thy ill word 
Thy Pen , is full as harmless as thy Sword.  
Seneca's Troas , Act. 2.  Chorus . 

After Death , nothing is , and nothing , Death 
The utmost Limits of a gasp of Breath : 
Let the ambitious Zealot , lay aside , 
His hopes of Heaven ( where Faith is but his pride ) 
Let Slavish Souls , lay by their Fear , 
Nor be concerned , which way , nor where . 
After this life they shall be hurled , 
Dead , we become the Lumber of the world ; 
And to that Mass of Matter shall be swept , 
Where things destroyed , with things Unborn , are kept . 
Devouring time swallows up whole , 
Impartial Death confounds Body and Soul.  
For Hell , and the foul Fiend , that rules , 
Gods everlasting fiery Goals , 
Devised by Rogues , dreaded by Fools ; 
( With his grim griezly Dog , that keeps the Door ) 
Are senseless Stories , idle Tales , 
Dreams , Whimsies , and no more . 
Upon Nothing . 

1 

Nothing thou Elder Brother even to shade , 
thou hadst a Being , ever the World was made , 
And ( well fixed ) art alone of ending not afraid , 
2 

Ever time , and place , were , time , and place , were not 
When Primitive Nothing , something straight begot , 
then all Proceeded from the great united — What ? 
3 

Something , the general Attribute of all , 
Severed , from thee , it 's sole Original , 
Into thy boundless self , must undistinguished fall . 
4 

Yet something did thy mighty power command . 
And from thy fruitful emptinesses hand , 
Snatched Men , Beasts , Birds , Fire , Aire , and land  
5 

Matter , the wickedest Offspring of thy Race , 
By form assisted , flew from thy embrace , 
And Rebel Light , obscured thy reverend dusky Face . 
6 

With form and Matter , time , and place , did join , 
Body , thy Foe , with thee did Leagues combine , 
To spoil thy peaceful Realm , and ruin all thy Line . 
7 

But Turn-coat-time , assists the Foe in vain , 
And bribed by thee , assists the short lived Reign , 
And to thy hungry Womb , drives back thy Slaves again . 
8 

Thomas Mysteries are barred from Laich-eyes , 
And the Divine alone , with Warrant pries , 
Into thy Bosom , where thy truth in private lies . 
9 

Yet this of thee , the wise may freely say , 
thou from the Virtuous , nothing tak'st away , 
And to be part of thee , the Wicked wisely pray . 
10 

Great Negative , how vainly would the Wise , 
Inquire , define , distinguish , teach , device , 
Didst thou not stand to point their dull Philosophies 
11 

Is , or is not , the two great ends of Fate , 
And true , or false , the Subject of debate , 
That pefect , or destroy , the vast designs of Fate . 
12 

When they have racked the Politicians Breast , 
Within thy Bosom , most securely rest , 
And when reduced to thee , are least unsafe , & best . 
13 

But Nothing , why does something still permit , 
That Sacred Monarches , should at Council sit , 
With persons highly thought , at best , for Nothing fit . 
14 

Whilst weighty Something , modestly abstains , 
From Prince's Coffers , and from Statesmens' Brains , 
And Nothing there , like stately Nothing reings . 
15 

Nothing who dwellest with Fools , in grave disguise , 
For whom they Reverend shapes , & forms device . 
Lawn-sleeves , & Furs , & Gowns when they like thee look wise . 
16.  

French Truth , Dutch Prowess , British Policy , 
Hibernian Learning , Scotch Civility , 
Spaniard's dispatch , Danes Wit , are mainly seen in thee . 
17 

The great Man's gratitude , to his best Friend , 
King Promises , Whores Vows , towards thee they bend , 
Flow swiftly into thee , and in thee ever end . 
Upon his leaving his Mistress . 

't is not that I 'm weary grown , 
Of being yours , and yours alone , 
But with what Face can I incline , 
To damn you to be only mine ? 
You whom some kinder Power did fashion , 
By merit , and by inclination , 
The joy at least of one whole Nation . 
Let meaner Spirits of your Sex 
With humbler aims , their thoughts perplex , 
And boast , if by their Arts they can , 
Contrive to make one happy Man ; 
Whilst moved by an impartial Sense , 
Favours like Nature you dispense , 
With Universal influence . 
See the kind Seed-receiving Earth , 
To every Grain affords a Birth ; 
On her no Showers unwelcome fall , 
Her willing Womb , retains 'em all , 
And shall my Celia be confined ? 
no , live up to thy mighty Mind , 
And be the Mistress of Mankind . 
Song . 

IN the Fields of Lincoln's Inn , 
Underneath a tattered Blanket , 
On a Flock-bed , God be thanked , 
Feats of Active Love were seen . 
Phillis , who you know loves Swiving , 
As the Gods love pious Prayers ; 
Lay most pensively contriving , 
How to Fuck with Pricks by pairs . 
Coridon's aspiring Tarse , 
Which to Cunt , had never submitted ; 
Wet with Amorous Kiss she fitted , 
To her lesle frequented Are — 
Strephon's , was a handful longer , 
Stiffly propped with eager Lust ; 
None for Champion , was more stronger , 
This into her Cunt he thrust . 
Now for Civil Wars prepare , 
Raised by fierce intestine bustle . 
When these Hero's meeting justle , 
In the Bowels of the fair . 
They tilt , and thrust with horrid pother , 
Blood , and slaughter is decreed ; 
Hurling Souls at one another , 
Wrapped in flakey Clotts of Seed . 
Nature had betwixt C — t and Ace , 
Wisely placed firm separation ; 
God knows else what desolation 
Had ensued from Warring Tarse . 
Though Fate , a dismal end did threaten , 
It proved no worse than was desired . 
The Nymph was sorely Ballock beaten , 
Both the Shepherds sound tired . 
Upon his drinking a Bowl . 

Wlean contrive me such a Cup , 
As Nestor used of old ; 
Show all thy skill to trim it up , 
Damask it round with Gold.  
Make it so large , that filled with Sack , 
Up to the swelling brim ; 
Vast Toasts , on the delicious Lake , 
Like Ships at Sea may swim . 
Engrave not Battle on his Cheek , 
With War , i  naught to do ; 
I 'm none of those that took Mastrich , 
Nor Yarmouth Leaguer knew . 
Let it no name of Planets tell , 
Fixed Stars , or Constellations ; 
For I am no Sir Sydrophell , 
Nor none of his Relations . 
But carve thereon a spreading Vine , 
then add Two lovely Boys ; 
Their Limbs in Amorous folds intwine , 
The Type , of future joys . 
Cupid , and Bacchus , my Saints are , 
May drink , and Love , still reign , 
With Wine , I wash away my cares , 
And then to Cunt again . 
Song . 

AS Cloris full of harmless thoughts , 
Beneath a Willow lay ; 
Kind Love a youthful Shepherd brought , 
To pass the time away . 
She blushed to be encountered so , 
And chid the Amorous Swain ; 
But as she striven to rise and go , 
He pulled her down again . 
A sudden Passion seized her Heart , 
In spite of her disdain ; 
She found a Pulse in every part , 
And Love in every Vain . 
Ah you ( said she ) what Charms are these , 
That conquer and surprise ; 
Ah let me — for unless you please , 
I have no Power to rise . 
She fainting spoken , and trembling lay , 
For fear he should comply ; 
Her lovely Eyes , her Heart betray , 
And gives her Tongue the lie . 
Thus she , whom Princes had denied , 
With all their Pomp and Train ; 
Was in the lucky Minute tried , 
And yielded to the Swain . 
Song . 

Quoth the Duchess of Cl — , to Mistress Kn — 
I 'd fain have a Prick , but how to come by 't ; 
I desire you 'll be secret , and give your advice , 
Though Cunt be not coy , Reputation is nice . 
To some Cellar , in Sodom , your Grace must retire , 
There Porters , with Black-pots , sit round a Coal-fire ; 
There open your Case , and your Grace cannot fail , 
Of a dozen of Pricks , for a dozen of Ale.  
Is 't so quoth the Duchess ? Ah by God , quoth the Whore. 
then give me the Key , that unlocks the Backdoor ; 
For I had rather be fuckt by Porters , and Carmen , 
then thus be abused by C — , and G — 
Song . 

I Rise at Eleven , I Dine obout Two , 
I get drunk before Seven , and the next thing I do ; 
I send for my Whore , when for fear of a Clap , 
I Spend in her hand , and I Spew in her Lap : 
There we quarrel , and scold , till I fall asleep , 
When the Bitch , growing bold , to my Pocket does creep ; 
then slyly she leaves me , and to revenge th' affront , 
At once she bereaves me of Money and Cunt. 
If by chance than I wake , hotheaded , and drunk 
What a coil do I make for the loss of my Punk ? 
I storm , and I roar , and I fall in a rage , 
And missing my Whore , I bugger my Page : 
then cropsick , all Morning , I rail at my Men , 
And in Bed I lie Yawning , till Eleven again . 
Song . 

Love a Woman ! y' are an Ass , 
't is a most insipid Passion 
To choose out for your happiness ! 
The idlest part of God's Creation . 
Let the Porter , and the Groom , 
Things designed for dirty Slaves , 
Drudge in fair Aurelia's Womb , 
To get supplies for Age , and Graves . 
Farewell Woman , I intent , 
Henceforth , every Night to sit , 
With my lewd well natured Friend , 
Drinking , to engender Wit.  
then give me Health , Wealth , Mirth , and Wine , 
And if busy Love , intrenches , 
there 's a sweet soft Page , of mine , 
Does the trick worth Forty Wenches . 
Song to Cloris . 

Fair Cloris in a Pig-stye , lay , 
Her tender Herd , lay by her , 
She slept in murmuring gruntlings , they 
Complaining of the scorching Day , 
Her slumbers thus inspire . 
She dreamt , while she with careful pains , 
Her snow Arms employed , 
In Ivory Pails , to fill out Grains , 
One of her Love convicted Swains , 
Thus hasting to her cried . 
Fly Nymph ! OH fly ! ever 't is too late , 
A dear loved life to save , 
Rescue your Bosom Pig , from Fate , 
Who now expires , hung in the Gate , 
That leads to yonder Cave . 
Myself had tried to set him free , 
Rather than brought the News , 
But I am so abhorred by thee , 
That even thy Darlings life from me , 
I know thou wouldst refuse . 
Struck with the News , as quick the flies , 
As blushes to her Face ; 
Not the bright Lightning from the Skies , 
Nor Love , shot from her brighter Eyes , 
Move half so swift a pace . 
This Plot , it seems the lustful , Slave , 
Had laid against her Honour , 
Which not one God , took care to save , 
For he pursues her to the Cave , 
And throws himself upon her . 
Now pierced is her Virgin Zone , 
She feels the Foe within it , 
She hears a broken Amorous groan , 
The panting Lovers fainting moan , 
Just in the happy Minute . 
Frighted she wakes , and waking Friggs , 
Nature thus kindly eased , 
In dreams raised by her murmuring Pigs , 
And her own Thumb between her Legs , 
She innocent and pleased . 
Song . 

Give me leave to rail at you , 
I ask nothing but my due ; 
To call you false , and then to say , 
You shall not keep my Heart a day . 
But alas ! against my will , 
I must be your Captive still . 
Ah! be kinder then , for I 
Cannot change , and would not die . 
Kindness has resistless charms , 
All besides , but weakly move , 
Fiercest Anger it disarms , 
And eclipse the Wings of flying love . 
Beauty , does the Heart invade , 
Kindness only can persuade ; 
It guilds the Lovers , servile Chain , 
And makes the Slave , grow pleased again . 
The Answer . 

Nothing adds to your fond Fire , 
more than scorn , and cold disdain , 
I to cherish your desire , 
Kindness used , but 't was in vain . 
You insulted on your Slave , 
Humble love you soon refused , 
Hope not then a power to have , 
When ingloriously you used . 
Think not Thirsis , I will ever , 
By my love my Empire loose ; 
You grow constant through despair , 
Love returned , you would abuse . 
Though you still possess my Heart , 
Scorn , and rigour , I must feign . 
Ah! forgive that only Art , 
Love has left , your love to gain . 
You that could my Heart subdue , 
To new Conquests never pretend , 
Let your example make me true , 
And of a Conquered Foe , a Friend : 
then if ever I should complain , 
Of your Empire , or my Chain , 
Summon all your powerful Charms , 
And sell the Rebel , in your Arms . 
Song . 

Philis , be gentler I advice , 
Make up for time misspent , 
When Beauty , on its Deathbed lies 
't is high time to repent . 
Snch is the Malice of your Fate , 
That makes you old so soon , 
Your pleasure ever comes too late , 
How early ever begun . 
Think what a wretched thing is she , 
Whose Stars , contrive in spite , 
The Morning of her love should be , 
Her faiding Beauty's Night . 
then if to make your ruin more , 
you 'll peevishly be coy , 
Die with the scandal of a Whore , 
And never know the joy . 
Song . 

What cruel pains Corinna , takes , 
To force that harmless frown , 
When not a Charm her Face , forsakes ; 
Love , cannot lose his own . 
So sweet a Face , so soft a Heart , 
Such Eyes , so very kind , 
Betray alas ! the silly Art , 
Virtue had ill designed . 
Poor feeble Tyrant , who in vain , 
Would proudly take upon her , 
Against kind Nature , to maintain , 
Affected Rules of Honor.  
The scorn she bears , so helpless proves 
When I pled passion to her , 
That much she fears , but more she love's , 
Her Vassal should undo her . 
Woman's Honor.  

L Ove , bade me hope , and I obeyed , 
Philis continued still unkind , 
then you may e'en despair he said 
In vain I strive to change her Mind . 
honour 's got in , and keeps her Heart ; 
durst he but venture once abroad , 
In my own right I 'd take your part , 
And show myself the mightier God , 
This huffing Honour domineers , 
In Breast alone , where he has place ; 
But if true generous Love appears , 
The Hector dare not show his Face 
Let me still Languish and complain , 
Be most unhumanely denied , 
I have some pleasure in my pain , 
She can have none with all her Pride . 
I fall a Sacrifice to Love , 
She life's a Wretch for Honour's sake , 
Whose Tyrant does most cruel prove , 
The difference is not hard to make . 
Consider real Honour then , 
you 'll find hers cannot be the same , 
't is Noble confidence in Men , 
In Women , mean mistrustful shame . 
Song . 

TO this moment a Rebel I throw down my Arms , 
Great Love , at first sight ●f Olinda's , bright charms , 
Made proud , and secure , by such ●orcess as these , 
You may now play the Tyrant , as soon as you please . 
When Innocence Beauty , and Wit do conspire , 
To betray , and engage , and inflame my desire . 
Why should I decline , what I cannot avoid ; 
And let pleasing hope , by base fear be destroyed . 
Her innocence cannot contrive to undo me , 
Her Beauties Beauties inclined , or why should it pursue me ? 
And Wit , has to pleasure , been ever a Friend , 
then what room for despar , since delight is Love's end . 
There can be no danger in sweetness , and youth , 
Where Love , is secured by good nature and truth . 
On her Beauty I 'll gaze , and of pleasure complain , 
While every kind look adds a Link to my Chain . 
't is more to maintain , that in was to surprise , 
But haet Wit leads in triumph the Slave of her Eyes , 
I beheld , with the loss of my freedom before , 
But hearing , for ever must serve and adore . 
Too bright is my Goddess , her Temple too weak , 
Retire Divine Image , I feel my Heart break , 
Help Love ! I dissolve in a Rapture of Charms , 
At the thought of those joys , I should meet in her Arms . 
Song . 

How happy Cloris ( were they free ) 
Might our enjoyments prove ? 
But you with formal Jealousy , 
Are still tormenting Love.  
Let us ( since Wit instructs us how ) 
Raise Pleasure to the top , 
If Rival Bottle , you 'll allow , 
I 'll suffer Rival Fop.  
there 's not a brisk insipid Spark , 
That flutters in the Town , 
But with your wanton Eyes you mark , 
The Coxcomb for your own . 
You never think it worth your care , 
How empty , nor how dull , 
The Heads of your admirers are , 
So that their Cod be full . 
All this you freely may confess , 
Yet we 'll not disagree ; 
For did you love your pleasure lesle , 
You were not fit for me . 
While I my passion to pursue , 
am whole Nights taking in , 
The lusty Juice of Grapes , take you 
The lusty Juice of Men.  
Love and Life , a Song . 

ALL my past Life is mine no more , 
The flying hours are gone ; 
Like transitory Dreams given o'er , 
Whose Images are kept in store , 
By Memory alone . 
What ever is to come , is not , 
How can it then be mine ? 
The present Moment's all my Lot , 
And that as fast as it is got , 
Phillis , is wolly thine . 
then talk not of inconstancy , 
False Hearts , and broken Vows , 
If I by Miracle can be , 
This livelong Minute true to thee , 
'T was all that Heaven allows . 
The Fall , a Song . 

How blessed was the Created State , 
Of Man , and Woman , ever they fell , 
Compared to our unhappy Fate ; 
We need not fear another Hell.  
Naked beneath cool Shades they lay , 
Enjoyment waited on desire . 
Each Member did their wills obey , 
Nor could a wish , set pleasure higher . 
But we poor Slaves , to hope and fear , 
Are never of our joys secure . 
They lessen still as they draw near . 
And none but dull delights endure . 
then Cloris , while I duty pay , 
The Noble Tribute of my Heart . 
Be not you so severe to say , 
You love me for a frailer part . 
Song . 

While on those lovely looks I graze , 
To see a Wretch pursuing , 
In Raptures of a blessed amaze . 
This pleasing happy ruin . 
't is not for pity , that I move , 
His Fate is too aspiring , 
Whose Heart , broke with a Load of love , 
Dies wishing , and admiring . 
But if this Murder you 'd forgo , 
Your Slave from Death removing . 
Let me your Art of Charming know , 
Or learn you mine of Loving . 
But whether Life , or Death betid , 
In love , 't is equal measure . 
The Victor life's with empty pride , 
The Vanquished dye with pleasure . 
Song . 

BY all Love's soft , yet mighty Powers . 
It is a thing unfit , 
That Men should Fuck in time of Flowers ; 
Or when the Smock's beshit . 
Fair nasty Nymph , be clean and kind , 
And all my joys restore ; 
By using Paper still behind , 
And Sponges for before , 
My spotless Flames can never decay , 
If after every close , 
My smoking Prick escape the Fray , 
Without a Bloody Nose . 
If thou wouldst have me true , be kind , 
And take to cleanly sinning ; 
None but fresh Lovers Pricks can rise , 
At Fillis in foul linen . 
Song . 

Room , room , for a Blade of the Town , 
That takes delight in Roaring , 
And daily Rambles up and down , 
And at Night in the Street lies Snoring , 
That for the noble name of Spark , 
Dares his Companions rally ; 
Commits an outrage in the dark , 
then slinks into an Alley . 
To every Female that he meets , 
He swears he bears affection , 
Defies all Laws , Arrests , and Feats , 
By the help of a kind Protection . 
then he intending further wrongs : 
By some resenting Cully , 
Is decently run through the Lungs , 
And there 's an end of Bully . 
Song . 

Against the Charms our Ballocks have , 
How weak all human skill is ? 
Since they can make a Man a Slave , 
To such a Bitch as Phillis . 
Whom that I may describe throughout , 
Assist me Bawdy Powers , 
I 'll write upon a double Clout , 
And dip my Pen in Flowrs , 
Her looks demurely impudent , 
Ungainly Beautiful , 
Her Modesty is insolent , 
Her Mirth is pert and dull . 
A Prostitute , to all the Town , 
And yet with no Man Friends , 
She rails , and scolds , when she lies down , 
And curses when she spends . 
Bawdy in thoughts , precise in words , 
Ill natured , and a Whore , 
Her Belly , is a Bag of T-rds , 
And her C — t , a common shore . 
Song . 

I Cannot change as others do 
Though you unjustly scorn 
Since that poor Swain that sighs for you 
For you alone was born . 
no Phillis , no , your Heart to move , 
A surer way I 'll try 
And to revenge my slighted love 
Will still love on , will still love on , and die . 
When killed with grief Amyntas lies 
And you to mind shall call , 
The sighs that now unpitied rise 
The Tears that vainly fall ; 
That welcome hour that ends this smart 
Will then begin your pain , 
For such a faithful tender Heart 
Can never break , can never break in vain . 
The Mock Song . 

I Swive as well as others do , 
I 'm young , not yet deformed , 
My tender Heart , sincere , and true , 
Deserves not to be scorned . 
Why Phillis then , why will you swive , 
With Forty Lovers more ? 
Can I ( said she ) with Nature strive , 
Alas I am , alas I am a Whore.  
Were all my Body larded o'er , 
With Darts of love , so thick , 
That you might find in every Poor , 
A well stuck standing Prick ; 
Whilst yet my Eyes alone were free , 
My Heart , would never doubt , 
In Amorous Rage , and Ecstasy , 
To wish those Eyes , to wish those Eyes sucked out . 
Actus Primus Scena Prima . 

Enter Tarsander and Swiveanthe . The Scene . 

A Bedchamber . Tar.   For standing Tarses we kind Nature thank , 
And yet adore those Cunts that make 'em lank ; 
Unhappy Mortals ! whose sublimest joy , 
Preys on itself , and does itself destroy . 


Swi .  Do not thy Tarse , Nature's best gift , despise , 
That C — t , that made it fall , will make it rise ; 
Though it a while the Amorous Combat eat , 
And seems from mine , into thy Belly run ; 
Yet 't will return , more vig'rous , and more fierce ; 
Than flaming Drunkard , when he 's died in Tierce , 
It but retires , as losing Gamesters do , 
Till they have raised a Stock to play a new . 


Tar.   What pleasure has a Gamester , if he knows , 
When ever he plays , that he must always lose ? 


Swi .  What Pego loses , 't were a pain to keep , 
We say not that our Nights are lost in sleep ; 
What pleasures we in those soft Wars employ , 
We do not waste , but to the full enjoy . 
[ ex Tarsander , 

Enter Celia . Cel.   Madam , methings those sleepy Eyes declare , 
Too lately you have eas d a Lovers care ; 
I fear you have with interest repaid , 
Those eager thrusts , which at your Cunt he made . 


Swi .  With force united , my soft Heart he stormed , 
Like Age he doted , but like Youth performed . 
She that alone her Lover can withstand , 
Is more than Woman , or he lesle than Man  
[ Exeunt . 

The first Letter from B. to Mr. E.  

Dreaming last Night on Mrs. Farley , 
My Prick was up this Morning early ; 
And I was fain without my Gown , 
To rise i' th' cold , to get him down . 
Hard shift alas , but yet a sure , 
Although it be no pleasing cure . 
Of Old , the fair Egyptian Slattern , 
For Luxury , that had no Pattern , 
To fortify her Roman Swinger , 
Instead of Nutmegs , Mace and Ginger , 
Did spice his Bow'ls ( as Story tells ) 
With Warts of Rocks , and Spawn of Shells . 
It had been happy for her Grace , 
Had I been in the Rascal's place . 
I who do scorn that any Stone , 
Should raise my Pintle , but my own . 
Had laid her down on every Couch , 
And sparded her Pearl , and Diamond Brouch , 
Until her Hot-taild Majesty , 
Being happily reclaimed by me , 
From all her wild expensive ways , 
Had worn her Gems on Holy Days . 
But since her C — has long done itching , 
Let us discourse of Modern Bitching . 
I must entreat you by this Letter , 
To inquire for Whores , the more the better : 
Hunger makes any man a Glutton , 
If Roberts , Thomas , Mistress Dutton . 
Or any other Bawd of note , 
Inform of a fresh Petticoat . 
Inquire , I pray , with Friendly care , 
Where their respective Lodgings are . 
Some do compare a Man to a Bark , 
A pretty Metaphor , pray mark , 
And with a long and tedious story , 
Will all the Tackling lay before ye . 
The Sails are Hope , the Masts desire , 
Till they the gentlest Reader tyre . 
But howso'ere they keep a pother , 
I 'm sure the Pintle is the Rudder . 
The powerful Rudder , which of force , 
To Town , must shortly steer my Course ; 
And if you do not there provide 
A Port , where I may safely ride . 
Landing in haste , in some foul Creek , 
't is ten to one , I spring a Leak . 
Next , I must make it my request , 
If you have any interest ; 
Or can by any means discover , 
Some lamentable Rhyming Lover , 
Who shall in Numbers harsh and vile , 
His Mistress , Nymph , or Goddess stile . 
send all his Labours down to me , 
By the first opportunity . 
Or any Knights of your round Table 
To other Scribblers formidable . 
Guilty themselves of the same Crime , 
Dress Nonsense up in ragged Rhyme , 
As once a Week , they seldom fail , 
Inspired with Love , and Grid-iron Ale.  
Or any paultery Poetry , 
Thomas from the University . 
Who when the k — and Q — were there , 
Did both their Wit and Learning spare ; 
And have ( I hope ) endeavoured since , 
To make the World some recompense . 
Such damned Fustian , when you meet , 
Be not too rash , or indiscreet ; 
Thomas they can find no just excuses , 
To put 'em to their proper uses ; 
Thomas fatal Privy , or the Fire , 
Their Nobler Foe , at my desire . 
Restrain your natural profuseness , 
And spare'em , though you have a looseness . 
Mr. E — s Answer . 

AS crafty Harlots , use to shrink , 
From Lechers , dosed with sleep and drink 
When they intent to make up Pack , 
By silching Sheets , or Shirt from Back , 
So were you pleased to steal away 
From me , whilst on your Bed I lay : 
But long you had not been departed , 
When pinched with cold from thence I started ; 
Where missing you , I stamped and stared , 
Like Bacon , when he waked and heard , 
His Brazen Head , in vain had spoken , 
And saw it lie in pieces broke , 
Sighing , I to my Chamber make , 
And every Limb , was stiff as Stake . 
Unless poor Pego , which did feel , 
Like slimey Skin of new stripped Eel , 
Or Pudding , that mischance had got ; 
And spent itself half in the Pot. 
With care , I cleansed the sneaking Varlet , 
That late had been in Pool of Harlot . 
But neither Shirt , nor Water could , 
Remove the stench of Leach'rous Mud. 
The Queen of Love from Sea did spring , 
Whence the best C — 't is still smell like Ling. 
But sure this damned notorious Bitch , 
Was made o' th' froth of Jane Shore's Ditch , 
Or else her C — t could never stink , 
Like Pump that 's foul , or nasty Sink . 
When this was done , to Bed I went , 
And the whole Day , in sleep I spent ; 
But the next Morning , fresh and gay , 
As Citizen , on Holy Day ; 
I wandered in the spacious Town , 
amongst the Bawds , of best renown ! 
To Temple I a visit made , 
Temple ! the Beauty of her Trade ! 
The only Bawd that ever I , 
For want of Whore could occupy ? 
She made me Friends with Mistress Cuffley , 
Whom we indeed had used too roughly ; 
For by a gentler way I found , 
The Whore , would Fuck under ten Pound . 
So resty Jades , which scorn to stir , 
Though oft provoked by Switches , and spur : 
By milder usage may be got , 
To fall into their wont Trot.  
But what success I further had , 
And what discov'ries good , and bad , 
I made roving up , and down , 
I 'll tell you when you come to Town . 
Further , I have obeyed your motion , 
Though much provoked by Pill , and Potion , 
And sent you down some paltry Rhymes , 
The greatest grievance of our times ; 
When such as Nature , never made 
For Poets daily will invade 
Wits Empire , both the Stage , and Press , 
And which is worse , with good success . 
The Second Letter from B — to Mr. E — 

IF I can guests the Devil choke me , 
What horrid fury could provoke thee , 
To use thy railing , scurr'lous Wit , 
Against C — t , and Pr. — k , the source of it : 
For what but C — t , and Pr. — k , does raise 
Our thoughts to Songs , and Roundelays ? 
Enables ns to Annagrams 
And other Amorous flim flams ? 
then we write Plays , and so proceed , 
To Bays , the Poets sacred Weed 
Hast no respect for God Priapus ? 
That Ancient Story , shall not scape us . 
Priapus , was a Roman God , 
But in plain English , Pr. — k , and Cod , 
That pleas ' their Sisters , Wives , and Daughters , 
Guarded their Pippins , and Pomwaters , 
For at the Orchards utmost entry , 
This mighty Deity stood Sentry ; 
Invested in a tattered Blanket , 
To scare the Magpyes , from their Banquet : 
But this may serve to show we trample , 
On Rule , and Method , by example . 
Of Modern Authors , who do snap at all , 
Will talk of Caesar , in the Capitol , 
Of Cimhius , Beams , and Sols , bright Ray , 
Known Foe , to Buttermilk , and Whey , 
Which softens Wax , and hardens Clay . 
All this without the least connexion , 
Which to say truth's enough to vex one ; 
But farewel all Poetic dizziniss , 
And now to come unto the business . 
Tell the bright Nymph , how sad , and pensively 
Ever since we used her so offensively , 
In dismal shades , with Arms a cross , 
I sit lamenting of my loss ; 
To Echo , I her Name commend , 
Who has it now at her Tongue's end , 
And Parrot-like , repeats the same , 
For should you talk of Tamberlyn , 
Cussley ! she cries at the same time , 
Though the last Accents do not Rhyme : 
Far more than Echo , ever did yet , 
For Phillis , or bright Amoretta . 
With Penknife keen , of moderate size , 
As bright and piercing as her Eyes ; 
A glitt'ring Weapon , which would scorn , 
To pair a Nail , or cut a Corn ; 
Upon the Trees , of smoothest Bark , 
I carve her Name , or else her mark , 
Which commonly's a bleeding Heart , 
A weeping Eye , or flaming Dart.  
Here on a Beech , like Amorous Sot , 
I sometimes carve a True-love's Knot ; 
There a tall Oak , her name does bear , 
In a large spreading Character . 
I choose the fairest , and the best 
Of all the Grove , among the rest . 
I carved it on a Lofty Pine , 
Which who wept a pint of Turpentine ; 
Such was the terror of her Name , 
By the report of evil Fame 
Who tired with immoderate flight , 
Had lodged upon its Boughs all Night . 
The wary Tree , who feared a Clap , 
And knew the virtue of his Sapritius , 
Dropped Balsam into every Wound , 
And in an hours time was sound . 
But you are unacquanted yet , 
With half the power of Amoretta , 
For the can drink , as well as swive , 
Her growing Empire , still must thrive , 
Our Hearts weak Forts , we must resign , 
When Beauty does its forces join 
With Man's strong Enemy , good Wine : 
This I was told by my Lord O B — , 
A Man whose word , I much rely on , 
He kept touch , and came down hither , 
When thou wert scared with the foul Wether : 
But if thou wouldst forgiven be , 
Say that a Cunt detained thee . 
Cunt ! whose strong Charms , the World bewitches , 
The joy of Kings ! the Beggar's riches ! 
The Courtiers , business , Statesman's leisure ! 
The tired Tinkers , ease , and pleasure ! 
Of which alas I've leave to prate , 
But o the rigour of my Fate ! 
For want of bouncing Bona Roba ! 
Lasciva est nobis pagina vita proba . 
For that Rhyme , I was fain to fumble , 
When Pegasus , begins to stumble , 
't is time to rest , your very humble . 
Mr. E — s. Answer . 

SO soft , and Am'rously you write , 
Of Cunt , and Pr. — k , the Cunts' delight ; 
That were I still in Lantern sweeting , 
Swallowing of Bolus , or a spitting , 
I should forget each injury , 
The Pocky Whores , have offered me , 
And only of my Fate complain , 
Because I must from C — t abstain . 
The powerful Cunt ! Whose very name ? 
Kindles in me an amorous flame ! 
begins to make my Pintle rise , 
And long again to fight Love's Prize ! 
Forgetful of those many Scars , 
He was received in those Wars . 
This shows Love's chiefest Magic lies , 
In Woman's C — 't is , not in their Eyes , 
There Cupid , does his Revels keep , 
There Lovers , all their sorrows steep , 
For having once but tasted that , 
Our miseries are quite forgot . 
This may suffice to let you know , 
That I to C — t , am not a Foe , 
Though you are pleased to think me so : 
't is strange his Zeal should be in suspicion . 
Who dies a Martyr , for 's Religion . 
But now to give you an account 
Of Cussley , that Whore Paramount ! 
Cuffley ! whose Beauty warms the Age , 
And fills our Youth , with Love , and Rage , 
Who like fierce Wolves , pursue the Game , 
While secretly the Lech'rous Dame , 
With some choice Gallant , takes her flight , 
And in a Corner Fucks all Night . 
then the next Morning , we all hunt , 
To find whose Fingers , smell of Cunt. 
With jealousy , and Envy moved , 
Against the Man that was beloved . 
Whilst you within some Neighbouring Grove , 
Indite the Story of your love , 
And with your Penknife , keen , and bright , 
On stately Trees , your passion write , 
So that each Nymph that passes through , 
Must envy her , and pity you ; 
We at the Fleece , or at the Bear , 
With good Case-knife , well whet on Stair : 
A gentle Weapon , made to feed 
Mankind , and not to make 'em bleed ; 
A thousand amorous fancies scrape , 
there 's not a Pewter-dish , can scape , 
Without her name , or Arms , which are , 
The same that Love , himself , does bear . 
Here one to show you Love 's no Glutton , 
i' th' midst of Supper , leaves his Mutton , 
And on a greasy Plate , with care , 
Carves the bright Image of the Fair.  
Another , though adrunken Sot , 
Neglects his Wine , and on the Pot , 
A band of naked Cupid's draws , 
With Pr. — ks , no bigger than Wheat Straws . 
then on a nasty Candlestick , 
One figures Love's Hieroglyphic , 
A Couchant Cunt , and Rampant Prick . 
And that the sight may more inflame , 
The lookers on , subscribe her name , 
Cuffley ! her Sex's Pride , and shame . 
there 's not a Man but does discover . 
By some such Action he 's her Lover , 
But now 't is time to give her over , 
And let your Lordship , know , you are 
The Mistress , that employs our care ; 
Your absence makes us Melancholy , 
Nor drink , nor C — t , can make us jolly ; 
Unless wa've you within our Arms , 
In whom there dwells diviner Charms ! 
then quit with speed the pensive Grove , 
And here in Town , pursue your love ; 
Where at your coming , you shall find , 
Your Servants glad , your Mistress kind , 
And all things devoted to your Mind . 
With your very Humble Servant . 

On Mr. E — H — upon his B — P — 

Come on ye Critics ! find one fault who dare , 
For read it backward , like a Witches Prayer . 
'T will do as well ; throw not away your jests , 
On solid Nonsense , that abides all Tests . 
Wit , like Tierce Claret , when 't begins to pall , 
Neglected lies , and 's of no use at all ; 
But in its full perfection of decay , 
Turns Vinegar , and comes again in play . 
This Simile , shall stand in thy defence , 
Against such dull Rogues , as now and then write sense . 
He lies dear Ned , who says thy Brain , is barren , 
Where deep conceits , like Vermin , breed in Carrin ; 
thou hast a Brain , such as thou hast indeed , 
On what else , should thy Worm of Fancy feed ? 
Yet in a Philbert , I have often known , 
Maggots , survive , when all the Kernell's gone . 
Thy Style 's the same , what ever be the Theme , 
As some digestions , turn all Meat to Phlegm . 
Thy stumbling Foundered Jade , can Troth as high , 
As any other Pegasus , can fly . 
As skilful Dyvers , to the bottom fall , 
Sooner than those , that cannot swim at all ; 
So in this way of writing , without thinking , 
thou hast a strange Alacrity , in sinking . 
thou writ'st below , even thy own natural parts , 
And with acquired dullness , and new Arts , 
Of studied Nonsense , tak'st kind Readers hearts , 
So the dull Eel , moves nimbler in the Mud , 
Than all the swift Finned Racers , of the Flood . 
Therefore dear Ned , at my advice forbear , 
Such loud complaints against Critics to prefer , 
Since thou art turned an Arrant Libeler : 
thou sett'st thy Name , to what thyself does write , 
Did ever Libel , yet so sharply bite ? 
On the same Author upon his B — P — 

AS when a Bully , draws his Sword , 
Though no Man gives him a cross word ; 
And all persuasions are in vain , 
To make him put it up again ; 
Each Man draws too and falls upon him , 
To take the wicked Weapon from him : 
Even so dear Ned , thy drsp'rate Pen , 
no lesle disturbs all witty Men : 
And makes 'em wonder what a Devil , 
Provokes thee to be so uncivil ; 
When thou and all thy Friends must know 'em , 
thou yet wilt dare to Print thy Poem . 
That poor Curs fate , and thine are one , 
Who has his Tail pegged in a Bone ; 
About he runs , no body , ll own him . 
Men , Boys , and Dogs , are all upon him . 
And first the greater Wtts , were at thee , 
Now every little Fool , will pat thee . 
Fellows , that never were heard , or read of , 
( If thou writ'st on ) will write thy head off . 
Thus Mastiffs , only , have the knack , 
To cast the Bear , upon his Back ; 
But when th' unwieldy Beast , is thrown , 
Mu●grillss , will serve to keep him down . 
On the same Author upon his New Vt — 

Thou damned Antipodes to common sense , 
thou Foil to Fluence ! prithee tell from whence , 
Does all this mighty Rock of dullness spring , 
Which in such Loads thou to the Stage dost bring ? 
Is 't all thy own ? or hast thou from Snow-hill , 
th' assurance of some Ballad making Quill ? 
no , they fly higher yet ; thy Plays are such , 
I 'd swear they were translated vot of Dutch : 
And who the Devil , was ever yetso drunk , 
To read the Volumes of Myn-heer-van Dunk ? 
fain would I know what Diet thou dost keep , 
If thou dost always , or dough never sleep ? 
Sure Hasty Pudding , is thy chiefest Dish , 
With Lights , and Livers , and with stinking Fish. 
Ox-cheek Tripe , Garbage , thou dost treat thy Brain 
Which nobly pays this Tribute back again . 
With Dazy Roots , thy dwafish Muse is fed , 
A Giant's Body , with a Pigmies Head. 
Canst thou not find amongst thy num'rous Race , 
One Friend , so kind , to tell thee that thy Play 's ; 
Laughed at by Box , Pit , Gallery , nay Stage , 
And grown the naus'ous grievance of this Age ! 
Think on 't a while , and thou wilt quickly find , 
Thy Body made for labour , not thy Mind . 
Nor other use of Paper , thou shouldst make , 
But carry Loads of Rhymes , upon thy Back ; 
Carry vast Burdens till thy Shoulders shrink , 
But cursed be he , that gives thee Pen , and Ink , 
Those dangerous Weapons , should be keep from Fools , 
As Nurse from their Children , keep Edge-tools . 
For thy dull Muse , a Muckender were fit , 
To wipe the slav'rings of her Infant Wit : 
Which though 't is late ( if Justice could be found . 
Should like blind , new born Puppy's , yet be drowned ) 
For were it not we must respect afford , 
To any Muse , that 's Grand-chil , to a Lord ; 
thine , in the Ducking-stool , should take her Seat , 
Drenched like herself , in a great Chair of State , 
Where like a Muse , of Quality , she 'll die , 
And thou thyself , shalt make her Elegy , 
In the same Strain , thou writ'st thy Comedy . 
The Disappointment . 

1.  

One Day the Amorous Lisander , 
By an impatient passion swayed , 
Surprised Fair Cloris , that loved Maid , 
Who could defend herself no longer ; 
All things did with his love conspire , 
The guilded Planet of the Day , 
In his gay Chariot , drawn by Fire , 
Was now descending to the Sea , 
And left no light to guide the World , 
But what from Cloris brighter Eyes was hurled 
2.  

In a loan Ticket , made for love , 
Silent , as yielding Maids consent , 
She with a charming languishment , 
Permits his force ; yet gently striven ; 
Her hands , his Bosom , softly meet , 
But not to put him back designed , 
Rather to draw him on inclined , 
Whilst the lay trembling at her Fect ; 
Resistance , 't is too late to show , 
She wants the power to say — Ah! what d' ye do ? 
3.  

Her bright Eyes sweet , and yet severe , 
Where Love , and shame , confusedly strive , 
Fresh vigour , to Lisander give ; 
And whispering softly in his Ear , 
She cried — cease — cease — your vain desire , 
Or I 'll call out what would you do ? 
My dearer Honour , even to you , 
I cannot — must not give — retire , 
Or take that life , whose chiefest part , 
I gave you with the Conquest of my Heart . 
4 

But he , as much unused to fear , 
As he was capable of Love , 
The blessed Minutes to improve , 
Kisses her Lips , her Neck , her Hair ! 
Each touch ! her new desires Alarms ! 
His burning trembling hand he pressed , 
Upon her melting Snowy Breast , 
While he lay panting in his Arms ! 
All her ungarded Beauties lie , 
The spoils , and Trophies , of the Enemy , 
4 

And now without respect , or fear , 
He seeks the Object of his Vows . 
His love no modesty allows . 
By swift degrees , advancing where . 
His daring Hand that Altar seized , 
Where Gods of Love , do Sacrifice ! 
That awful Thorn ! that Paradise ! 
Where Rage is tamed , and Anger pleased ? 
That living Fountain , from whose Trills , 
The melted Soul , in liquid drops destils ! 
6.  

Her Balmey Lips , encountering his , 
Their Bodies , as their Souls they joined , 
Where both in transports unconfined , 
Extend themselves upon the Moss ! 
Cloris , half dead , and breathless lay , 
Her Eyes appeared like Humid light , 
Such as divides the Day , and Night , 
Or falling Stars , whose Fires decay ; 
And now no signs of life she shows , 
But what in short-breathed sighs , returns and goes . 
7.  

He saw how at her length she lay , 
He saw her rising Bosom bare ; 
Her loose thine Robes , through which appear , 
A shape designed , for love , and play 
Abandoned by her Pride , and shame : 
She does her softest sweets dispense , 
off ring her Virgin , innocence , 
A Victim , to Love's sacred flame . 
Whilst th' o'er ravished Shepherd , lies , 
Unable to perform the Sacrifice . 
8 

Ready to taste a Thousand joys , 
The too transported hapless Swain , 
Found the vast pleasure , tured to rain : 
Pleasure ! which too much love destroys ! 
The willing Garment by he laid , 
And Heaven all open to his view . 
Mad to possess , himself he threw , 
On the defenceless lovely Maid ! 
But o ! what enviours Gods conspire ! 
To snach his power , yet leave him the desire ! 
9  

Nature's support , without whose Aid , 
She can no human being give ; 
Itself now wants the Art to live ; 
Faintness , its slackened Nerves Invade , 
In vain th' enraged Youth assayed , 
To call his fleeting Vigour back ; 
no motion , 't will from motion take , 
Excess of love , his love betrayed , 
In vain he toils , in vain commands . 
th' Insensible , fell weeping in his Hands . 
10.  

In this so Amorous cruel strife , 
Where Love , and Fate , were too severe . 
The poor Lisander , in despair , 
Renounced his Reason , with his life . 
Now all the brisk , and Active fire , 
That should the nobler part in flame , 
And left no spark for new desire ; 
Not all her naked Charms could move , 
Our calm that Rage , that had debauched his love . 
11.  

Cloris , returning from the Trance , 
Which love and soft desire , had bred , 
Her timorous hand , she gently laid , 
Or guided by design , or chance 
Upon that Fabulous Priapus , 
That Potent God ( as Poets feign ) 
But never did young Shepherdess , 
( Gathering of Fern , upon the Plain ) 
more nimbly draw her Fingers back , 
Finding beneath the Verdant Leaves a Snake ; 
12.  

then Cloris , her fair hand withdrew , 
Finding that God , of her defiers , 
Lisa●med of all his powerful Fires ; 
And cold as Flowers bathed in the Morning Dew ; 
Who can the Nymphs confusion guests ? 
The blood forsaken the kinder place , 
And strewed with blushes all her Face , 
Which both disdain , and shame express ; 
And from Lisander's , Arms she fled , 
Leaving him fainting , on the gloomy Bed.  
13.  

Like Lightning , through the Grove , she hies , 
Or Daphne , from the Delphic God , ; 
no print upon the Grassy Rcad , 
She leaves , t' instruct pursuing Eyes ; 
The Wind , that wantoned in her Hair , 
And with her ruffled Garments played , 
Discovered in the flying Maid ; 
All that the Gods ever made of Fair. 
So Venus , when her Love , was slain , 
With fear , and hast , flew o'er the Fatal Plain , 
14.  

The Nymphs resentments , none but I , 
Can well imagine , and Condole ; 
But none can guests Lisander's , Soul , 
But those who swayed his Distiny : 
His silent griefs , swell up to Storms , 
And not one God , his fury spares , 
He cursed his Birth , his Fate , his Stars , 
But more the Sheherdesses' Charms ; 
Whose soft bewitching influence , 
Had damned him to the Hell , of Impotence . 
On a Giniper Tree now cut down to make Busks . 

Whilst happy I triumphant stood , 
The pride and glory of the Wood , 
My Aromatic Boughs , and Fruit , 
Did with all other Trees dispute ; 
Had right by Nature , to excel , 
In pleasing both the Taste , and smell . 
But to the touch , I must confess , 
bore an unwilling fullenness : 
My Wealth , like bashful Vergins , I , 
Yielding with some reluctancy ; 
For which my value should be more , 
Not giving easily my store . 
My Verdant Branches , all the year , 
Did an Eternal Beauty were , 
Did ever young , and gay appear , 
Nor needed any Tribute pay , 
For Bounties from the God of Day . 
Nor do I hold Supremacy , 
In all the Wood , o'er ev're Tree , 
But even those to of my own Race , 
That grew not in this happy place ; 
But that in which I glory most , 
And do myself with reason boast , 
Beneath my snade the other Day , 
Young Philocles , and Cloris , lay 
Upon my Root , he placed her Head , 
And where I grew , he made her Bed ; 
There trembling Limbs , did gently press , 
The kind suporting , yielding Moss ; 
Never half so blessed , as now to bear , 
A Swain , so young , a Nymph , so fair . 
My grateful Shade , I kindly lent 
And every aiding Bough I bend , 
So low , as sometimes had the Bliss , 
To rob the Shepherd of a Kiss . 
Whilst he in pleasures far above ! 
The sense of that degree of love ! 
Permitted every stealth I made , 
Uujealous of his Rival shade . 
I saw 'em kindle to desire ! 
Whilst with soft sighs , they blew the Fire ! 
saw the approaches of their joy , 
He growing more fierce , and she lesle coy ! 
Saw how they mingled melting Rays ! 
Exchanging love a Thousand ways ! 
Kind was the force on every side . 
Her new desires , she could not siide , 
Nor would the Shepherd be denied ! 
Impatient , he waits no consent , 
But what she gave by languishment . 
The blessed Minute he pursued , 
Whilst Love , her fere , and shame subdued 
And now transported in his Arms , 
Yieelds to to the Conqueror , all her Charms ! 
His panting Breast , to hers now joined , 
They feast on Raptures , unconfined ! 
Vast and luxuriant , such as prove , 
The immortality of love ! 
For who but a Divinity ! 
Could mingle Souls to that degree , 
And melt 'em into Ecstasy ! 
Where like the Pooenix both expire , 
Whilst from the Ashes of their Fire , 
Sprung up a New , and soft desire , 
Like Charmers , Thrice they did invoke 
The God , and Thrice new vigour took 
And had the Nymph , been half so kind , 
As was the Shepherd , well inclined ; 
The Mystery had not ended there ; 
But Cloris , reassumed her fear , 
And chid the Swain , for having pressed , 
What she ( alas ) could not resist : 
Whilst he , in whom Love's sacred flame , 
Before , and after was the same , 
Humbly implores she would forget 
That fault , which he would yet repeat , 
From active joys with shame they hast , 
To a reflection on the past ; 
A Thousand times the Covert blses , 
That did secure their happiness ; 
Their gratitude , to every Tree 
They pay , most to happy me ! 
The Shepherdess , my Bark carrest , 
Whilst he my Root ( Love's Pillow ) kissed , 
And did with sights their Fate deplore , 
Since I must shelter 'em no more . 
And if before , my joys were such , 
In having seen , and herd so much ; 
My griefs , must be as great , and high , 
When all abandoned I must lie , 
Doomed to a silent Destiny : 
no more the Amorous strife to hear , 
The Shepherds , Vous , the Virgin's fear ; 
no more a joyful looker on , 
Whilst Love's soft Battl's lost and wone . 
With grief I boued my murmuring Head , 
And all my Crystal Dew , I shed , 
Which did in Cloris pity move ; 
Cloris whose Soul is made of love . 
She cut me down , and did translate , 
My being to a happier State : 
no Martyr , for Religion died , 
With half that unconsid'ring pride ; 
My Top was , on the alter laid , 
Where Love , his softest Offerings paid , 
And was as fragrant Incense burned ; 
My Body , into Busks , was turned . 
Where I still guard the sacred Store , 
And of Love's Temple , keep the Door . 
On the Death of Mr. Grnehill The Famous Painter . 

What doleful cries are these that fright my sense , 
Sad , as the groans of dying innocence ! 
The kill Accents , now more near approach , 
And the infectious sound , 
Spreads , and enlarges all around , 
And does all Hearts , with grief , and wonder touch ! 
The famous Grnehill's dead ! even he , 
That could to us give immortality , 
Is to th' Eternal , silent Groves , withdrawn , 
Those sullen Groves , of Everlasting Dawn ; 
Youthful as Flowers scarce blown , whose opening 
Leaves , 
A wondrous and a fragrant Prospect gives , 
Of what its Elder Beauties would display , 
When it should slorish up to ripening May ! 
Witty ! as Poets , warmed with Love , and Wine , 
Yet still spared Heaven and his Friend ; 
For Both to him , were sacred , and divine , 
Nor could he this , no more than that offend . 
Fixed as a Martyr , where he Friendship paid , 
And generous as a God 
Distributing his Bounties all abroad , 
And soft , and gentle , as a Lovesick Maid . 
Great Master , of the Noble Mystery , 
That ever happy knowledge did inspire ; 
Sacred as that of Poetry ! 
And which , the wondering World , does equally admire ! 
Great Nature's works we do contemn , 
When on his glorious Births , we meditate , 
The Face , and Eyes , more Darts received from him , 
then all the Charms she can create : 
The difference is , his Beauties do beget , 
In the Enamered Soul , a virtuous heat , 
Whilst Nature's grosser pieces move , 
In the course Road , of common love . 
So bold , yet soft , his touches were . 
So round each part , so sweet , and fair , 
That as his Pencil moved Men thought it pressed , 
The lively imitated Breast , 
Which yields like Clouds , where little Angels rest ! 
The Limbs all easy , as his temper was , 
Strong at his Mind and Manly too ; 
Large as his Soul , his fancy was , and new ; 
And from himself he coppyed every grace , 
For he had all that could adorn a Face , 
All that could either Sex , subdue . 
Each excellence he had , that Youth has in its pride , 
And all experienced Age , can teach ; 
At once the vig'rous Fire of this , 
And every Virtue , which that can express , 
In all the height that both could reach ! 
And yet ( alas ) in this perfection died ! 
Dropped like a Blossom , with a Northern blast , 
When all the scattered Leaves , abroad are cast , 
As quick ! as If his Fate , had been in haste ! 
So have I seen an unfixt Star , 
Outshine the rest of all the num'rous Train 
( As bright as that which guide's the Mariner ) 
Dart swiftly from its darkened Sphere , 
And never shall light the World again ! 
O why should so much knowledge die ! 
Or with his last kind Breath , 
Why could he not to some one Friend , bequeath 
The mighty Legacy 
But 't was a knowledge given to him alone , 
That his Eternised name might be , 
Admired to all Posterity , 
By all to whom his grateful name was known ! 
Come all ye softer Beauties , come ! 
Bring Wreaths of Flowers , to deck his Tomb , 
Mixed with the dismal Cypress , and the Yew , 
For he still gave your Charms their due ; 
And from the injuries of Age , and Time , 
Scured the sweetness of your prime , 
And best knew how to adore that sweetness too ! 
Bring all your mournful Tributes here , 
And let your Eyes , a silent sorrow wear , 
Till every Virgin , for a while become , 
Sad as his Fate , and like his Pictures dumb . 
To all curious Critics and Admirers of Meeter . 

Have you seen the raging Stormy Main 
Toss a Ship up , then cast her down again ? 
Sometimes she seems to touch the very Skies . 
And then again upon the Sand she lies . 
Or have you seen a Bull , when he is jealous , 
How he does tear the ground , and Rores and Bellows ? 
Or have you seen the pretty Turtle Dove , 
When she laments the absence of her love ! 
Or have you seen the Fairies , when they sing , 
And dance with mirth together in a Ring ? 
Or have you seen our Gallants , keep a pother , 
With Fair and Grace , and Grace , and Fair Anstrudder ? 
Or have you seen the Daughter of Apollo , 
Power down their rhyming Liquors in a hollow Cane ? 
In spongy Brain , congealing into Verse ; 
If you have seen all this , then kiss mine A — se.  
Satyr . 

A. What Timon does old Age begin to approach 
That thus thou droop'st under a night's debauch ? 
Hast thou lost deep to needy Rogues on Tick 
Who never could pay , and must be paid next Week ? 
Tim. Neither alas , but a dull dining Sot ; 
Seized me i' th' Mall , who just my name had got ; 
He runs upon me , cries dear Rogue I 'm thine , 
With me some Wits , of thy acquaintance dine . 
I tell him I 'm engaged but as a Whore , 
With mdesty enslaves her Spark , the more . 
The longer I denied , the more he pressed , 
At last I e'en consent to be his Guest . 
He takes me in his Coach , and as we go ; 
Pulls out a Libil , of a Sheet , or two ; 
Insipid , as , The praise of pious Queens , 
Or s — , unassisted former Scenes ; 
Which he admired , and praised at every Line , 
At last it was so sharp , it must be mine . 
I vowed I was no more a Wit , than he , 
Unpractised , and unblessed in Poetry : 
A Song to Phillis , I perhaps might make , 
But never Rhymed , but for my Pintles sake : 
I envied no Man's fortune , nor his fame , 
Nor ever thought of a revenge so tame . 
He knew my Style , he swore , and 't was in vain , 
Thus to deny the Issue of my Brain . 
Choked with his flattery , I no answer make , 
But silent leave him to his dear mistake . 
Of a well meaning Fool , I 'm most afraid , 
Who sillily repeats , what was well said . 
But this was not the worst , when he came home , 
He asked are Sidley , Buchurst , Savil , come ? 
no , but there were above Halfwit and Huff , 
Kickum , and Dingboy . O 't is well enough , 
they 're all brave Fellows cries mine Host , let 's Dine , 
I long to have my Belly full of Wine , 
they 'll write , and fight I dare assure you , 
they 're Men , Tam Marte quam Mercurio . 
I saw my error , but ' was now too late , 
no means , nor hopes , appears of a retreat . 
Well we salute , and each Man takes his Seat. 
Boy ( says my Sot ) is my Wife ready yet ! 
A Wife good Gods ! a Fop and Bullies too ! 
For one poor Meal , what must I undergo ? 
In comes my Lady straight , she had been Fair. 
Fit to give love , and to prevent despair , 
But Age Beauties incurable Disease , 
Had left her more desire , than power to please . 
As Cocks , will strike , although their Spurs be gone . 
She with her old bleer Eyes to smite begun : 
Though nothing else , she ( in despite of time ) 
Preserved the affectation of her prime ; 
How ever you begun , she brought in love , 
And hardly from that Subject would remove . 
We chanced to speak of the French Kings , success ; 
My Lady wondered much how Heaven could bless , 
A Man , that loved Two Women at one time ; 
But more how he to them excused his Crime . 
She asked Huff , if Love's flame he never felt ? 
He answered bluntly — do you think I 'm gelded ? 
She at his plainness smiled , then turned to me , 
Love in young Minds , proceeds even Poetry . 
You to that passion can no Stranger be , 
But Wits are given to inconstancy . 
She had run on I think till now , but Meat 
Came up , and suddenly she took her seat . 
I thought the Dinner would make some amends , 
When my good Host cries out , y' are all my Friends , 
Our own plain Fare , and the best Terse the Bull 
Affords , I 'll give you and your Bellies full : 
As for French Kickshaws , Cellery , and Champoon 
Ragous' and Fricasses , in troth we've none . 
here 's a good Dinner towards thought I , when straight 
Up comes a piece of Beef , full Horsmans' weight ; 
Hard as the Arse of M — , under which , 
The Coachman sweats , as wridden by a Witch . 
A Dish of Carrots , each of 'em as long , 
As Tool , that too fair Countess , did belong ; 
Which her small Pillow , could not so well hide , 
But Visiters , his flaming Head espied . 
Big , Goose , and Capon , followed in the Rear , 
With all that Country Bumpkins , call good Cheer : 
Served up with Sauces all of Eighty , Eight , 
When our tough Youth , wrestled , and threw the Weight . 
And now the Bottle , briskly flies about , 
Instead of Ice , wrapped in a wet Clout . 
A Brimmer follows the third bit we eat , 
Small Bear , becomes our drink , and Wine , our Meat 
The Table was so large , that in lesle space , 
A Man might save , six old Italians place : 
Each Man had as much room , as Porter B — , 
Or Harris , had , in Cullens , Bushel C — t. 
And now the Wine began to work , mine Host 
Had been a Colonel we must hear him boast 
Not of Towns wone , but an Estate he lost 
For the King's Service , which indeed he spent 
Whoring , and Drinking , but with good intent 
He talked much of a Plot , and Money lent 
In Cromwell's time . My Lady she 
Complained our love was course , our Poetry , 
Unfit for modest Ears , small Whores , and Play'rs . 
Were of our Hare-brained Youth , the only cares ; 
Who were too wild for any virtuous League , 
Too rotten to consummate the Intrigue . 
Falkland , she praised , and Sucklings , easy Pen , 
And seemed to taste their former parts again . 
Mine Host , drinks to the best in Christendom , 
And decently my Lady , quits the Room . 
Left to ourselves , of several things we prate , 
Some regulate the Stage , and soem the State , 
Halfwit , cries up my Lord of OH — , 
Ah how well Mustapha , and Zanger die ! 
His sense so little forced , that by one Line , 
You may the other easily divine . 
And which is worse , if any worse can be , 
He never said one word of it to me . 
there 's fine Poetry ! you 'd swear 't were Prose , 
So little on the Sense , the Rhymes impose . 
Damn me ( says Dingboy ) in my mind Gods-swounds 
E — , writes Airy Songs , and soft Lampoons , 
The best of any Man ; as for your Nouns , 
Grammar , and Rules of Art , he knows 'em not , 
Yet written two talking Plays , without one Plot. 
H — , was for s — , and Morocco , praised , 
Said rumbling words , like Drums , his courage raised . 
Whose broad-built-bulks , the boisterous Billows , bear , 
Zaphee and Sally , Mugadore , Oran , 
The famed Arzile , Alcazer , Tituan . 
Was ever braver Language written by Man ? 
Kickum for Crown declared , said in Romance , 
He had out done the very Wits , of France . 
Witness Pandion , and his Charles the Eight ; 
Where a young Monarch , careless of his Fate , 
Though Foreign Troops , and Rebels , shock his State , 
Complains another sight afflicts him more . 
( Videl . ) The Queen's Galleys rowing from the Shore , 
Fitting their Oars and Tackling to be gone 
Whilst sporting Waves smiled on the rising Sun. 
Waves smiling on the Sun ! I am sure that 's new , 
And 't was well thought on , give the Devil his due . 
Mine Host , who had said nothing in an hour . 
rose up , and praised the Indian Emperor . 
As if our old World , modestly withdrew , 
And here in private had brought forth a New. 
There are two Lines ! who but he durst presume 
To make the old World , a new withdrawing Room , 
Where of another World she 's brought to Bed ! 
What a brave Midwife is a Laureates head ! 
But pox of all these Scribblers , what d'ye think . 
Will Souches this year any Champoon drink ? 
Will Turene fight him ? without doubt says Huff , 
If they two meet , their meeting will be rough . 
Damn me ( says Dingboy ) the French , Cowards are , 
They pay , but the English , S●ots , and Swiss make War : 
In gaudy Troops , at a review they shine , 
But dare not with the germans , Battle join ; 
What now appears like courage , is not so , 
't is a short pride , which from success does grow ; 
On their first blow , they 'll shrink into those fears , 
They showed at Cressy , Agincourt , Poytiers ; 
Their loss was infamous , Honour so stained , 
Is by a Nation not to be regained . 
What they were then I know not , now they are brave , 
He that denies it-lyes and is a Slave , 
( Says Huff and frowned ) says Dingboy , that do I , 
And at that word , at tother's Head let fly 
A greasy Plate , when suddenly they all , 
Together by the Ears in Parties fall . 
Halfwit , with Dingboy joins , Kickum with Huff , 
Their Swords were safe , and so we let 'em cuff 
Till they mine Host , and I , had all enough . 
Their rage once over , they begin to treat , 
And six fresh Bottles , must the peace complete . 
I ran down stairs , with a Vow never more 
To drink Bear Glass , and hear the Hector's roar . 
A Session of the Poets . 

Since the Sons of the Muses , grew mum'rous , and loud , 
For th' appeasing so factious , and clam'rous a Crowd ; 
Apollo , thought fit in so weighty a cause , 
IT Establish a Government , Leader , and Laws . 
The hopes of the Bays , at this summoning call , 
Had drawn 'em together , the Devil and all ; 
All thronging and listening , they gaped for the Blessing , 
no Presbyter Sermon , had more crowding , and pressing . 
In the Head of the Gang I — D — , appeared , 
That Ancient grave Wit , so long loved , and feared , 
But Apollo , had heard a Story'ith ' Town , 
Of his quitting the Muses , to wear the black Gown , 
And so gave him leave now his Poetries done , 
To let him turn Priest , now R — , is turned Nun.  
This Reverend Author was no sooner set by , 
But Apollo , had got gentle George in his Eye , 
And frankly confessed , of all Men that written , 
there 's none had more sancy , sense Judgement , and Wit. 
But ' th' crying Sin , idleness , he was so hardened , 
That his long Seav'n years silence , was not to be pardoned 
Brawny W — , was the next Man showed his Fa1ce , 
But Apollo , e'en thought him too good for the Place ; 
no Gentleman Writer , that office should bear 
'T was a Trader in Wit , the Laurel should wear . 
As none but a Citt , ever makes a Lord Major . 
Next into the Crowd , Tom S — , does wallow , 
And Swears by his Guts , his Paunch , and his Tallow , 
't is he that alone best pleases the Age , 
Himself , and his Wife have supported the Stage . 
Apollo , well pleased with so bonny a Lad , 
TO oblige him , he told him she should be huge glad , 
Had he half so much Wit , as he fancied he had . 
How ever to please so Jovial a Wit , 
And to keep him in humour , Apollo , thought fit , 
To bid him drink on , and keep his Old Trick , 
Of railing at Poets , and showing his Prick . 
N — L — , step in next , in hopes of a Prize , 
Apollo , remembered he had hit once in Thrice ; 
By the Rubies in 's Face , he could not deny , 
But he had as much Wit , as Wine could supply ; 
Confessed that indeed he had a Musical Note , 
But sometimes strained so hard , that he rattled i' th' Throat ; 
Yet owning he had Sense , t' encourage him for 't , 
He made him his Ovid in Augustus' Court.  
Poet S — , his Trial , was the next came about , 
He brought him an Ibrahim , with the Preface torn out ; 
And humbly desired , he might give no offence ; 
God damn , cries S. — he cannot write sense , 
And Ballocks crued Newport , I hate that dull Rogue ; 
Apollo , considering he was not in vogue , 
Would not trust his dear Bays , with so modest a Fool , 
And bid the great Boy , should be sent back to School , 
Tom OH — , came next Tom s — , dear Zany ; 
And swears for Heroics , he writes best of any ; 
Don C — , his Pockets so amply had fined , 
That his Mange was quite cur d , and his Lice were all killed . 
But Apollo , had seen his Face on the Stage , 
And prudently did not think fit to engage , 
The scum of a Playhouse , for the Prop of an Age.  
In the numerous Herd , that encompassed him round 
Little starched Jonny C — at his Elbow he found , 
His Crevat-string , new Ironed , he gently did stretch , 
His Lily white hand out , the Laurel to reach ; 
Alleging that he had most right to the Bays , 
For writing Romances , and shiting of Plays . 
Apollo , rose up , and gravely confessed , 
Of all Men that written , his Talent was best : 
For since pain , and dishonour , Man's life only damn , 
The greatest felicity , Mankind can claim , 
Is to want sense of smart , & be past sense of shame : 
And to perfect his Bliss , in Poetical Rapture , 
He bid him be dull to the end of the Chapter . 
The Poetress Afra , next showed her sweet face , 
And swore by her Poetry , and her black Ace , 
The Laurel , by a double right was her own , 
For the Plays she had written , and the Conquests she had wone : 
Apollo , acknowledged 't was hard to deny her , 
Yet to deal frankly , and ingeniously be her , 
He told her were Conquests , and Charms her pretence , 
She ought to have pleaded a Dozen years since . 
Anababaluthu put in for a share , 
And little Tom Essences Author , was there . 
Nor could D — , forbear for the Laurel to stickle , 
Protesting he had had the Honour to tickle , 
The Ears of the Town , with his dear Madam Fickle . 
With other pretenders , whose namesled rehearse , 
But that they 're too long to stand in my Verse . 
Apollo , quite cired with their tedious Harangue , 
Finds at last Tom B — , face in the gang , 
And since Poets , with the kind Play'rs , may hang , 
By his own light , he solemnly swore , 
That in search of a Laureate , he 'd look out no more . 
A general murmur run quite through the Hall , 
To think that the Bays , to an Actor should fall , 
But Apollo , to quiet , and pacify all ; 
E'en told 'em to put his desert to the Test , 
That he had made Plays , as well as the best ; 
And was the greatest wonder , the Age ever bore , 
For of all the Play-scriblers , that ever written before , 
His wit , had most worth , and most modesty in 't , 
For he had written Plays , yet never came in print . 
Satyr . 

Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris aut carcere dignum 
Sivis esse aliquis — indem sat . 


Supposed to be spoken by a Court Hector . 

Pindaric , 

Now curses on ye all , ye virtuous Fools . 
Who think to fetter free born Souls , 
And tie 'em up to dull Morality , and Rules , 
The Stagyrite , be damned , and all the Crew , 
Of learned Idiots , who his steps pursue ; 
And those more silly Proselytes , whom his fond Precepts drew ! 
O had his Ethics , been with their wild Author drowned 
Or a like fate , with those lost writings found , 
Which that grand Plagiary , doomed to Fire , 
And made by unjust Flames expire , 
They never had then seduced Mortality , 
Never lasted to debauch the World , with their lewd Pedantry . 
But damned and more ( if Hell can do`t ) be that 
Thrice cursed name , 
Who e`re the rudiments of Law design`d ; 
Who e`re did the First Model of Religion , frame , 
And by that double Vassalage enthralled Mankind ; 
By naught before , but their own power , or will confined : 
Now quite abridged of all their Primitive liberty . 
And Slaves , to each capricious Monarches , Tyranny . 
more happy Bruits ! who the great Rule of sense observe , 
And ne'er from their First Charter swerve . 
Happy whose lives are merely to enjoy , 
And feel no stings of Sin , which may their Bliss annoy ; 
Still unconcerned , at Epithets of ill , or good , 
Distinctions unadult'rate Nature , never understood . 
2 

Hence ! hated Virtue , from our goodly Isle ! 
no more our joys beguile ! 
no more , with thy loathed presence plague our happy State ; 
thou Enemy to all , that 's brisk , or gay , or brave , or great ! 
Begun ! with all thy pious meager Train , 
To some unfruitful , unfrequented Land , 
And there an Empire gain , 
And there extend thy rigour command : 
There where illib'ral Nature's nigradice , 
Has set a Tax on Vice ! 
Where the lean barren Region , does enhance , 
The worth of dear intemperance ! 
And for each pleasurable Sin , exacts Excise ! 
We ( thanks to Heaven ) more cheaply can offend , 
And want to tempting Luxuries . 
no good convenient Sinning opportunities , 
Which Nature's bounty could bestow , or Heavens' kindness lend ! 
Go follow that nice Goddess , to the Skies ! 
Who heretofore disgusted at increasing Vice , 
Disliked the World , and thought it to profane , 
And timely hence retired , and kindly never returned , again , 
Hence ! to those Airy Mansions rove , 
Converse with Saints , and holy Folks above ! 
Those may thy presence woe , 
Whose lazy ease , offords 'em nothing else to do . 
Where haughty scornful I , 
And my great Friends , will never vouch safe thee Company . 
thou art now a hard unpracticable good , 
Too difficult for Flesh , and Blood , 
Where all Soul like them , perhaps I 'd learn to practise thee . 
3 

Virtue ! thou solemn grave impertinence , 
Abhorred by all the Men of Wit , and Sense ! 
thou damned Fatigue ! that clogg'st life's Journey here , 
Thomas thou no weight of Wealth , or profit bear ! 
thou puling , fond Green-sicknes of the Minds , 
That makes up prove to our own selves unkind ; 
Whereby we Coals , and Dirt , for Diet , choose , 
And pleasures better Food refuse . 
Cursed Jilt ! that lead'st deluded Mortals on , 
Till they too late perceive themselves undone , 
Chowsed by a Dowry , in Reversion ! 
The greatest Votary , thou ever couldst boast , 
Pity so brave a Soul , was in thy service lost , 
What wonders he in wickedness had done ! 
Whom thy weak power , could so inspire alone ! 
Though long with fond Amours he courted thee , 
Yet dying did recant his vain Idolatry ; 
At length ( though late ) he did repent with shame : 
Forced to confess thee nothing but an empty name . 
So was that Lecher , gulled , whose haugty love , 
Designed a Rape , on the Queen Regent of the Gods above . 
When he a Goddess , thought he had in chase , 
He found a gaudy Vapour in the place , 
And with thin Air , beguiled his starved embrace ; 
Idly he spent his Vigour ! spent his blood , 
And tie d himself , t' oblige an unperforming Cloud . 
4 

If Human kind to thee ever Worship paid , 
then were by ignorance misled ; 
That only them devout , and thee a Goddess made : 
Known haply in the World's rude , untaught , Infancy , 
Before it had out-grown its Childish innocence ; 
Before it had arrived at sense , 
Or reached the Manhood , and discretion of Debauchery : 
Known in those Ancient Godly duller times , 
When crafty Pagans' , had engrossed all Crimes : 
When Christian Fools , were obstinately good , 
Nor yet their Gospel freedom understood . 
Tame easy Fops , who could so prodigally bleed , 
To be thought Saints , and die a Calendar with red 
no prudent Heathea , ever seduced could be , 
To suffer Martyrdom for thee , 
Only that Arrant Ass , whom the false Oracle cal'ld wise : 
( no wonder if the Devil uttered Lies ) 
That sniv'ling Puritan , who spite of all the Mode . 
Would be unfashionably good ; 
And exercised his whining gifts , to rail at Vice , 
Him all the Wits , of Athens damned . 
And justly with Lampoones , defamed . 
But when the mad Fanatic , could not filenced be , 
From broaching dangerous Divinity , 
The wise Republic , made him for prevension die , 
And kindly sent him to the Gods , and better Company . 
5 

Let fumbling Age , be grave , and wise , 
And Virtues poor contemned Idea prize , 
Who never knew , now are past the sweets of Vice ; 
Whilst we whose Active Pulses beaten , 
With lusty youth and vig'rous heat , 
Can all their Birds , and Morals too despise ? 
Whilst my plump Veins , are filled with lust and 
Blood , 
Let not one thought of her intrude , 
Or dare approach my Breast ; 
But know 't is all possessed , 
By a more welcome Guest ; 
And know , I have not yet the leisure to be good . 
If ever unkind Destiny , 
Shall force long life on me ; 
If ever I must the curse of Dotage bear , 
Perhaps I 'll dedicate those Dregss of time , to her , 
And come with Crutches , her most humble Votary . 
When Sprightly Vice , retreats from hence , 
And quits the ruins of decayed sense , 
she 'll serve to Usher in a fair pretence , 
And varnish with her Name , a well dissembled Impotence ! 
When Ptisick , Rheums , Catarrhs , and Palsies , seize , 
And all the Bill of Maladies , 
Which Haven to punish overliving Mortals sends ; 
then let her enter , with th' num'rous infirmitis , 
Herself the greatest plague , which wrinkles , and grey Hairs , attends . 
6 

Tell me ye Venerable Sots who court her most , 
What small advantage can she boast , 
Which her great Rival , has not in a greater store engrossed ? 
Her quiet , calm , and peace of Mind , 
In Wine , and Company , we better find , 
find it with pleasure , to combined ! 
In mighty Wine , where we our Senses steep : 
And lull our cares , and Consciences asleep ! 
But why do I , that wild Chimaera name ? 
Conscience ! that giddy Airy Dream ; 
Which does from Brain-sick-heads , or ill digesting 
Stomaches , steam . 
Conscience ! the vain fantastic fear , 
Of punishments , we know not when , or where : 
Project of crafty Statesmen , to support weak Law , 
Whereby they slavish Spirits awe , 
And dastard Souls , to forced obedience draw . 
Grand Wheadle ! which our Gownd-impostors use , 
The poor unthinking Rabble , to abuse : 
Scare-crew , to fright from the forbidden fruit of 
Vice , 
Their own beloved Paradise ! 
Let those vile Canters , wickedness decry , 
Whose Mercenary Tongues take pay 
For what they say ; 
And yet commend in practice , what their words deny . 
While we discerning Heads , who farther pry , 
Their Holy Cheats defy , 
And scorn their frauds , and scorn their sanctified 
Cajollery . 
None but dull unbred Fools , discredit Vice , 
Who act their wickedness , with an ill grace ; 
Such their profession scandalise , 
And justly forfeir all their praise , 
All that esteem , that credit , and applause . 
Which we by our wise Manage , from a Sin can raise . 
A true , and brave transgressor ought , 
To Sin with the same height of Spirit , Caesar fought . 
Mean-souled , Offenders , now no Honour gain , 
Only Debauchees of the Noble strain ; 
Vice , well improved , yields Bliss , and Fame beside , 
And some for Sinning have been Deified ! 
Thus the lewd Gods , of old , did move , 
By these brave Methods , to the Seats above ! 
Even Jove himself , the Sov'raign Deity , 
Father , and King , of all th' immortal Progeny , 
Ascended to that high degree , 
By Crimes above the reach of weak Mortality : 
He Heaven , one large Seraglio , made , 
Each Goddess , turned a glorious Punk , o' th' Trade , 
And all that sacred place , 
Was filled with Bastard Gods , of his own Race ! 
Almighty Letch'ry got his first repute , 
And everlasting Whoring , was his chiefest Attribute . 
8 

How gallant was that Wretch , whose happy guilt , 
A fame upon the ruins of a Temple built ? 
Let Fools , ( saith he ) impiety allege , 
And urge the no great fault of Sacrilege ? 
I 'll set the sacred Pile , on flame , 
And in its Ashes , write my lasting name ! 
My Name ! which thus shall be , 
Deathless , as its own Deity ! 
Thus the vain glorious Carian , I 'll out do , 
And Egypt's , proudest Monarches too ! 
Those lavish Prodigals , who idly did consume , 
Their lives , and Treasures to erect a Tomb , 
And only great , by being buried would become . 
At cheaper rates than they , I 'll buy renown , 
And my loud Fame , shall all their silent glories drown ! 
So spoke the daring Hector , so did Prophecy , 
And so it proved — in vain did envious Fate , 
By fruitless Methods try : 
To raise his well built Same , and Memory 
amongst Posterity : 
The Beautifeu , can now immortal write , 
While the inglorious Founder , is forgotten quite . 
9 

Yet greater was that mighty Emperor , 
( A greater Crime , befitted his high power ) 
Who sacrificed a City , to a jest , 
And showed he knew the grand Intriqus of humour best ! 
He made all Rome , a Bonfire to his Fame ! 
And sung , and played , and danced amid the 
Flame ! 
Bravely begun ! yet pity there he stayed , 
One step to glory more he should have made ! 
He should have heaved the noble Frolic higher ! 
And made the People , on that Funeral Pile expire ! 
Or providently with their Blood put out the Fire ! 
Had this been done , 
The utmost pitch of glory he had wone ! 
no greater Monument could be , 
To consecrate him to Eternity ! 
Nor should there need another Herald , of his praise but me ! 
10 

And thou yet greater Faux , the glory of our Isle 
Whom baffled Hell , esteems its chiefest Foil ; 
( ' were injury , should I omit thy name ) 
Whose Action , merit's all the breath of Fame ! 
Methinks I see the trembling Shades below , 
Around in humble rev'rence how , 
Doubtful they seem , whether to pay their Loyalty , 
To their dread Monarch , or to them ! 
no wonder he grown jealous , of thy feared success , 
Envied Mankind . the honour of thy wickedness , 
And spoilt that brave attempt , which must have made his grandeur lesle . 
How ever regret not mighty Ghost . 
Thy Plot by treacherous Fortune crossed . 
Nor think thy well deserved glory lost ! 
thou the full praise of Villainy , shalt ever share , 
And all will judge thy Act complete enough , when thou coudst dare . 
So thy great Master , feared ; whose high disdain . 
Contemned that Heaven , where he could not reign . 
When he with bold ambition striven , 
T' usurp the Throne above , 
And led against the Deity , an Armed Train . 
Though from his vast designs he fell , 
O'er powered by 's Almighty Foe , 
Yet gained he Vict'ry in his overthrow ; 
He gained sufficient Triumph , that he durst rebel , 
And 't was some pleasure , to be thought the greatest in Hell ! 
11 

Tell me ye great Triumvirate , what shall I do , 
To be Illustrious as you ? 
Let your example move me with a generous Fire ! 
Let 'em into my daring thoughts inspire ! 
Some what completely wicked , some vast Giant 
Crime , 
Unthought , unknown , unpatterned , by all past and present time ! 
't is done , 't is done , me thinks I feel the powerful Charms ! 
And a new heat of Sin , my Spirits warms ! 
I travel with a glorious Mischief , for whose Birth 
My Souls too narrow , and weak Fate too feeble , yet to bring it forth ! 
Let the unpitied Vulgar , tamely go , 
And stock for company , the wide Plantations below 
Such their Vile Souls , for viler Barter sell , 
Scarce worth the damning , or their room in Hell 
We are its Grandees , and expect as high perferment there , 
For our good service , as on Earth we share . 
In them , sin is but a mere privative of good , 
The frailty and defect , of Flesh , and Blood ; 
In us 't is a perfection , who profess 
A studied , and Elaborate wickedness : 
we 're the great Royal Society of Vice. 
Whose Talents , are to make discoveries , 
And advance Sin , like other Arts and Sciences . 
't is I , the bold Columbus , only I , 
Who must new Worlds , in Vice descry , 
And fix the Pillars , of unpassable Iniquity . 
12.  

How sneaking was the first Debauch that sinned , 
Who for so small a sin , sold Human kind ! 
How undeserving that high place , 
To be thought Parent , of our sin , and Race ; 
Who by low guilt , our Nature doubly did debase . 
Unworthy was he to be thought , 
Father , of the great firstborn Cain , which he begot . 
The Noble Cain ! whose bold , and gallant Act , 
Proclaimed him of more high Extract ! 
Unworthy me , 
And all the braver part of his Posterity ; 
Had the just Fates designed me in his stead , 
I 'd done some great , and unexampled Deed ! 
A Deed ! which should decry , 
The Stoics dull Equality , 
And show that Sin admits transcendency ! 
A Deed ! wherein the Tempter should not share , 
Above what Heaven , could punish , and above what he could dare ! 
For greater Crimes than his , I would have fell , 
And acted some what , which might merit more than Hell.  
An Apology to the foregoing Satyr by way of Epilogue . 

MY part is done , and you 'll I hope excuse , 
The extravagance , of a repenting Muse ; 
Pardon what ever she has too boldly said , 
She only acted here in Masquerade ; 
And the slight Arguments , she did produce , 
Were not to flatter Vice , but to traduce : 
So we Buffoons , in Princely dress expose , 
Not to be gay , but more ridiculous , 
When she a Hector , for her Subject had , 
She thought she must be Termagant , and mad ; 
That made her speak like a lewd Punk , o' th' Town , 
Who by converse with Bullys , wicked grown , 
Has learned the Mode , to cry all Virtue down : 
But now the Vizor's off , she changes Scene , 
And turns a modest , civil Girl , again . 
Our Poet , has a different taste of Wit , 
Nor will to th' common Vogue , himself submit . 
Let some admire the Fops , whose Talents lie , 
Inventing dull insipid Blasphemy ; 
He swears he cannot with those terms dispense , 
Nor will be damned , for the repute of sense . 
Wit's name , was never to profaneness due , 
For than you see , he could be witty too : 
He could Lampoon the State , and Libel Kings , 
Put that he 's Loyal , and knows better things , 
Than Fame , whose guilty Birth from Treason spring's . 
He likes not wit , which can no Licence claim , 
To which the Author , dares not set his Name : 
Wit , should be open , court each Readers Eye , 
Not lurk in sly , unprinted privacy . 
But Criminal Writers , like dull Birds of Night , 
For weakness , or for shame , avoid the light : 
May such a Jury , for the Audience have , 
And from the Bench , not Pit , their doom receive : 
May they the Tower , for their due merits share , 
And a Just Wreath of Hemp , not Laurel wear . 
He could be Bawdy too , and nick the times , 
In what they dearly love , damned Piacket Rhymes 
Such as our Nobles write — 
Whose nauseous Poetry , can reach no higher , 
Than what the Codpiece , or its God inspire : 
So lewd they spend at Quill , you 'd justly think , 
They wrote with something nastier than Ink. 
But he still thought that little wit , or none , 
Which a just modesty , must never own , 
And a mere Reader , with a blush atone . 
If Ribaldry , deserve the praise of wit , 
He must resign to each Illit'rare Cit , 
And Prentices , and Carmen ; challenge it : 
Even they too , can be smart , and witty there , 
For all Men , on that Subject , Poets are . 
Henceforth he says , if ever more he find , 
Himself to the base itch of Verse , inclined , 
If ever he 's given up so far to write , 
He never means to make his end delight ; 
Should he do so , he must despair success , 
For he 's not now debauched enough to please , 
And must be damned for want of wickedness . 
he 'll therefore use his gift another way , 
And next the ugliness of Vice display : 
Though against Virtue once he drew his Pen , 
he 'll never for aught , but her defence again . 
Had he a Genius , and Poetic Rage , 
Great as the Vices , of this guilty Age ; 
Were he all Gaul , and armed with store of spite , 
'T were worth his pains to undertake to write : 
To noble Satyr , he 'd direct his aim , 
And by 't Mankind , and Poetry , reclaim : 
he 'd shoot his Quills , just like a Procupine , 
At Vice , and made 'em stab in every Line ; 
The World , should learn to blush — 
And dread the vengeance of his angry Wit , 
Which more than their own Conscience should fright ; 
And all should think him Heavens' , just plague designed , 
To visit for the Sins of lewd Mankind . 
Upon the Author of a Play called Sodom . 

Tell me abandoned Miscreant , prithee tell , 
What damned Power invoked and sent from Hell ; 
( If Hell , were bad enough ) did thee inspire , 
To write , what Fiends ashamed would blushing hear ? 
Hast thou of late embraced some Succubus ? 
And used the lewd Familiar , for a Muse ? 
Or didst thy Soul , by Inch'oth ' Candle sell , 
To gain the glorious Name of Pimp , to Hell ? 
If so ; go , and its vowed Allegiance swear , 
Without Press-money , be its Voluntiere : 
May he who envies thee , deserve thy fate , 
Deserve both Heavens' , and Mankind's , scorn , and hate . 
Disgrace to Libels ! Foil to very shame , 
Whom 'tis a scandal to vouchsafe to damn . 
What foul descriptions foul enough for thee , 
Sunk quite below the reach of infamy ? 
thou covetest to be lewd , but want'st the might , 
And art all over Devil , but in Wit. 
Weak feeble Strainer , at mere ribaldry , 
Whose Muse , is impotent to that degree , 
' Thad need like Age , be whipped to Lechery . 
Vile Sot ! who clapped with Poetry art sick , 
And void'st Corruption , like a Shankered Prick . 
Like Ulcers , thy impostumed Addle Brains , 
Drop out in Matter , which thy Paper stains : 
Whence nauseous Rhymes , by filthy Births proceed , 
As Maggots , in some T-rd , engendering breed . 
Thy Muse has got the Flowers , and they ascend , 
As in some Greensick Girl , at upper end . 
Sure Nature made , or meant at least t' have don 't , 
Thy Tongue a Clytoris , thy Mouth a C — t : 
How well a Dildoe , would that place become , 
To gag it up , and make 't for ever dumb ? 
At least it should be syringed — 
Or wear some stinking Merkin , for a Beard , 
That all from its base converse , might be scared . 
As they a Door shut up , and marked beware , 
That tells infection , and the Plague is there . 
thou Morefields Author , sit for Bawds to quote , 
( If Bawds themselves , with Honour safe may do 't ) 
When Suburb Apprentice , comes to hire delight , 
And wants incentives to dull Appetite , 
Their Punk , perhaps , may they brave works rehearse , 
Frigging the senseless thing , with Hand , and Verse . 
Which after shall ( preferred to Dressing Box ) 
Hold Turpentine , and Medicines for the Pox. 
Or ( If I may ordain a Fate more fit ) 
For such foul , nasty , Excrements of Wit , 
May they condemned to th'publick Jakes , be lent , 
For me I 'd fear the Piles , in vengeance sent 
Should I with them profane my Fundament ) 
Therefore bugger wiping Porters , when they shite , 
And so thy Book itself , turn Sodomite . 
A Call to the Guard by a Drum.  

Rat too , rat too , rat too , rat tat too , rat tat too . 
With your Noses all scabbed , and your Eyes black and blue . 
All ye hungry poor Sinners , that Foot Soldiers are , 
Though with very small Coin yet with very much cure , 
From your Quarters in Garrets , make haste to repair , 
To the Guard to the Guard. 
From your sorry Straw-beds , & your bonny with Fleas , 
From your Dreams of small drink , and your very small ease , 
From your plenty of stink , and no plenty of room , 
From your Walls daubed with Phlegm sticking on 'em like Gum. 
And Ceiling hung with cobwebs , to staunch a cut Thumb , To the Guard , etc.  
From your cracked Earthen Piss-pots , where no Piss can stay , 
From Roofs bewrit with snuffs in letters the wrong way , 
From one old broken Stool , with one unbroken Leg , 
One Box with never a Lid , to keep never a Rag , 
And Windows that of Storms more than yourselves can brag , 
To the Guard , etc.  
With rusty Pike , and Gun , and the other rusty Tool , 
With heads extremely hot , and with Hearts wondrous cool ; 
With Stomaches meaning none ( but Cooks and Sutler's ) hurt ; 
With two old tottered Shoes , that disgrace the Town dirt 
With Forty shreds of Breeches , & not one shred of Shirt . 
To the Guard , etc.  
See they come , see they come , see they come , see they come 
With Alarms in their Pates , to the call of a Drum ; 
Some lodging with Bawds ( whom the modest call Bitch's ) 
With their Bones dried to Kexes , and Legs shrunk to 
Switches ; 
With the Plague in the Purse , & the Pox , in the Breeches . 
To the Guard , etc.  
Some from snoriug , and farting , and spewing on Benches , 
Some from damned fulsome Ale , and more damned fulsome Wenches ; 
Some from Put , and Size Ace , and Old Sim , this way stalk , 
Each Man's reeling's his Gate , and his Hyccop , his talk ; 
With two new Cheeks of red , from ten old Rows of Chalk , 
To the Guard , etc.  
Here come others from scuffling , & damning mine Host , 
With their Tongues at last tamed , but with Faces that boast , 
Of some Scars , by the Jordan , or Warlike Quart Port , 
For their building of Sconces , and Volleys of Shot , 
Which they charged to the Mouth , but discharged never a Groat . 
To the Guard , etc.  
They for Valour in black too ! the Chaplain does come ! 
From his Preaching o'er Pots , now to pray o'er a Drum. 
All ye Whoreing , and Swearing , old red Coats draw near , 
Like to Saints , in red Letters , listen , and give ear , 
And be Godly a while ho , and then as you were . 
To the Guard , etc.  
After some canting Terms , to your Arms and the like , 
Such as poising your Muskits , or Porting your Pike ; 
To the Right , to the Left , or else Face about , 
After rattling your Sticks , and your shaking a Clout , 
Hast your Infantry Troops , that mount the Guard on Foot. 
To the Guard , etc.  
Captain Hector , first marches , but not he of Troy , 
But a Trifle made up of a Man , and a Boy . 
See Man scant of Arms , in a Scraf does abound , 
Which presages some swaggering , but no blood nor wound , 
Like a Rainbow , that shows the World shan't be drowned , 
To the Guard , etc.  
As the Tinker , wears Rags , whilst the Dog bears the Budget , 
So the Man stalks with staff , whilst the Footboy does trudge it , 
With the Tool he should work with ( that 's Half-pike you 'll say ) 
But what Captains Captains so strong his own Arms to convey , 
When he marches o'er loaden with Ten other men's pay . 
To the Guard , etc.  
In his march ( if you mark ) he 's attended at least , 
With stinks Sixteen deep , and about five a Breast 
Made of Ale , and Mundung as , snuff , Rags , and Brown Crust for , 
While he wants Twenty Tailors , to make up the Cluster , 
Which declares that his journey 's not new to the Muster , 
But to the Guard , etc.  
Some with Musket , and Belly , uncharged march away , 
With Pipes , black as their Mouths are , and short as their pay , 
Whilst their Coats made of holes , show like Bonelace about 'em , 
And their Bandeliers hang like to Bobbins without 'em , 
And whilst Horsemen , do cloth 'em , those Foot-scrubs do clout ' 'em . 
For the Guard , etc.  
Some with that tied one one side , and Wit tied on neither , 
Wear grey Coats , and grey dattle , see their Wenches run hither , 
For to peep through red Lettuce , and dark Cellar doors , 
To behold'm wear Pikes rusty , just like their Whores , 
As slender as their Meals , and as long as their Scores . 
To the Guard , etc.  
Some with Tweedle , Weedle , Weede ( whilst we beaten dub a dub ) 
Keep the base Scotish noise , and as base Scotish scrub ; 
then with the Body contracted , a Rag , open spread , 
Comes a thing , with red Colours and Nose full as red , 
Like an Ensign , to the King , and to the Kings Head. 
Towards the Guard , etc.  
Two Commanders , come last , the Lieutenant perhaps , 
Full of Low Country , Story , and Low Country Claps , 
To be next him the other takes care not to fail , 
( Powder Monkey by name ) that vents stink by whole sale ; 
For where should the Fart be , but just with the Tail. 
Of the Guard , etc.  
And now hey for the King , Boys , & hey for the Court , 
Which is guarded by these , as the Tower is by Dirt ; 
These Whitehall must admit , and such other unhouse ye 
Each day let's in the drunk , whilst it let's out the drowsey 
And no place in the World , shifts so oft to be Lousy . 
Thank the Guard , etc.  
Some to Scotland-yard sneak , and the Sutler's Wise kisses , 
But despairing of drink , till some Country man pisses , 
And pays too ( for no place in the Court must be given . ) 
To the Can Office then , all a Foot Soldiers Heaven , 
Where he finds a foul Fox , soon , and cures Sir Stephen . 
On the Guard , etc.  
Some at Shite-house public ( where a Rag always goes ) 
At once emty their Guts , and diminish their clothes 
Though their Mouths are poor Pimps ( Whore and Bacon being all 
Their chief Food ( yet their Bums we true Courtiers , may call , 
For what they eat in the Suburbs , they shite at Whitehall . 
For the Guard , etc.  
Such a like pack of Cards , to the Park , making entry , 
Here , and there , deal an Ace , which the Jews call a Sentry , 
Which in bad Houses of Board's , stand to tell what a Clock 't is , 
Where they keep up tame red Coats , as men keep up tame Foxes , 
Or Apothecaries lay up their Dogs T-ds , in Boxes . 
O the Guard , etc.  
Some of these are planted ( though it has been their lucks 
Of 't to steal Country Geese ) now to watch the Ks. Ducks ; 
While some others are set , in the side that has Wood in , 
To stand Pimps to black Masques , that are of thither footing , 
Just as Huswives , set Cuckolds , to tend their black Pudding . 
O the Guard , etc.  
Whilst another true Trojan , to some passage runs , 
As to keep in the Debtor , so to keep out the Duns ; 
Or a Apprentice , or his Mistress ; with Oaths to confound , 
Till he hies him from the Park , as from forbidden ground , 
'Cause his credit is whole , and his Wench may be sound . 
And quits the Guard , etc.  
Now it 's Night , and the Patrole in Alehouse drowned , 
For naught else , but the Pot , and their Brains walk the round ; 
Whilst like Hell , the Commanders , Guard Chambers , does ( show , 
there 's such damning their selves , and all else of the Crew ; 
For though these cheat their Men , they give the Devil , his due . 
On the Guard , etc.  
Whilst a Main , after main , at old Hazard they throw , 
And their Quarrels grow high , as their Money grows low ; 
Straight thy threaten hard ( using bad Faces for frowns ) 
To revenge on the Flesh , the default of the Bones , 
But the blood 's in their Hose , and in Oaths all their Wounds . 
Like the Guard , etc.  
In the Morning they fight , just as much as they pray , 
For some one to the King , does the tidings convey 
For preventiug of Murder ; O 't is a wise way ! 
Though not one of 'em knows ( as a Thousand dare say ) 
What belongs to a dead Man , unless in his pay . 
For the Guard , etc.  
With their skins , they march home , no more hurt than their Drums , 
But for scratching of Faces , or biting of Thumbs ; 
And now hey for fat Alewives , and Tradesmen , grow lean , 
For the Captain , grown Bankrupt , recruits him again , 
With sending out Tickets , and turning out Men. 
From the Guard , etc.  
Straight the poor rogue 's Cashiered , with a Care , and a curse , 
Fall from wounding no Men , now to cut every Purse 
And what then ? man 's a Worm ; these we Glow-worm's may name . 
For as they 're dark of Body , have Tails all a flame , 
So though these lived in Oaths , yet they die with a Psalm . 
Farewell Guard , etc.  
Ephelia to Bajazet . 

How far are they deceived who hope in vain , 
A lasting Lease of joys from Love t' obtain ? 
All the dear sweets , or promise or expect , 
After enjoyment , turns we cold neglect . 
Could love , a constant happiness have known , 
The mighty wonder , had in me been shown , 
Our Passions are so favoured by Fate , 
As if she meant 'em an Eternal Date ; 
So kind he looked , such tender words he spoke , 
'T was past belief such Vows should ever be broke . 
Fixed on my Eyes , how often would he say , 
He could with pleasure gaze an Age away ! 
When thoughts too great for words had made him mute , 
In kisses , he would till my hand his Suit. 
So great his passions was , so far above , 
The common Gallantryes , that pass for love , 
At worst I thought if he unkind should prove , 
His ebbing passion , would be kinder far , 
Than the First transports of all others are . 
Nor was my love , or fondness lesle than his , 
In him I centred all my hopes of Bliss ! 
For him my duty to my Friends forgot , 
For him I lost , alas ! what lost I not ? 
Fame , all the valuable things of life , 
To meet his love , by a lesle name than Wife 
How happy was I then , how dearly blessed , 
When this great Man lay panting on my Breast , 
Looking such things , as never can be expressed ! 
Thousand fresh looks he gave me every hour , 
Whilst greedily I did his looks devour ! 
Till quite o'ercome with Charms , I trembling lay , 
At every look he gave , melted away ! 
I was so highly happy in his love , 
Methought I pitied them that dwelled above ! 
Think than thou greatest , loveliest , falsest Man , 
How you have vowed , how I have loved , and then , 
My faithless dear , be cruel if you can ! 
How I have loved , I cannot , need not tell , 
no every act , has shown , I loved to well . 
Since first I saw you , I never had a thought , 
Was not entirely yours , to you I brought , 
My Virgin , Innocence , and freely made , 
My love , an Off'ing , to your noble Bed : 
Since when ,   been the Star , by which I steered 
And nothing else but you , I loved , or feared . 
Your smiles , I only live by , and I must . 
When ever you frown , be shattered into Dust. 
Oh! can the coldness that you show me now , 
Suit with the generous heart you once did show ? 
I cannot live on pity , or respect , 
A thought so mean , would my whole love infect ; 
Lesle than your love , I scorn Sir to expect . 
Let me not live in dull indiff'rency , 
But give me rage enough to make me die ! 
For if from you , I needs must meet my Fate , 
Before your pity , I would choose your hate . 
A very Heroical Epistle in Answer to Ephelia . 

Madam , 

IF your deceived , it is not by my Cheat , 
For all disguises , are below the great . 
What Man , or Woman , upon Earth can say , 
I ever used 'em well above a Day ? 
How is it then , that I inconstant am ? 
He changes not , who always is the same . 
In my dear self , I centre every thing , 
My Servants , Friends , My Mistress and my King , 
Nay Heaven , and Earth , to that one point I bring . 
we 'll mannered , honest , generous , and stout , 
Names by dull Fools , to plague Mankind found out ; 
Should I regard , I must myself constrain , 
And 't is my Maxim , to avoid all pain . 
You fond look for what none ever could find , 
Deceive yourself , and then call me unkind , 
And by false Reasons , would my falsehood prove , 
For 't is as natural to change , as love : 
You may as justly at the Sun , repined , 
Because alike it does not always shine , 
no glorious thing , was ever made to stay , 
My blazing Star , but visits and away . 
As fatal to it shines , as those ' i' th' Skies , 
't is never seen , but some great Lady dies . 
The boasted favour , you so precious hold , 
To me 's no more than changing of my Gold 
What ever you gave , I paid you back in Bliss , 
then where 's the Obligation pray of this ? 
If heretofore you found grace in my Eyes , 
Be thankful for it , and let that suffice , 
But Woman , Beggar-like , still haunt the Door , 
Where   received a Charity before . 
O happy Sultan ! whom we barbarous call , 
How much refined art thou above us all : 
Who envys not the joys of thy Serail ? 
Thee like some God the trembling Crowd adore , 
Each Man 's thy Slave , and Woman kind , thy Whore . 
Methinks I see thee underneath the Shade , 
Of Golden Ganopy , supinely laid , 
Thy crowding Slaves , all silent as the Night , 
But at thy nod , all active , as the light ! 
Secure in solid Sloth , thou there dost reign , 
And feelest the joys of Love , without the pain . 
Each Female , court's thee with a wishing Eye , 
While thou with auful pride , walkest careless by ; 
Till thy kind Pledge , as last , marks out the Dame , 
thou fancy'st most , to quench thy present flame . 
then from the Bed , submissive she retires . 
And thankful for the grace , no more requires . 
no loud reproach , nor fond unwelcome sound , 
Of Woman's Tongues , thy sacred Ear does wound ; 
If any do , a nimble Mute , straight ties 
The True-loves-knot , and stops her foolish cries . 
thou fearest no injured Kinsman's threatening Blade , 
Nor Midnight Ambushes , by Rivals laid ; 
While here with aching Hearts , our joys we taste , 
Disturbed by Swords , like Democles his Feast . 
On Poet Ninnie . 

Crushed by that just contempt his Follies bring , 
On his crazed Head , the Vermin fain would sting . 
But never Satyr , did so softly bite , 
Or gentle George himself more gently write . 
Born to no other , but thy own disgrace , 
thou art a thing so wretched , and so base , 
thou canst not even offend , but with thy Face . 
And dost at once a sad example prove , 
Of harmless malice , and of hopeless love . 
All pride ! and ugliness ! o how we loath , 
A nauseous Creature , so composed of both ! 
How oft have we thy Cap'ring Person seen , 
With dismal look , and Melancholy Meene , 
The just reverse of Nokes , when he would be , 
Some mighty Hero , and makes love like thee ! 
thou art below being laughed at , out of spite , 
Men gaze upon thee , as a hideous sight , 
And cry , there goes the Melancholy Knight . 
There are some modest Fools , we daily see , 
Modest , and dull , why they are Wits , to thee ! 
For of all Folly , sure the very top , 
Is a conceited Ninny and a Fop. 
With Face of Farce , joined to a Head Romancy , 
there 's no such Coxcomb as your Fool of fancy : 
But 't is too much on so despised a Theme . 
no Man would dabble , in a dirty Stream : 
The worst that I could write , would be no more , 
Than what thy very Friends , have said before . 
My Lord All-pride . 

Bursting with Pride , the loathed Impostume swells , 
Pr-k him , he sheds his Venom straight , and smells ; 
But 't is so lewd a Scribbler , that he writes , 
with as much forth to Nature , as he fights , 
Hardened in shame , 't is such a baffled Fop , 
That every Scool-boy whips him like a Top : 
And with his Arm , and Head , his Brains so weak , 
That his starved fancy , is compelled to take , 
Among the Excrements of others wit , 
To make a stinking Meal of what they shit . 
So Swine , for nasty Meat , to Dunghill run , 
And toss their gruntlinst Snouts up when   done : 
Again his Stars , the Coxcomb ever strives . 
And to be something they forbid , contrives . 
With a red Nose , Splay Foot , and Goggle Eye , 
A Plough Man's , looby Meene , Face all a wry , 
With stinking Breath , and every loathsome mark , 
The Punchianello , sets up for a Spark , 
With equal self conceit too , he bears Arms , 
But with that vile success , his part performs , 
That the Burlesques his Trade , and what is best 
In others , turns like Harlequin , in jest . 
So have I seen at Smithfields wondrous Fair , 
When all his Brother Monsters , flourish there ; 
A Lubbard Elephant , divert the Town , 
With making Legs , and shooting off a Gun. 
Go where he will , he never fiends a Eriend , 
Shame , and derision , all his steps attend ; 
Alike abroad , at home , i' th' Camp , and Court , 
This Knight , o' th' Burning Pestle , make us sport . 
Captain Ramble . 

Whilst Duns were knocking at my Door , 
I lay in Bed with wreeking Whore , 
With Back so weak , and Pr. — k foe sore yo'ud wonder . 
I raised my Doe , and laid her Gown , 
I pinned her Whisk , and dropped a Crown , 
She pissed , and then I driven her down 
Like Thunder . 
From Chamber than I went to Dinner , 
And drank small Beer , like mournful Sinner , 
But still I thaught the Devil in her 
Clytoris . 
I sat at Muscots' , in the dark , 
And heard a Tradesman , and a Spark , 
A Scrivener and a Lawyer's Clerk , 
Tell Stories . 
From thence I went with muffled Face , 
To the Duke's House , and took a place , 
In which I spewed ,   please his Grace 
Or Highness . 
Had I been hanged , I could not choose , 
But laugh at Whores , who dropped from Stews , 
Seeing that Mrs. Margaret Hews , 
So fine is . 
When Play was done , I called a Link , 
Hearing some paltry pieces chink 
Within my Breeches , how ' die think 
I employed 'em ? 
Why Sir , I went to Mistress Speerings , 
Where some were Cursing , others Swearing , 
Never a Barrel better Herring , 
Per fidem . 
Seave'ns the Main , 't is Eight God damn me , 
't is Six , ( said I ) as God shall save me ; 
And being true , they could not blame me 
So saying . 
Save me ( quoth one ) what Shamaroone , 
Is this has begged an Afternoon , 
Of 's Mother , to go up , and down , 
A playing ? 
Now this to me , was worse than kill , 
Mistake me not for I am willing ; 
And able both , to drop a Shilling , 
Or Two Sir. 
Well said my Lad , ( Quoth Bully Hack ) 
With Whiskers stern , and Cordibeck , 
Pinned up behind his scabby Neck 
To show Sir. 
With Mangy Fist , he grasped the Box , 
Giving the Table bloody knocks , 
Calling upon the Plague , and Pox , 
To assist him . 
Ten Shillings from me , he did snach , 
he 'd like to have made a quick dispatch , 
Nor would Times Register , my Watch , 
Have missed him . 
As luck would have it in came Will , 
Perceiving things went very ill , 
Quoth he , thou 'dst better go and swill , 
Canary . 
We stee'rd our Course to Dragon Green , 
Which in Fleetstreet to be seen , 
Where we drank Wine , not foul but clean 
Contrary . 
Our Host Eclipsed Thomas Hammon , 
Presented slice of Bacon Gammon , 
Which made us swallow Sack , as Salmon 
Does Water . 
Being over warm with the last debauch , 
I grew as drunk as any Roach , 
When hot Backed Wardens did opproach , 
Or later . 
But see the damned confounded fate , 
Attends on drinking Wine so late , 
I drew my Sword on honest Kate 
i' th' Kitchin. 
Which Hammonds Wife could not endure , 
I told her though she looked demure , 
That she came latly I was sure , 
From Bitching 
We broke our Glasses out of hand , 
As many Oaths , we did command , 
As Hastings , Savin , Southerland , 
Or Ogle . 
then I cried up Sir Harry fain , 
And swore by God I would mantain , 
Episcopacy , was too plain , 
A juggle . 
And having now discharged the House , 
We did reserve a gentle Souse , 
With which we drank another Rouse , 
At the Bar. 
And now good Christians , all attend , 
To drunkenness , pray put an end , 
I do advice you as a Friend , 
And Neighbor . 
For lo the mortal , here behold , 
Who cautious was in days of old , 
Is now become , rash , sturdy , bold , 
And free Sir , 
For having 'scaped the Tavern so , 
There never was a greater Foe , 
Encountered yet by Pompey , no 
Nor Caesar. 
A Constable , both stern , and dread , 
Who is from Mustard , Brooms , and Thread , 
Preferred to be the Brainless head 
o' th' People . 
A Gown , he 'd on with Age made grey , 
A Hat too , which as Folks do say , 
Is Sir-nameed to this very Day , 
A Steeple . 
His Staff , which knew as well as he , 
The business of Authority , 
Stood bolt upright at sight of me ; 
Most true 't is . 
The Lousy Curs , that hither come . 
To keep the King's peace , safe at home , 
Yet cannot keep the Vermin from 
Their Cutis . 
Stand , stand , says one , and come before , 
You lie , said I , like a Sun , of a Where , 
I can't , nor will not stand , that 's more 
De mutter ? 
You watchful Knaves , I 'll tell you what , 
Your Officer , i' th' May-pole-hat , 
I 'll make as drunk as any Rat. 
Or Otter . 
The Constable began to swell , 
Although he liked the motion well , 
Quoth he my Friends , this I must tell 
You clearly . 
The Pestilence yond can't forget , 
Nor th' dispute with the Dutch , nor yet 
The dreadful Fire , that made us get 
Up early . 
From which ( quoth he ) I this infer , 
To have a Body's Conscience clear 
excelleth any costly Cheer , 
Or Banquet . 
Besides ( and faith I think he wept ) 
Were it not better you had kept , 
Within your Chamber , and have slept , 
In Blanket . 
But I 'll advice you by , and by , 
— A pox of all advice said I , 
Your Janissaries look as dry , 
As Vulkan . 
We came not here to talk of Sin , 
— Come — here 's a Shilling fetch it in . 
Our business now is to begin , 
A full Can , 
At last I made the Watchmen drunk , 
Examined here , and there , a Punk , 
And then away to Bed I slunk , 
To hide it . 
Now these my wishes are to you , 
Who will those dangers not Eschew , 
That ye may all go home , and spew , 
As I did . 
On Rome's Pardon . 

IF Rome can pardon Sins , as Romans hold , 
And if those Pardons , can be bought and sold , 
It were no Sin , t' adore , and worship Gold.  
If they can purchase Pardons with a Sum , 
For Sins they may commit in time to come , 
And for Sins past , 't is verywell for Rome . 
At this rate they are happy'st that have most ; 
they 'll purchase Heaven at their own proper cost , 
Alas ! the Poor ! all that are so are lost . 
Whence came this knack , or when did it begin ? 
What Author have they , or who brought it in ? 
Did Christ , ever keep a Cusiom-house for Sin ? 
Some subtle Devil , without more ado , 
Did certainly this sly invention brew , 
To gull'em of their Souls , and Money too . 
FINIS . 





Sir. R. B.  