THE Italian Husband . A TRAGEDY , Acted at the THEATRE IN Lincolns-inn-fields . 

By Mr. EDW. RAVENSCROFT . 

LONDON , Printed for Isaac Cleave , next Sergeants Inn Gate in Chancery lane . MDCXCVIII . 

London , Decemb : 16. 1697.  A Dedicatory Epistle TO Mr. HENRY CONYERS . 

SIR , 

When Poets dedicate to Great Men , their servile Genius stoops to Flattery : They write not their just sentiments , but what they think will please their Patrons : So , to make them great , they debase themselves , and become Idolaters of Images , gilded by their own praise . As well may the Carver adore his Statues , the Painter his Pictures , which are their own handyworks . To show my dislike of this Custom , I choose to expose this Tragedy to the public with no other ornament than your name . But let not the world mistake me ; for you have Virtues that tender you more valuable than Titles . They that know you love you , for you will not let the least of your acquaintance go unobliged whenever you can find opportunity to show your generous temper . Believe me , Sir , I esteem your friendship , and the name of Friend is preferable to any title that descends by Birth , or what Monarches can confer ; the first comes without desert , the latter oftener by Chance than Merit . Let other Poets than boast Patrons of Quality , whilst I , more happy I , enjoy my Friend , I am my Friend and my Friend is Me. O he is absent yet , but when he comes , the cheerful Bottle shall tune our souls to as high a rapture , as if we were met at the Harmonions Feast of Great Cecilia . Haste then , thou worthy man , and cheer the hearts of all your Friends . None in your absence more devoutly wishes' your return , than 

SIR , Your Friend and Servant , Edward Ravenscrost . 

The PRELUDE . 

Enter Poet and Critic . Crit.   I Have been very attentive to your Rehearsal , and what I tell you you 'll find true . 



Po.   Well , good Mr. Critics , let me alone with my faults , I don't allow your objections . 



Po.   I tell you , Sir , you 'll anger the Ladies , they 'll be against you . 



Crit.   I 'm not of your opinion . 



Crit.   You are Poet Positive right . 



Po.   And you Critic Find-fault , right or wrong . 



Enter Mr. Peregrine . Crit.   O , here 's Mr. Peregrine , we 'll ask his judgement . 



Po.   With all my heart ; he 's a Traveller , and knows the Customs of other Countries . 



Per.   Your Servant Gentlemen : what is the matter ? what am I to be Judge of betwixt you ? 



Crit.   Why Sir , Mr. Scribble here has written a Play , that 's to be acted to day . 



Per.   I know it Sir , and am come to see 't . 



Crit.   Lord , Lord , Sir ! he calls it a Tragedy . 



Per.   then I suppose it is one . 



Crit.   A Tragedy ! no , it has but three Acts.  



Per.   What then , Sir ? 



Crit.   If it has but three Acts it must be a Farce . 



Per.   Why so , Sir ? 



Crit.   Why so ! did you ever see it otherwise ? 



Per.   Ask him — 



Po.   Yes Sir , a Farce may be two , three , or five Acts ; as you have seen upon our Stage already . 



Per.   't is the same amongst the French and Italians . 



Crit.   What then is a Farce ? 



Po.   I 'll tell you : A Play is not called a Farce from any number of Acts , but from the lowness of the Subject and Characters ; which are not true Characters in Nature , nor just representations of human actions ( as Comedy is or should be ) but from the oddness and extravagancy of the Characters and Subject : Which , though not natural , yet not always against Nature ; and though not true , yet diverting , and foolishly delightful . A Farce is like a Dutch piece of Painting , or a Grotesque Figure , extravagant and pleasant . 



Per.   In my judgement it is so . 



Crit.   Well , we 'll pass over that point . But why do you make a Tragedy but three Acts ? 



Per.   OH , that 's customary in other Countries . 



Po.   I have observed that many Plays of late are all talk and no business ; others have some business , but so much talk , that the business is almost lost in the multiplicity of words , and the Plays lag and grow tedions . Therefore , to avoid this , I have now laid the business so close , that every Scene may seem necessary to carry on the design and story of the Play , and with as few words as I could suppose sufficient ; therefore I confine myself to three Acts , which gives me also opportunity to introduce some Musical Entertainments , and those seeming natural to the Play ; which few Poets have yet observed . 



Crit.   I confess they bring in their Music by head and shoulders , and may serve in one Play as well as another . But the main objection against your Play is , Your Lady , or chief Character in your Play , being of Quality , and a married woman , sees a young Lord , hearkens to his Love , and gives up her Honour in the first Act , without much ceremony or couttship : How will the Boxes like this , Sir ? There you are lost . 



Po.   Mr. Peregrine , you have been a Traveller , and are a fit Judge : In the first place , I say this great Lady and her Lover were not strangers to each other , courtship had formerly passed betwixt them , they were contracted by Vows ; but being separated before they could be joined in Marriage , and despairing ever to see one another again , the Lady is married . By accident they see each other , have opportunity of discourse , their Love renews , the Gallant presses , the Lady is frail , and they agreed upon the present moment . 



Per.   Where lies the Scene ? 



Po.   In Italy ; you know it is not there as in England , where we have easy access , and freedom of conversation , and opportunity of Courtship . An opportunity there once lost , is not to be recovered . 



Per.   Right , therefore , there if the Gentleman likes the Lady , and the Lady the Gentleman , they presently come to the point . An Italian Dame would think you a very dull , heavy , phlegmatic Lover , if you should waste time in idle Ceremony and Compliments . When Love is the Banquet , they fall to without saying Grace , I can tell you . 



Crit.   Aye , but the custom of that Country won't be an excuse here . 



Per.   But it ought ; for if the Scene lies in a foreign Country , the Poet may write after the custom of that Country . 



Crit.   But they won't like a great Lady losing her Honour ; they won't like that , Sir.  



Po.   It is not the design of my Play to expose a Lady's frailty , so much as to raise her up to virtue when fallen . I intent her fall not an example for vice . The great design being to bring a guilty person to be pitied in her circumstances . Many Plays have made the Virtuous in misfortunes to be pitied , but the Guilty never yet , as I remember . 



Per.   Very well : That design indeed is new , I like it . 



Po.   And lastly , Sir , to show what evils may follow one ill action , though repented on as soon as done . And let the Moral of the Play show , that one error brings more fatal consequences than many virtuous actions can remedy ; and therefore , though it is good to repent of ill , 't is better not to do ill : 



Crit.   I like your Moral well enough ; I have but one thing more to say , your Play has no lofty flights , nor never a fine dying Speech . 



Per.   We have too much of them in every Play.  



Po.   I have endeavoured in this to make my persons speak like men and women , and in such words as the real persons represented might be supposed to discourse in the same circumstance . The Scene lies in Italy , and I have written in the stile of the Italian Tragedies ; how it may please here I know not . 



Crit.   Aye , but Sir , you have left out Similes : ' IN Gad I scarce remember three Similes in the whole Play ; and Mr. Peregrine I am a passionate lover of Similes . 



Per.   I confess in English Writers great part of the Wit lies in Similes ; we have too many of ' 'em . 



Crit.   Too many Similes ! ' Y Gad Mr. Peregrine now I question your judgement : Oh! they are the prettiest things in nature . I had as live see , The Firmament without Stars , A Tree without Blossoms , A Garden without Flowers , A Lady's Face without Patches , or A Pudding without Plumbs , as a Play without Similes . There are your Similes now ! who could have expressed so much Wit without Similes ? 



Per. & Po.   ha , ha , he . 



Po.   See , the prologue 's going to be spoken , the Curtain is drawing up . 



Crit.   Well , well , I 'll tell you more anon : I 'll go into the Pit.  

Exit . 

Po.   Pray follow , and sit by him ; your presence will awe him ; 't is the nature of Critics to be malicious : he 'll be finding fault to show his Wit.  



Per.   I 'll drink a Bottle with you when the Play is done , and tell you my opinion . 

Exit . 

Po.   Lesle blame it is in new attempts to fail , Than in the old but meanly to prevail . 



Exeunt ▪ PROLOGUE . 

THE Town of late so very nice is grown , 
That nothing but what 's poignant will go down . 
YE expect to find every new Play that 's written , 
In spite of Nature , should be stuffed with Wit. 
This heavy Tax which you on us have laid , 
Without your friendly help can never be paid . 
With helps of Folly you Manure the Soil , 
To make it grateful to the Tillers Toil. 
Like Vintners we on impositions live , 
And at the expense of those who Tax us , thrive . 
Yet Poets say , in one thing you●r unkind , 
Wit ye expect — 
But what Wit is , no man has yet defined . 
Thus whilst we wander in a doubtful Maze , 
't is only our good fortune if we please , 
And when we start a Play , full cry you run , 
And never leave Yelping till   run it down . 
Rules you prescribe , but when you try the Cause , 
We find each Critics Whimsies are thy Laws . 
So , when of Wit , each Palat's made the test . 
Good plays are damned , because   lost your taste . 
He that would furnish out a modish treat , 
Should strive to please with varions sort of meat . 
To feed the Beaus with Farce is very good , 
Those Babes in Wit can't bear substantial food . 
For men of sense some Satyr should be got . 
For Politicians to be sure , a Plot. 
With Swanish Puns you may regale the Cit. , 
Their swinish taste delights in husks of Wit. 
But he that wou●d secure a good third day , 
Must show your Vices to you , to save his Play. 
lest Bully like , eager to purchase Fame , 
You should your follies in the Poet Dam. 
These are the Rules I heard our Author say : 
But Bays forsooth has found a newer way . 
Which , if it miss , he swears he shall be uneasy , 
To think he was not fool enough to please ye . 
Drammatis Personae . 

Frederico , Duke of Radiano , Mr. Verbrugen . 
Alousia , Duchess , Mistress Bowman . 
Alfonso , Marquis of Rosse , Mistress Hodgson . 
Fidalbo , Secretary to the Duke , Mr. Watson 
Rodrigo , Gentleman of the Chamber , Mr. Thurmond . 
A Friar . 
Amidea , Women to the Duchess , Mistress Prince . Florella , Mistress Martin . 
Page . 
Two Bravoes , Servants , Singers , Dancers , and Musicians . THE Italian Husband . 

ACT I SCENE I  

Enter Duchess , Amidea , Florella , Rodrigo . The Duchess dr●ps her Glove as she enters , Rodrigo takes it up and kisses it , presents it to her on his knees , she turns away in anger . Rod.   Madam , your Glove — 


Dutch.   Your saucy service does offend : 


[ Duchess gives tother Glove to Amid . who takes that from Rodrigo which she let fall . Amidea , fetch me another pair , 
oft have I frowned on your insolence : 
Offitions Sycophant , if ever more thou dost presume 
The Duke shall know — 
Enter Duke , Fidalbo giving him a Paper . Duke .  What , my Alovisia ? 


Dutch.   Rodrigo has been faulty , but I forgive him ; 
The solemnity of the day requires it ▪ 


Duke .  This is the second year we have solemnised 
Our Matrimonial Vows , — 
This day I took thee from the Great Duke's hand , 
By Royal bounty , given for my Bride . 
Why dost thou sigh ? 
Whenever I am talking thus to thee , 
Thy Bosom heaves , and thy Cheeks change colour . 


Dutch.   oft have I wondered that your Breast , my Lord , 
Should not partake the same concern with mine : 
My mind labour's under many doubts . 


Duke .  What are they ? — for I long to hear : 
[ Aside . Vent them in my bosom , 
And I will ease thee of thy burden . 


Dutch.   Why from my Infancy , was I bred up 
In lonely Convents , and from hence remote , 
no Friend or Parent ever appearing there 
To own me for their Child , or let me know 
Who gave me birth ; 
Or what my Quality may be , 


Duke .  't is true ! 


Dutch.   then brought to Court , by the Great Duke's command , 
And ever I could surveyed the spacious Roof , 
Or know what noise of Pomp and Greatness meant , 
In this amaze and change of station , 
Given for a Bride , my Lord , to you . 


Duke .  't is strange — 
[ aside . I feared her mind had wander after Court.  


[ aside . Dutch.   And stranger yet , why after Marriage 
None should reveal my Birth , 
If not to me , to you my Lord — 


Duke .  I pressed the Duke to know that Secret once , 
But he replied , i  given you a rich Gem , 
What need you be inquisitive 
From which Cabinet I took it , 
Or on what Rock engendered . 


Dutch.   't is very strange — 
This was the occasion of my private sighs . 


Duke .  And this the reason why I left the Palace , 
And am retired with thee , my life 's whole blessing , 
To these my Villas — but no more : 
Is the Music ready ? 


Dutch.   What paper 's that ? 


Duke .  Fidalbo , my Secretary , presents 
The Arguments of some Songs he has composed 
For this Days Entertainment : 
I think them not improper — 


Dutch.   Let 'em begin . 


[ Duke and Duchess sent themselves in Arbours . Attendants on each side . Enter Singers and Dancers . Shepherds , Shepherdess's , a Court Lady and a Citizen's Daughter . First , An Anniversary Song on the Duke's Wedding . 

1.  

Joy to the youthful happy pair ; 
Thus blessed you are , by Hymen joined : 
May you love on , from year to year , 
And by Enjoyment prove more kind : 
then with your days Love will increase , 
And you sit crowned with Joy and Peace . 
In Lover's hearts all joys abound , 
When Love with Constancy is crowned . 
2.  

Never may unwelcome Care molest 
The lovely Bride nor Bridegroom's breast : 
Keep firm your Faith , and value Truth , 
then Age will be as blessed as Youth : 
In Lover's hearts all joys abound , 
When Love with Constancy is crowned . 
Keep firm your Faith , and value Truth , 
then Age will be as blessed as Youth . 
In praise of a Country Life . 

1st Shepherdess .  OH Happy Nymph is she 
Who leads a rural life ; 
From Court Ambition free , 
From City Noise and Strife : 
Grant me ( ye Gods ) so sweet a life . 


Chor.   Grant me , etc.  


2d Shepherdess .  We see our Flocks at distance feed , 
The Fountains clear , the Sky serene ; 
The Herds are grazing in the Meads , 
Whilst Maids are milking of the kine . 


Chor.   OH happy Nymph , etc.  


1st Shep.   The Spring affords us Flowers 
That deck the gaudy Fields ; 
Summer gives us Shady Bowers , 
Where Birds their natural Music yield . 


Chor.   OH happy Nymph , etc.  


2d Shep.   Autumn brings us Corn and Fruits , 
Which are laid up for Winter store ▪ 
We Sing and Dance , and Tune our Flutes , 
Ah! what can Mortals wish for more . 


Chor.   OH happy Nymph , etc.  


1st Shep.   When Winter comes , and Cold prevails , 
Around the shining Hearth we fit ; 
With pleasant pastimes , merry tales , 
The nights are spent in Mirth and Wit.  


Chor.   OH happy Nymph , etc.  


In derision of a Country Life . By a Court Lady and a Citizen . 

Court L.   Fond Nymphs , from us true pleasure learn , 
There is no Music in a Churm : 
The Milkmaids sing beneath the Cow , 
The Sheep do bleat , the Oxen low : 


Court L. & Citiz.   If these are comforts for a Wife , 
Defend , defend me from a Country life . 


Court L.   The Team comes home , the Ploughman whistles , 
The great Dog barks , the Turkeycock bristles , 
The Jackdaws caw , the Magpyes chatter , 
Quack , quack , cry the Ducks , that swim in the water . 


Court L. & Citiz.   If these are comforts , etc.  


Citiz.   then melancholy crows the Cock , 
And dull is the sound of th' Village Clock ; 
The Leaden hours pass slow away : 
Thus yawning Mortals spend the day . 


Citiz. & Court L.   If these are comforts , etc.  


A Dance . Court Lady in praise of a Court Life . 

Court L.   Give me the gay and splendid Court , 
The lofty Roofs adorned with Gold , 
Where all the Great and Fair resort , 
The Noble and the Bold . 
There highest Honours are acquired , 
Kings are Adored , and Beauty is Admired . 
The Court is a Lady's proper sphere , 
OH let me live for ever there . 


Chor.   OH let me live , etc.  


The Shepherdess against a Court Life . 

1st & 2d Shep.   O who would be another's Slave , 
That may herself be free ; 
And pay that Homage she might have , 
Or Bondage take for Liberty ? 


The Citizen in praise of the City . 

Cit   The Court is but show , and vain tittle tattle , 
then give me the City , where in Coaches we rattle ; 
Thomas not quite so nice , nor modishly dressed , 
we 're rich in our Jewels , and wear of the best . 
The Courtiers spend all , and ever are needy , 
The Citizen gets , yet still he is greedy . 
He never boggles at Usury , nor at Extortion , 
Thomas the Father is damned the Child gets a Portion . 
then happy are we , whose Parents are civil , 
For blessed is the Child whose Father goes to the Devil . 
They truly know the pleasures of life ; 
there 's nothing like being a Citizen's Wife . 


Chor.   We truly know , etc.  




Enter at Page . Page .  Marquis Alfonso alights from his Charion , and sends your Grace word he brings Letters from the Great Duke . 



Duke .  All attend him in . 


Dut.   My Lord , I 'll retire to another Walk . 


Duke .  no Alovisia , stay , 
And learn the Message of this Embassy . 


Dutc.   I obey . 


Duke .  Your Virtue does obey , but your Beauty 
Rules the Empire of my heart . 
Enter Alfonso , Attendants . What Honour , most noble Marquis , is this 
You do my House and me : You find me out 
In Solitude , and close Retreat ? 


Alfon.   I know your Grace receives no Visitors , 
Nor Audience gives to Ceremonious Guests ▪ 
The Dukes commands alone have brought me 
Here : These Letters will excuse this Interruption . 


Duke .  Obedience to Sovereign Power has no restraint : 
you 're welcome ; How fares the Duke ? 


Alf.   Well , when he did give these Papers to my trust . 
He spoke of you ●ith great Indulgence ; 
Bid him to read , consider , and answer . 


Duke .  This is the Noble Alfonso . 
[ Speaks to the Duchess Lately returned from his long Travels . 
Receive him with the favour of your presence , 
Whilst I retire , and read the Duke's Commands . 


Alf.   Ha ! 


[ Aside , looking at the Duchess ▪ Dutc.   His Merits and his Honour claim their due , 
And all must Tribute pay to such desert . 


Alf.   Astonishment ! 


Dutch.   What surprise ! 


Duke .  One hour I borrow for retirement : 
What these import I long to know . 


Exit Duke and Attendants . SCENE III  

Dutch.   Marquis Alfonso ! 


Alf.   Duchess of Radiano — 


Dutch.   What do I see ? — 


Alf.   What do I feel ? 


Dutch.   I am all wonder — 


Alf.   Amazement all . 


Dutch.   Marquis ! 


Alf.   Duchess ! 


[ Sighs and breaths short D●tch .  This Walks too close , the next has free air , My Lord  


Alf.   I feel a Calenture , and scarce can breathe . 


Exit Alf. and Duchess Armid .  Come Florella , 
The Duchess gave the sign to attend at distance . 


Flor.   Let us take the next Arbour . 


[ Exeunt . Rodrigo . Rod.   Miserable unhappy Rodrigo , 
Whose Love must be the Prologue to his Death : 
Ah Duchess , how does this Heaven of Beauty 
Plunge and torment me in a Hell of pain . 
O that I might but snatch one Flower 
From the fair Garden of thy fragrant bosom , 
I 'd quit my hopes of Paradise . 
But I 'm doomed to love when hope is gone : 
then love , be silent , despair , and die : 
Yet I will be the shadow to that bright Sun , 
I 'll keep that Orb of Beauty still in view , 
And with a dying glance behold that Heaven , 
Which I must never possess . 
O Rodrigo ! 
Exit . 

Enter Alfonso and Duchess . Dutc.   Does then that wand'ring Stranger , who came to visit 
Our lonely Convent , prove to be Alfonso ? 


Alf.   I was the straggler stopped my Journey there . 


Dut.   You are the person , whose surprising presence 
First catched my eyes , and then engaged my heart : 
My mind till then was fixed on holy objects : 
But straight — 
As if Enchantment had surprised my senses , 
You drew my thoughts from Heaven to Earth , 
And I could only gaze and think of you . 


Alf.   'T was I came there to offer up my vows , 
And pay devotion at that holy Shrine : 
But o ! the sight of you robbed the dead Saint 
Of all the Reverence I came to pay . 
The brightest sure in all the Crystal Orb 
Could not excel in form 
Nor sooner gain a Votary . 
But o the strange amazement I was in ! 
When after one days absence , my new Saint 
Was thence translated to unknown Regions : 
How have I wandered thro' the world ever since , 
But till this happy hour could never find . 


Dutch.   Unhappy hour , and fatal interview . 


Alf   Our hearts were panting with the same desire , 
And in our eyes we mingled Souls . 
Love does record our vows , and gives me title 
To Alouisia's heart . 


Dutch.   Not to my honour . 


Alf.   To all , love is no niggard . 


Dutch.   I am the Duke's . 


Alf.   By Marriage ; by former vow thou 'rt mine . 


Dutch.   The Duke — 


Alf.   Shall know nothing . 


Dutch.   Heaven — 


Alf.   Will be silent . 


Dutch.   Fear chills my heart . 


Alf.   Let Love warm your bosom — 


Dutch.   Break off this eager Conference , my Lord ▪ 
lest wand'ring eyes observe our ecstasies . 


Alf.   That Grove of Jessamins will shade our loves 


Dutch.   no : I 'll lead you to yond apartment : 
There we will both lament our rigid Fate , 
Cancel our Vows , and grieve we met so late . 


Exeunt . Enter Rodrigo . Rod.   Despairing Love I thought the only plague ; 
But my too curious Eyes have added now 
A new tormenter to my breast : — Jealousy : 
How free in their discourse ; what amorous looks , 
And darting glances , flew like Lightning round : 
What pauses , and what slarts — I grow mad — 
I 'm enraged — go on , pursue — turn Spy , 
See till thou ravest , then break thy heart , and die . 
Exit . 

Enter Duke , Reading and pausing on the Great Duke's Letter , with another in his hand Sealed . Duke . Reads .  You stand high in our regard and favour . 
I gave you Alovisia for your Bride , 
In my esteem you were most worthy of her : 
You have withdrawn yourself and her from Court : 
Let me by Letters know the hidden cause , 
then I 'll reveal a Secret shall remove 
All scruples from your mind — Thus satisfied 
That you return to Court , with your Duchess , 
Shall be my wish , but never my command . 
Jealousy takes birth from fond suspicion , 
Is fed and nursed by every idle fear , 
Till it becomes the canker of the mind : 
It shall spread no farther here — 
His tenderness in all discourses to her , 
His pleasing smiles at all she said or did , 
And all the soft Indulgence which he showed , 
Not meant to wrong her Virtue , nor my Honour . 
Showing his own Letter . Here I have established my discontent , 
Upon my doubts she was ignobly born , 
And sixth it for the cause of my retreat . 
Enter Rodrigo . where 's Alfonso ? 


Rod.   With the Duchess , busy . 


Duke .  Busy ! 


Rod.   Very busy . 


Duke .  Busy ? Rodrigo ! 


Rod.   Yes , shut up together in a close apartment : 
Not fire or heat are more incorporate . 


Duke .  Be plain and brief : or this stops thy Tongue . 


Shows a Dagger . Rod.   They in conjunction : Your Honour in Eclipse . 


Duke .  Impossible — 


Rod.   Possible — 


Duke .  How know ye ? 


Rod.   These eyes beheld the first onset , 
When with eager embraces , hasty kisses , 
And trembling limbs , they striven , 
As if half famished for the Banquet . 


Duke .  Which way comes this discovery ? 


Rod.   Thro' a small vacancy in the Partition , 
I could surveyed the Room all round . 


Duke .  Look it be true . 


Rod.   Would it were false . 


Duke .  thou hast thrown Lightning into my Soul : 
Fierce anger flashes in my eyes , 
And I shall break like Thunder from a Cloud , 
And blast 'em all to Hell. — Led to the place . 


Exeunt ▪ Re-enter Duke and Rodrigo in another Apartment . Duke bushes at the door . Duke .  Here , open the door , Alovisia — Duchess open the door : 
Are you so employed , you can't hear ? 
Open , or I 'll break it down this minute . 


Dutch.   See , my Lord , 't is open . 
[ Duchess opens the door . Rodrigo rushes in , and returns with Alfonso's Sword.  What sudden rage transports your Grace ? 


Duke .  Let your Guilty Conscience tell you . 
Duchess , where hides the Adulterer ? 
Where is the Traitor ? 


Rod.   I have secured his Sword.  


Duke .  Have an eye to the Duchess , 


[ The Duke presses in . Dutch.   I see no prospect but death before me : 
Fear and guilt wing me for flight : 
Thomas I save not life , I may get time to pray . 


Exit Duchess , Rodrigo following Enter Duke with a Pistol in his hand , Alfonso flying him . Duke .  Inhospitable Traitor — 


Alf.   OH stay your Revengeful hand ! 


Dukk .  Die Alfonso ! — Base Instrument of Death , 
Snaps a Pistol , throws it away ; draws his Sword.  Hast thou failed me , this will not . 


Alf.   Oh! have Compassion . 


Duke .  Compassion ! Traitor . 


Alf.   Your thoughts may err , you may be deceived , 
Misinformed — We may be innocent . 


Duke .  no — Death is not more certain than thy crime . 


Alf.   Give then a life that merit's a thousand deaths : 
A life that will be greater punishment , 
Than death itself : Ah give me time . 


Duke .  Live Alfonso ; 
[ After a pause . I had not well considered — the Great Duke — 
Live young Lord — my word secures your Life . 
Most generous Duke — behold a Traitor at your feet , 
Whose Crimes deserve not only death 
But a tormenting , violent death 
But if you are so Godlike to forgive . — 


Duke .  As your fault is above excuse 
't is also above punishment . 
Revenge would end in death — 
And your death would publish my dishonour — 
Which yet may be concealed — Close then your Lips , 
Let not your breath once whisper 't to your soul — 
no not to Heaven , in Prayer , and Penitence . 


Alf.   no records of your wrongs with me remain , 
But my repentant thoughts , that bear 
My Crimes to Heaven in hopes of pardon there . 


Duke .  The Pistol failed ▪ 
Live then Alfonso — Fate will have it so — 
But henceforth eat all opportunities 
To see , or by my Duchess to be seen . 
Do not remember that I had a Wife — 
Let all her Crimes and all her Charms 
Sleep in Eternal silence . 


Alf.   Ever , ever — 


Duke .  Rise — be composed 
Let not your looks betray either guilt or fear . 
Be not abrupt in your departure ; 
But with due marks of ceremony and respect , 
Take leave — withdraw — 
But still believe your Life to be a dream . 
Methinks I do but dream . 
And that i  pardoned you is but a dream , 


Alf.   Sir — 


Duke .  no more , your absence , and your silence . 


Alf.   I go , am silent , and obey . — 
Exit . 

Enter Rodrigo . Duke .  Where is the guilty Duchess ? 


Rod.   In her private Oratory , at prayers . 


Duke .  Good Heaven — 
With what Conscience can a Woman pray ! 
What made you , Rodrigo , so officious ? 


Rod.   Zeal for your Honor.  


Duke .  Had you been silent I had not known my dishonour . 
And not knowing it had still been happy . 


Rod.   If silent , I had been a Traitor . 


Duke .  The adultery of a Wife not known , 
The Husband loses not his peace . 


Rod.   You had slept then in polluted Arms.  


Duke .  You force a fatal necessity : 
Alfonso or my Wife must die . 


Rod.   Honour requires it . 


Duke .  With Alovisia I destroy my life . 


Rod.   She is disloyal . 


Duke .  But I love her . 


Rod.   i  done — 


Duke .  What thou canst never undo . 
Seal up thy Lips , Rodrigo : 
What , thy too officious diligence 
Brought to thy knowledge , 
hide in the darkest corner of thy heart : 
For if one breath should give it vent , thou diest . 


Rod.   Now I have told ye , my Conscience is quiet , 
And I am dumb as death itself . 


Duke .  Suspend thy thoughts and follow me . 
I 'll give directions for an Ambuscade : 
The Conduct shall be yours . 


Rod.   So , — I have paddled in the Water , 
And must now wade thro' the Stream . 


Duke .  How necessary , but how hateful is a Spy.  


Exeunt . ACT II SCENE I  

The Duchess in black , lying on Carpets , her hair loose , leaning on a Death's head , a Book in her hand , and the Picture of a Magdalen over her Oratory . Dutch.   OH Alovisia ! wretched by thy fall , 
Wretched by thy tormenting life , that canst 
Survive thy honour , and thy happiness . 
My Soul hangs trembling on my Lips ; 
And yet I cannot sigh it from me . 
But here , here comes my angry Lord , 
The just avenger of his wrongs , 
And fatal punisher of my misdeeds . 
Enter Duke . Welcome , my Lord , whose presence heretofore 
Was wont to give new life and joy to Alovisia , 
But now most welcome , now you come armed , 
With punishment to end a painful life . 


Duke .  no , live Alovisia — 


Dutc.   OH mix not Cruelty with Justice . 
Let me not languish out a life in Torment . 
Behold me prostrate at your Feet — My Head 
Bowed low to Earth — Cheeks wet with Tears , 
And Heart o'ercharged with sorrow , 
Your penitent offender meets her Fate . 


Duke .  Live , live Duchess , I pronounce it . 
Let mercy be as great a wonder to thee , 
As are thy Crimes to me . 


Dutch.   Live ! O presumption ! 


Duke .  Come , I 'll lay myself down by thee : 
we 'll talk a while . — 


Dutch.   Come not too near , my infectious breath will blast 
All Virtue — but the Noble Fredericoes . 


Duke .  Peace ; why are you thus all habited in black ? 
And why thus mournfully attended ? 


Dutch.   To solemnize the funeral of my honour , and myself . 


Duke .  That you have erred I know , 
That you repent I do believe : 
The wanness of your Cheeks , and anguish of your Heart , 
Do show the sad affliction of your Mind . 
Live then . 
Mercy is due to the first Crime of Penitents . 


Dutch.   Your Mercy gives a Life I do not merit , 
And spares a Death that I deserve with pain . 


Duke .  The Memory that you was once most dear , 
Dear as my life , now gives you life : 
then Duchess hope , hope what I dare not speak , 
And I will wish your hopes may all succeed . 
Who waits ? 
Enter Amidea and Florella . The Duke takes a Letter out of his pocket , and holds it in his hand . Speaks as they all may hear . Attend the Duchess to her Chamber . 
Ah , Alovisia , thy fate indeed was hard , 
Never to know the greatness of your Parents , 
Till that sad minute , which gives at once 
The knowledge of their Names , and of their Death . 
Farewell : Ever night I 'll visit you again . 
Exit . 

Flor.   O Amidea , the secret of the Duchess Grief 
And sudden Alteration is at last made known . 


Dut ▪   Led me for I am faint and overcome with Grief . 


Am.   Heaven ease your Cares , and send your mind relief . 


Exeunt . Enter Alfonso . Alf.   My mind is tossed in a rough Sea of doubts . 
I live , but know not the reason why , 
I fear the Duke only preserves my life , 
To make my death more horrid . 
OH mystery ! The Adulterer goes unpunished , 
And the offending Wife received to Grace ! 
When the offended smiles on the offenders , 
It shows their Ruin near . 
Oh! Love ! O Duchess ! O Alfonso ! 


Enter Duke . Duke .  My Lord , commend my Duty to our Master , 
This to your Charge I do commit ▪ 


[ Gives him a Letter Alf.   Most noble Fredrico thy hand , 
My heart , my life , are all at thy Command . 


Duke .  What further service you may do me , 
As we pass my Vineyards , I 'll impart . 
Your Coach is ordered to the Park Gate , 
So far I will conduct you . 


Alf.   How generously you conquer Souls . 
You load me with Honours ▪ and I blush for shame . 


Exeunt . Enter Amidea , Florella Flo.   She sleeps still , but sighs abundantly . 


Am.   Sure she 's very tenderhearted . 
That Grief can make so great an alteration . 
In the morning how lively were her Eyes , 
Her Lips , how rosy ; and her Cheeks were spread 
Like the Fields of beauty , all pleasure to the Eye . 


Flor.   Ah the difference in a woman , 
When she 's in a good humour : 
What a change there 's now ? 


Am.   Her eyes clouded with Tears , 
Her lids so swelled , no charming light breaks thro' ; 
Her Cheeks all smeared , like Meadows that have 
Been o'erflowed with hasty Rains.  


Flo.   Shuns company , nothing but weeps and prays , 
As if she thought her latest hour was come . 


Am.   If this holds she can't live . 


Flor.   Ah Amidea , the world may think , and think , 
But a small thing won't break a woman's heart . 
Prithee let 's leave this melancholy subject , 
And talk of other matters . 


Am.   What Florella ? — 


Flor.   Of the handsome young Lord was here to day : 
Eyes never beheld a more lovely person . 


Am.   Could you think so , Florella , and not be moved 
With thoughts that make young Virgins blush : 
Conscious their wishes bear a Gild , 
That wrongs their Modesty . 


Flor.   Heavens preserve me Chaste , had one word , 
One tempting word , fallen from those lips , 
Or the soft language of his eyes expressed 
A willing mind , I had flown thro' Air. 
Precepts of Chastity and Honour 
Are taught in vain , where such strong Charms invite . 


Am.   You are transported , Florella . 
Hark ; I hear the Duchess stirring : 
[ A Bell sounds . She ring's for us . 


Exeunt . Enter Duke , Alfonso . Duke .  That , my Lord , is my new Lodge , 
Where I intent to pass my evening hours . 


Alf.   A delightful situation . 


Duke .  If you receive no orders from the Duke 
For your return , let my Invitation 
Bring you here to night : 
Society will strengthen our new Friendship . 


Alf.   You load me with favours . 


Duke .  we 'll sup together . i  ordered Music , 
The hours shall slide away with pleasure ; 
In soft delights we 'll bury all our cares . 
you 'll be my Guest — 


Alf.   I promise — 


Duke .  Your hand Alfonso — 


Alf.   My heart , most generous Frederico . 
Embrace . Most noble Duke of Radiano ! 


Enter Rodrigo in disguise , with two Ruffians . Rod.   That , that 's the Traitor Alfonso : 
You two dispatch him . 


Alf.   ha , am I at last betrayed ! Fond Credulity : 
[ Draws I won't die without defence — 


Duke .  Courage , Alfonso , my Sword shall be your Guard.  


Alf.   What new wonder 's this ? 


Rod.   This way , Sir , they 'll dispatch him presently . 


Duke .  Slave , there 's a dispatch for you . 
The Duke engages betwixt 'em , and drives Rod. at distance : 
Rod. retreating with design , feigning only to fight , whilst 
Alfonso fights the other two . 


Rod.   O , why have you killed me ? 


Duke .  Valiant Alfonso ,   now 
[ Duk turns to Alf. side . no odds — 


1 Ruff.   Rodrigo killed ! 


2 Ruff.   The Duke against us ! we are betrayed . 


1 Ruff.   Fly Comrade , fly . 


The two Ruff. run off . Alf.   Flight shall not save you , Murderous Villains . 


Duke .  Pursue no farther than that rising ground ; 
then let your eyes observe what way they take . 
[ Exit Alf.  Livest thou Rodrigo ? Speak . 


Rod.   Fato lends me one short gasp of breath , 
To ask the reason why I have my death . 


Duke .  How thankless is the office of a Spy. 
Spies ruin whom they serve : they are the cause 
Of Murders , and the bane of Families : 
no man was ever made happy by 'em yet ; 
The guilty and the injured both undone . 


Rod.   Faithful service ill repaid . 


Duke .  Thy death was necessary : 
You were Master of a secret ; 
Which I would not have known myself : 
The knowledge of my shame hung on thy Tongue , 
Each blast of breath had blown it thro' the world ; 
But dying that dies with thee . 


Rod.   O! O! — 


Rod. dies . Duke .  Farewell Spy.  


Re-enter Alfonso . Alf   The Villains were too nimble of foot , 
they 're out of sight already , 
Their Coast was Westward . 


Duke .  Here lies the Engineer of this design 
The officious Slave was Rodrigo . 
Gentleman of my Chamber , he was the Spy. 
Brought me the fatal intelligence ; 
Stop there my Tongue — 
This Villain with his dying breath confessed , 
That fearing my forgiving nature , 
He laid this Ambush to surprise your life . 


Alf.   Each Circumstance confirms the truth . 
Forgive me , generous Duke , if my first thoughts 
Transgressed , and sinned against Gratitude and you : 
But when you nobly interposed your arm , 
And shared an equal danger with me : 
Shame covered me all o'er , and I 'm still confused . 


Duke .  Ignoble minds work by ignoble ways . 
The brave and generous act without deceit . 


Alf.   These are most gracious favours . 
Thomas you refused the forfeit of my life , 
To give it me a second time ; 
With hazard of your own , is most surprising . 


Duke .  The life I gave , I may with right call mine ; 
And what is mine , my Honoor will defend . 


Alf.   You act like Caesar. O wonder in nature , 
That fiercest rage should turn to perfect love ! 


Duke   So greatest love to greatest hatred turns : 
Riddles in 〈◊〉 , that puzzle Philosophy . 
Now I dismiss you — 
Your Servants and your Coach are here — 
Remember , Alfonso , 
Who profanes Friendship commits Sacrilege . 


Alf.   You call him Friend , that is your Slave . 


Duke .  no Alfonso , let Females be our Slaves : 
Men can be grateful , when they are obliged ; 
But Woman never . 


Alf.   My Gratitude , like my Soul , shall be Eternal . 


Duke .  My Friendship lasting as your Silence — no more : 
Till evening I take my leave — 


Alf.   Your Grace commands Alfonso . 
Alfonso's Servants appear with Fidalbo . 


Exeunt severally . Enter Duchess , supported by Flor. and Amid Dutch.   Reach me a Chair — Leave me — 


[ Sits down . Am.   We wait without . 


Dutch.   no , stay — But observe your distance — 
What Rigour shall punish the excess of Love ; 
That wrongs the Matrimonial vow . 
And what reward for Chastity , 
That was preserved by loss of Life . 


Aside to herself . Flor.   she 's very thoughtful . 


Am.   Let us be very silent , lest we disturb her more . 


Dutch.   Away there with that Sophonisba 
And Zanobia , and Firma there , 
That Flower-piece too : I like 'em not . 
Looks wildly about , as imagining Pictures . Amid , She fancy's Pictures , and there 's none . 


Dut.   Take 'em away ; — no stay you by me : 
For my Lord is absent , and my mind 
Wanders I know not where . 


Flor.   Her senses are disordered . 


Dut.   A Song to lull my troubled thoughts asleep . 


A SONG to the Duchess . 

I  

Nymph's that now are in your prime , 
Make , OH make good use of time : 
Each Minute hastens your decay , 
Beauty , like time , fly's fast away . 
Nymphs that now are in your prime , 
Make , OH make good use of time . 
II  

If you would know how Youth doth pass , 
Look on the Dyal of your face , 
Where , though no sudden change is found , 
Yet still the Sun is moving round . 
Nymphs that , etc.  
III  

But when it comes to be full Noon , 
The day grows short , and night comes soon ; 
The Sun steals off by slow degrees , 
And Beauty fades , though no one sees . 
Nymphs that , etc.  
iv.  

Night's shades do pass , and day comes on , 
But Beauty has no second dawn ; 
The Sun returns , but Beauty never , 
When Beauty sets , it sets for ever . 
Nymphs that , etc.  
Dut.   Who can give ease to a distracted mind . 


Am.   Madam the Duke . 


Enter Duke . Dut.   Retire — Your Grace is welcome . 


Florella and Amid . withdraw . Duke .  Not always so — 


Dutch.   Excuse me , my Lord ; 
Love first taught me that lesson . 


Duke .  Lust soon untaughr what Love had learned . 


Dutch.   What says your Grace ! 


Duke .  Excuse me , I was thinking — 
What are you doing ? 


Dutch.   My task is great : and I have much to do . 


Duke .  What , Alovisia ? 


Dutch.   To repent , to die . 


Duke .  That is indeed hard for a woman . 


Dutch.   What , to repent ? 


Duke .  no ; to die in the flower of her youth . 


Dutch.   My fault deserves death . 


Duke .  Your fault is pardoned . 


Dutch.   By Heaven I hope — Heaven knows the heart . 


Duke .  By me too ; speak no more on 't . 


Dutch.   I must ever think on 't . 


Duke .  When the offended forgives the offender ; 
Let the offender forget the offence . 


Dut.   But not that Noble generosity 
With which he pardoned the offender . 


Duke .  First faults may be forgiven — 
Faults once forgiven are pardoned ever . 
Duchess , let 's discourse of something else ▪ 


Dut.   Of any thing , my Lord shall please . 


Duke .  Of love — the love you have for me . 


Dut.   We shall then speak of an infinite . 


Duke .  'T was finite once . 


Dutch.   I mean not past Love , but the present : 
That new birth of Love , created in my Soul , 
By your excess of Goodness 


Duke .  Tell me , how d' ye love me ? 


Dut.   As my immortal Being . 


Duke .  Are you sure you don't hate me . 


Dut.   Myself I hate — 


Duke .  Why ? 


Dut.   For offending you . 


Duke .  Will you offend no more ? 


Dut.   May Heaven — 


Duke .  I believe you — 


Dut.   With Joy I hear you , 
And here I swear Eternal truth . 


Duke .  And I Eternal love . 


Dut.   Give me this hand for pledge . 


Duke .  And with it too my heart . 


Dut.   Blessed Reconcilement . 
Angels Witness our Accord . 


Duke .  Wonder not , there 's Magic in Beauty . 


Dut.   And harmony in Love.  


Duke .  Our Love is now complete — 


Dut.   Not till I 'm reinstated — O I dare not name where . 


Duke .  That shall be — 


Dut.   When ? 


Duke .  This night 


Dut.   Can it be ? 


Duke .  It shall be : mark me : one Bed shall hold both , 


Dut.   Sun , hasten on thy Course . 


Duke .  Darkness , advance — 


Dutch.   Reward your Goodness Heaven : 
And bless my noble Lord  


Duke .  I take my leave . 


Dutch.   Where goes your Grace ? 


Duke .  I Sup at my Vineyards . 


Dutch.   When will you return ? 


Duke .  Soon after Supper . 


Dutch.   You will not fail — 


Duke .  no , I will not fail . 


Dutch.   Farewell my Lord  


Duke .  And Alovisia too , farewell . 
Exit ▪ 

Dut.   Ah! shall these Arms once more receive my Lord : 
And to night too ! OH Fortunate Duchess ! 
I 'll chain him to my panting breast , 
Suck the sweet Roses of his lips , 
Till he has lost all memory of my fault . 
And all his Rage dissolves in Love. 
Yes , yes , be present all ye Amorous Powers : 
ye tender Arts of Love , and sweet Endearments , 
That Ecstasy the Soul in soft delights , 
Be present with me , lend me all your Charms , 
That may endear him ever to my Arms.  
Exit , 

ACT III SCENE I  

Enter Duke reading a Letter . Fidalbo at distance . Duke .  ' Your Duchess was Daughter to fair Bianca , 
' For Beauty famed at Court , when I was Prince . 
' My Youth , and greatness of my Quality , 
' After much pain , and long Courtship , 
' Prevailed upon her Chastity . 
' I find my Wife is of a coming Breed . 
Reads . Our practice was carried with such secrecy ; 
' That our Love remains yet undiscovered . 
' Alovisia was born , Bianca recovered strength , 
' Retired to a Monastery , turned Penitent and died . ; 
' The Daughter copies the Mother exactly ; 
' Sin and Repent is both their faculties . 
' Reads . I would not have revealed this Secret , 
' Had not your Letter pressed the knowledge of her Birth . 
' To morrow I 'll hunt with you , and discourse at large . 
Enter Alfonso . My Lord Alfonso I thank you — 
Your return was what I most desired : 
But this Letter you bring clears many doubts , 
And gives my mind much ease . 


Alf.   Had not the Dukes commands returned me back , 
My own inclinations had brought me to ye . 


Duke .  I took care in mine , not to lose you , Alphonso . 


Alf.   I am bid to let you know , he 'll hunt with you 
To morrow early in your own Park . 


Duke .  I will show him Sport ; he shall see Game . 
Fidalbo , enclose this Letter under a Cover , 
then carry it to the Duchess : 
Tell her , I remember my promise , 
And after Supper it shall be performed : 
no business now shall interrupt our pleasure , 
we 'll spend our short minutes to the purpose : 
I have ordered Music for this days Entertainment . 
Sat , my Lord , and be attentive . 


IXION , A Masque . 

persons Names that Sing in the Masque . Ixion , 
Juno , 
Iris , 
Jupiter , 
Mercury . 
Two Furies . 


The rest of the Singers sing in the Chorus . A Poetical Heaven . The Overture with Violins , Hautbois , Trumpets and Kettledrums . A Chorus of Divinities welcome Ixion to Heaven , in the following words : First Sung by Mercury . Mercury .  Welcome to the blessed Abodes , 
To the Palace of the Gods ! 
Happy Guest , you here may know 
Boundless joys , unknown below : 
But o ! use the blessing well ; 
Heaven abused will turn to Hell.  


Ixion kneeling gives a Letter to Jupiter . Ixion .  Great Jove , thy Slave a Letter brings , 
Born hither on thy eagle Wings . 


Jupiter Retires with his Train . Juno .  This is some new Intrigue of Love , 
The grand affair of Amorous Jove : 
Cold Brothers Love he gives his Bride , 
Wedded to every she beside . 


Iris , her Rainbow in prospect . Iris.   no more , great Juno , let your breast 
Be with the Jealous Fiend possessed . 
1.  

Hence restless Jealousy remove , 
Ice mixed with Flames , cursed Viper of the mind ; 
Pale Child , that kills thy Parent Love , 
And mak'st us search for what we dread to find . 
2.  

Go , partial Councillor , 't is vain 
With Jealous doubts to raise a Lover's woe ; 
Even when they 're justest , most they pain , 
And make him look like a distrustful Foe . 


Juno .  Iris now in vain advices , 
Love abused all Rules despises : 
I must find what Beauty's Charms 
Force my Rover from my Arms : 
Quickly let my Birds attend , 
Juno must on Earth descend . 


Iris goes , and the Peacock's o'resproad part of the Stage . Ixion .  What a heaven of Beauty's here ! 
Oh! I Love , but must Despair : 
Now I tremble , now I dare : 
What a heaven of Beauty's here ! 


Juno .  Tell me , Stranger , tell me true , 
What new Loves does Jove pursue ? 


Ixion .  What new Loves can Jove pursue ? 
nothing 's worthy Love but you . 


Juno .  Jove to change alone is true ; 
Lawless Love does all subdue . 


Both.   Love and Wine no trust maintain ; 
Love , like Wine , is Reason's bane ; 
Love , like Wine , makes Wisdom reel ; 
Both will secret Truths reveal : 
Both the worst Events despise : 
None in Wine or Love is wise . 


Ixion .  Since Cupid conquers mighty Jove , 
Bright Goddess . pardon if I Love : 
Too high I raise my bold desire , 
But Love and you at once inspire . 
Since Cupid conquers mighty Jove , 
Bright Goddess pardon if I love . 


Juno aside .  Be still my wrongs of Virtue and of Love , 
Till I to vowed Revenge can move . 


To him .  If you Love , o ! let me know 
What now brings you from below ? 


Ixion .  Calisto , of Diana's Train , 
Of Jove's long absence does complain : 
Since for a Mortal he deserts the Sky , 
Oh! let a Mortal here his place supply . 
A light Air . What a fool is a Wife to lie pining at home , 
When to pleasures abroad the false Husband is gone ? 
Let the Rover be gone , take a Lover to Bed , 
And your wrongs he 'll revenge on the Murderer's head . 
For why should a Goddess be robbed of delight , 
Be a Wife all the day , and a Widow at night , 


Juno .  Hold , Mortal , whither wowd you move ! 


Ixion .  To Heaven and you , to Heaven and Love.  


Each repeating their last Verse , he striving to embrace her , and she to hinder him . Juno makes a Cloud arise , which he embraces , in the mean time she sings two lines aside . Juno .  Embrace a Cloud , unjust possessing , 
Is such a vain delusive blessing . 
Jove appears on his Eagle , and thunders Ixion down to Hell.  


Jove .  Down , down , presumptuous Traitor fall ; 
Such Crimes th' avenging Thunder call : 
Down , down presumptuous Traitor fall . 
A Chorus of Divinities . 


The Chorus of Divinities , who come in with Jove , repeat that he Sung , as a Chorus . A wild dismal Symphony is heard . The Scene changes to a Poetical Hell.  Enter Ixion . Ixion .  Oh! to my pains let s●me small ease be given , 
't is Hell enough to forfeit Heaven : 
My Crimes are present to my tortured Soul ; 
Adulterous breach of Trust the foremost in the Roll.  


A Dance of Furies . Furies and Devils spring up about him , with Whips of Snakes and Daggers , and Dance : then hale him out to a Wheel . Two Furies sing . Two Furies .  Drag him along to yonder 's Wheel , 
There he shall endless Tortures feel . 
't is the Sentence was given in Minos' Court : 
we 'll whirk him about , and lash him in sport . 
Grand Chorus of Devils and Furies . Here , Proud , Lustful ▪ Faithless Soul , 
Round th' Eternal Circle ●●wl : 
For such Crimes the Gods ordain 
Thunder , Hell , and Endless Pain . 


A Dance of Furies ends the Masque . The Scene closes . Duke .  My Lord Alfonso , rouse your Spirits , 
And be prepared for something new : 
I seldom treat the common way . 


Alf.   Your Grace is eminent in all : 
It pleases me , you are so well disposed . 


Duke .  But you , Alfonso , would take more delight 
To be at Court , among the Ladies . 


Alf.   Excuse me , if my looks don't express 
The satisfaction of my heart : 
I am pleased abundantly . 


Duke .  Some Wine , and bring the Table furnished for Supper . 
Servants bring Wine to the Duke and Alfonso , and set it on a Table , they sit down . My Lord , seat yourself , this is mine . 
[ Both sit down . This to the Health you wish . Alfonso . 


[ Duke drinks . Alf.   't is to the Noble Duke of Radiano . 
Most cordially I drink this Health . 


[ Both drink . Duke .  I have a new Cook to night , let 's see 
What Rarities he has provided for us . 
Uncover your Plate , my Lord , as I do mine . 
In the Marquis his plate is the picture of the Dut. 
In the duke 's a Dagger — Marq. starts . 


Alf.   A Picture ! 


Duke .  A Dagger ! 


Alf.   Ominous prospect ! 


Duke .  My Duchess' picture ! 
But can the shadow displease you . 
The substance liked you well . 


Alf.   I want air . 
Offers to rise , a Spring goes and locks him in . ha — Another Devil — Locked in my Chair ! 
I am then designed a Victim to revenge . 


Duke .  What have they sent us in this other dish . 
A brace of Death's heads . 
Uncovers the dish in the middle of the Table . My Lord , Alfonso , you see the first Course . 
I told ye 't was no common Treat : 
Is nothing here you like — 


Alf.   Why this sad preparation for my death ? 


Duke .  Fall to most heartily , my young Lord , 
As you did once , without Ceremony or Grace . 
Let your eyes feed upon that lovely Face : 
Scent the sweet fragrancy of her breath , 
And suck the balmy dew that hangs 
Upon those melting lips : 
Feast all your Senses with her Charms , 
And lie once more entranced 
In the dear Enchantments of her Breast . 
Speak Alfonso ; why are you silent ? 


Alf.   What would you have me , or what can I say ? 
OH Duke ! my Tongue falters , and my Lips tremble , 
As if I lay just at the point of Death . 


Duke .  Put that Cordial to your Lips.  


Alf.   Why d' ye triumph , Treacherous Duke ? 
Your Revenge had once been Justice : 
You might have taken then my life with Honour , 
But now 't is base ignoble persidy , 
Breach of hospitality , and friendship . 


Duke .  Thy Crime was inhospitable , so be the punishment ; 
I had killed thee in the first transports of my Rage , 
But the Engine failed my design : 
then second thoughts came crowding in my mind , 
Which did instruct me better : 
You were sent by the Great Duke our Master ; 
Revenge had then been b●each of Duty and Allegiance : 
You were entrusted by him , and therefore 
By that trust protected . 


Alf.   Go on with your Politics , Duke ; 
And let me hear why you preserved my life , 
When others would have taken it — You not to blame ! 


Duke .  'T was my Duty to give you safe Conduct ; 
You were not then dismissed from my protection , 
Nor should base Villains snatch my Revenge , 
And disappoint a nobler Justice , 
Due to my Honour , and my Name . 


Alf.   These Maxims I learn too late . 


Duke .  But , poor , unpolitick , unthinking Lord , 
That Ambush was my master Stratagem , 
'T was I contrived , and dressed it out . 


Alf.   To what end ? 


Duke .  To secure your Confidence , 
And six belief of real Friendship : 
All fair pretences else had vanished ; 
Or when powdered in your cooler thoughts , 
Appeared no more than bubbles in the air . 


Alf.   Why killed you then a person you engaged ? 


Duke .  He was the Spy ▪ that did the thankless office 
To inform me of my dishonour : 
For such service , such reward ; 
He knew the secret , and might talk , — 
But with that last politic stroke , 
I secured his silence and your confidence . 
Thus are you drawn into the snare . 


Alf.   OH dreadful Maxims , far ▪ be they from my Soul.  


Duke .  thine Alfonso , is but a Mongrel Soul , 
Infused in the act of Generation ; 
In some dull Climate where thou wast begot , 
Beyond the Mountains . 
Mine is the true Italian Spirit : 
There is a great Genius in Mischief . 
Brutish Revenge is but the exercise of the body , 
Noble Revenge the delight and pleasure of the 
Mind . 


Alf.   OH Horror ! 
One thing more , most exquisite Duke ; — 
Ambrose I not under sovereign protection now . 


Duke .  no , I written the Duke word in my Letter 
You were my Guest , and under obligation to return . 
You are remitted back ; 
And now stand disengaged from all Commands . 


Alf.   Have you no pity ? 


Duke .  Wronged Honour calls for satisfaction . 


Alf.   On then , plunge that Dagger deep in my breast ; 
My blood will only fully thy hands : 
But this most barbarous Treachery will fix 
A lasting stain upon thy Name and Memory : 
You said the brave and generous did act 
Without deceit . 


Duke .  With Friends , and where they are not injured : 
Shall he that was deceived to his undoing , 
Not use deceit to right himself ? 
The Notion's dull and phlegmatic . 
Now Alfonso , thou rifler of my sweets , 
And great destroyer of my happiness , 
Tremble , thy utmost date of life is come , 
And thou must fall a Sacrifice to vengeance . 


Alf.   I feel the Terror ever you strike the blow : 
Cold sweats hang on my Brows , 
My heart shrinks up , my voice grows faint , 
And every limb is paralytic ; 
Yet not from fear , but horror of thy deeds : 
O , quickly end thy barbarous Triumph , 
And complete thy Treachery . 


Duke .  Ho — you , the Assistants of my just revenge : 
Enter Ruffians with a Bowstring . There sits the Criminal . 


Alf.   OH mercy . 


Duke .  Hold — As other Malefactor's crimes are written on their Foreheads , 
His shall he hung upon his Breast : 
Fix there there the Duchess' Picture , 
With this Dagger . 


[ Gives a Dagger to one of the Ruffians . Alf.   Alas , her fatal turn is next . 


Duke .  How dying men do often Prophecy . So — 
Another strike into his Brain . 
Now execute my just Commands . 


Alf.   Mercy ! mercy ! Oh! o ! 


A little Silk Curtain falls to screen him , that hung ruffled above his Head.  Duke .  The Rigour of punishment 
Strikes terror in many others , 
Turns their bad minds , and makes 'em fear 
To act the evil deeds they had designed : 
This the mistaking world calls Cruelty , 
But rightly understood , 't is tender Mercy . 
Thus Alfonso did misjudge Revenge : 
If Revenge has no Charms , why are men fond on 't ? 
't is brutish and unnatural to hurt others , 
Unless a benefit accrues thereby . 
Let cold Northern Stoics give their reasons 
Why we should not take pleasure in Revenge , 
When the Wrong-doers found so much 
In every act they did . 


They draw up the Curtain . Alfonso appears murdered , one Dagger in his Breast , with the Picture , another in his Forehead , all bloody . 1 Ruff.   he 's dead . 


Duke .  My Honour then in part is righted — 
Bear hence his Body , dispose it as i  ordered . 
Thus cunning Fowlers catch the Bird by Art : 
All Stratagems are lawful in Revenge ; 
promise , deceive , betray , or break your trust , 
Who rights his Honour cannot be unjust . 
Exit . 

Enter Duchess , with a Letter in her hand . Am. Flor. at a distance . Dutch.   Welcome , welcome , most happy Paper : 
This brings the wished-for knowledge of my Birth . 
Bianca my Mother , the Great Duke my Father ! 
I his Natural Daughter ! — 
Now let Alouisia's Breast be calm . 
My Lord too sends me a kind Message , 
Confirms his parting promise , 
And will take me to his bosom : 
I 'll be prepared to receive him . — 
Amidea , Florella . 


Am.   Your Grace's pleasure ? 


Dut.   Come , undress me , lay aside these Blacks , 
My newest , and my richest Night-dress bring . 


Am.   They are here already , under the Tuillet . 


Dut.   What Book is that ? 


Am.   Pastor Fido.  


Dut.   An excellent piece : 
Whilst you undress me , Florella shall read ; 
Open the Book as chance directs . 


Flo.   The fourth Act , Scene the Fifth . 
[ Reads . Nicander and Amarillis speak — 


Dut.   Is not that the Scene where she was supposed faulty ? 


Flo.   The same . 


Dut.   Alas ! Amarillis was innocent when blamed ! 
Would all were so that were accused — Begin and read . 


Flo.   Nicander says . 


Reads .  ' A heart of flint , or rather none had he , 
' Nor human sense , that could not pity thee ; 
' Unhappy Nymph and for thy sorrow grieve 
' The more ; by how much lesle they can believe , 
' This should befall thee — 


Dut.   Enough . 
[ Dut. rises and walks a little aside and speaks . Ah , how much greater is my fault than hers . 
She broke no Matrimonial Vows . 
Skip that Scene and turn to another . 


[ Dut. sits down again . [ Flo , opens the Book again . Flo.   Act the Fifth , Scene the second . 
Tityro , and Messenger — 


Dut.   That is it where Tityro bewails 
His Daughters lost Honour , going to die — 
Read — 


Flo.   Reads . ' Which first , my Daughter , shall I mourn in thee , 
' Thy loss of Life , or of thy Chastity ? 
' I 'll mourn thy Chastity — 


Dutch.   Skip the rest of that Speech , and read her answer . 


Flo. Reads .  ' If my mishap had come thro' my own fault , 
' And the effect had been from an ill thought , 
' As of a deed that seems ill , it had been 
' Lesle grievous to me , to have death pay sin ; 
' And very just it were . 


[ Duchess starts from her Chair . Dut.   no more — How the words strike me to the heart . 
By Amraillis I stand condemned ! 


Enter Fidalbo . Fid.   Madam , the Duke is returned , 
And waits you in his Chamber . 


Dut.   Hence Amidea and Florella — follow me . 


Exeunt . Duke in the Chamber , and others . The Body of Alfonso appears laid in the Bed , his Head raised , his Arms laid out straight , as in his Shirt , to be seen ; Candles upon Stands round the Bed , but not lighted . Duke .  I dismiss you now — 
Exeunt Attendants . This is the Body of ill-fated Alfonso , 
That dared to love , tempt , and enjoy my Wife . 
Here , where he did commit his Crimes . 
Now receives the State of Funeral pomp . 
The Duchess too prepares herself , 
Like a new Bride , for a new Nuptial Night , 
But here she 'll find revenge in Triumph , 
And love with a pale ghastly countenance , 
Lie ready to embrace her — She comes , 
Close then these Curtains . Yet a while . 
Anon those Tapers shall be lighted , 
And death appear in ceremonions State.  


Enter Duchess in a night dress . Dutch.   OH , my Lord ! 


Duke .  My Duchess ! 


Dutch.   My dear loved Lord ! 


Duke .  My once dear Wife . 


Dutch.   Once ! my Lord ? 


Duke .  Yes Alovisia — But I had forgot . 


Dutch.   You seem troubled — 


Duke .  My mind is burdened . 


Dutch.   Can I ease you ? 


Duke .  You only — 


Dutch.   With my life , if needful . 


Duke .  Speak sincerely — 


Dut.   My tongue and heart are partners in this truth . 


Duke .  Would you die for me ? 


Dut.   Most willingly . 


Duke .  Death , Alovisia , is terrible . 


Dut.   For my Lord's sake delightful . 


Duke .  To live is painful , to die is sweet ; 
For Death does put an end to worldly cares : 
But let us talk of Life . 


Dut.   Whilst you are my Life , I cannot think of Death . 


Duke .  And yet the thoughts of Death are needful : 
It concerns us to think on 't every hour . 


Dut.   True , my Lord ; but we are in present health . 


Duke .  Aye , every moment , for every moment we are dying : 
And who knows but you or I may die this minute . 


Dut.   Avert it Heaven . 
Let Loves more pleasing thoughts enter your bosom — 
And tune our Souls for Rapture . 


Duke .  Now , Alovisia , you inspire me : 
Forgive me that I have been so slow . 
Come to thy Bed — 


Dut.   The Scene of Paradise , when you my Lord are there . 


Duke .  The Scene of Love and Union . 


Dut.   I go . 


Duke .  Stay.  


Dut.   Why , my Lord ? 


Duke .  First give light to these Tapers . 


Duke takes a Candle , and lights them round the Bed.  Dut.   For what , my Lord ? 


Duke .  To represent our Love , which was extinct , 
But now like these , new kindled and new lighted . 


Dut.   We pay this Ceremony to the dead . 


Duke .  that 's my intent ; sleep is the Image of death . 


Dut.   I see great alteration — Your looks show Terror . 


Duke .  Take this light ; hold it in your hand . 


Dut.   For what , my Lord ? 


Duke .  Now open the Curtains . 


Dut.   My hand trembles , and my pulse scarce beats . 


Duke .  't is not long since you ran with joy , and there 
Sacrificed my honour to your pleasure : 
Your tremble then were ecstasy , not fear . 


Dut.   Sad Remembrance . 


Duke .  A sad Truth . 


Dut.   O Heaven ! the time is come — 
That Penitence must end in Death . 


Duke .  Speak to the person in the Bed.  


Dut.   Who is in the Bed ? 


Duke .  One you loved well . 


Dut.   Horror seizes me . 


Duke .  Take Courage Duchess , draw wide the Curtains . 


Dut.   Did you not pardon me ! what will become of me ! 


Duke .  Open the Curtains , there you 'll see a Glass , 
In which you will read your Fate . 


Dut.   What Glass is there ? 


Duke .  The truest you ever looked in . 


Dut.   I would , but I dare not . 


Duke .  You durst for another . 


Dut.   My Heart faints , and my Arm wants strength . 


Duke .  I 'll help you . See they are open now . 


Dut.   Ah!  


Duke .  Behold the body of you loved Alfonso 
What d' ye read in this mirror . 


Dut.   In his pale looks , and in your Angry brow 
I read my death . 


Duke .  Right , deaths bitter potion must wash down 
The sweet intoxicating draught of Love. 
Recommend yourself to Heaven — 
Revenge is in my hand 


[ A Dagger and a Bowstring Dut.   My gracious Lord , my loved Husband , 
Stay till tomorrow , take not the forfeit of my life , 
Till the Great Duke is here — He owns me his Daughter . 


Duke .  thou art the Offspring of sin , 
And product of unlawful pleasures . 
Thy Birth was tainted and thy Life impure . 
thou most of all to blame — Thy Mother erred , 
But broke no Conjugal Vow . 


Dut.   Let the Duke pronounce my doom . 


Duke .  He is thy Father , I thy Husband . 
He is my Prince , but I am your Lord 
His power may punish me , 
But thy sentence hangs only in my breath . 


Dut.   no hope , no mercy ? 


Duke .  no prayer , no repentance ? 


Dut.   My life ever since I erred , has been 
But one continued Act of penitence . 
My prayer is short , 
My Lord forgive , and Heaven forgive me too . 


Duke .  Rise — Now sit down in that Chair . 
This Instrument , without much pain , 
Will give thee speedy death ; — 
I 'll gently let thee down into thy Grave — OH Alovisia ! 


Dutch.   Sigh not . This comfort in my death I have , 
My Lords own hand does send me to my Grave . 


Duke .  Die then , thou fair disturber of my peace : 


Pulls the Bed-curtaines over her Face , and strangles her , sitting in the Chair . That Honour should command o'er Love , 
And Love thus cruelly obey . 
Throws the Curtains off , and looks on her . So , she 's dead . 
Honour now is righted , and Revenge appeased . 
Behold , how Beauty still revel's in her Cheeks , 
And gets the Victory o'er Death and my Revenge . 
Soft Compassion creeps into my Soul , 
And I could now forget my Injuries . 
But let the noble sense of Honour drive it out : 
Hence than all tender thoughts , and foolish pity . 
Now her Colour , like withdrawing beams , 
Leaves only some few streaks of Light behind . 
Thus Flowers blasted by i'll Winds decay and fade ; 
But ever these perish quite — I 'll taste their sweets 
Once more — 
[ Offers to kiss her , and starts back . Ha! she is not a sweet smelling Rose , 
But a vile Canker — mildewed all o'er , 
And rank as basest Weeds — not sin itself 
more rank — Who waits there ? 
Enter Amidea , Florella . Flor.   Your Garce's pleasure ? 


Duke .  Put your Lady to bed . 


Amid .  Asleep ! 


Duke .  Go nearer . Amid , and Flor. go towards the Duchess . 


Flo.   Ah!  


Flo. looks at the Duchess and starts . Amid .  Bless me ! ah , ah — 


Amid . sees Alfonso in the Bed , starts and shrieks louder . Duke .  Do your Duty , without more noise . 


Amid .  OH horror ! 


Duke .  Leave wonder , and obey ; put her to bed : 
then my Revenge in Triumph will appear 
In the same Field where Honour did receive its fatal wound . 


Enter Fidalbo and Friar . Fid.   Holy Father , press not forward , 
I will acquaint the Duke you are here . 


Fry.   Hinder me not , I will bear you blameless . 
I fear I come too late — 


Fidalbo Retires . Duke .  For what ? holy man  


Fry.   To prevent what my fears presage . 
Why have you done this deed of horror ? 


Duke .  You need not ask that question , 
You were her Confessor . 


Fry.   She was my Penitent , and such a Penitent , 
That the least error of her life was not told 
Without tears , and hearty sighs of sorrow : 
Heaven make you such an one for these ill deeds . 


Duke .  I say Amen . 


Fry.   But have you not misjudged her ? 


Duke .  No.  


Fry.   But Revenge is Heaven's prerogative , not ours . 


Duke .  So say Divines : 
But we Husbands are of another mind . 


Fry.   The Laws of our Country are against you . 


Duke .  Aye , for form they discountenance Revenge , 
But Custom does suspend the punishment : 
Honour is the noblest Law.  


Fry.   Wicked Custom , and mistaken Honour ! 


Enter Fidalbo . Fid.   Please your Grace , the Huntsmen are in the Park , 
And the Great Duke is coming . 


Duke .  Enough — Fidalbo look there , but wonder not : 
There lies Alfonso , here behold my Wife . 


Fid.   O — 


Fidalbo weeps , and wipes his eyes with his Handkerchief . Duke .  Be it your charge to see my orders performed . 
Let her Women lay the Duchess in the Bed , 
In this same posture by Alfonso's side . 
This Letter I leave upon the Table here , 
To be removed by none but the duke 's own hand . 
When he comes , conduct him in , say I am not well . 
That Letter and this sight , will fully 
Instruct him the reason of this deed . 


Fid.   Do you not fear his Anger ? 


Duke .  I know 't will grieve his heart , he loved her well . 
But Princes have noble Souls , 
His sense of honour will excuse the deed . 
Now Holy Father , I will retire with you , 
Your Convent shall be my safe retreat , 
I 'll put on your habit , and pray away my life with you . 
I have no more business with the world . 
For all my peace and worldly joys are fled , 
Life has no Charms now Alouisia's dead . 


EPILOGUE , 

Written by Jo. Haynes . Spoken by Mr. Bowman , mimicking a Beau.  Loaded with Muff , and Nose adorned with Snush , 
Eclipsed in Wig , like Owl in Ivey-bush . 
With dangling Shoulder-knot o'er Arm a kimbo , 
In fine embroidered Coat Just out of Limbo . 
With all the Rhetoric of DOUX YEUX , I come 
To mitigate our trembling Author's doom ; 
Who bid me beg your Smiles , ( the Poet's Alms , ) 
In words as moving as the Singing Psalms . 
Not doubting my success , because he knows , 
The Fair Sex must be obliging to the Beaux , 
For while those Gallants , who had Brains to spare , 
For Honour ran Campaigning every year , 
Love ! Love ! The nobler Province of the two , 
Kept peaceful Beau at home to die for you : 
Not that he feared the Wars , but some chance blow 
Might beaten out his Fine Teeth , and then you know , 
Thomas he , ( the Man ) were saved , that kills the Beau. 
Whose Courage might , no doubt , successful prove , 
In Bed of Honour , as in Bed of Love. 
But whether think you has the greater Charms , 
Don Mars the Bully's , or Don Cupid's Arms ? 
Who in this glorious Field Cupid makes his Campaign , 
So famed for kill Eyes , and Lovers slain . 
Like Caesar here the Beaux may Conquest host , 
They come , they ogle , and the Heart is lost . 
For wonder then they 're in such Vencration , 
But I remember Monkeys once in Fashion . 
Till these new Favourites obtained their Station . 
But Monkey , Squirrel , and loved Parakeeto , 
( The prettier Creatures much , methinks , to see to ) 
Lap-dog , nay Darling Black , must all vail now , 
To the prevailing Charms of Rival Beau. 
But tell me pray how would this Peacock show , 
If he were but treated like old Aesop's Crow ? 
If those who clubbed to 's Beauship flocked together , 
And every Bird laid hold of his own Feather , 
Unrigged of Clotheses , of Wig , and unpaid Linen , 
Sword , Feather , Muss , and no Charms left to sin in . 
What a Figu — re he 'd make you easily guests , 
Strippd of his borrowed plumes in that undress . 
The naked truth I fear would oft discover , 
The Giant Beau to be a Pigmye Lover . 
Sure naught but the Green Sickness of the mind , 
Can relish this sad Trash of Humankind . 
However — 
Since Beauteous Plenty here begins to dress , 
With her Bright Ornaments the face of Peace ; 
't is fit that our Dramatic Wars should cease : 
Therefore , to you , Sweet Beaus , inmeer Compassion , 
These Terms we offer of Capitulation . 
First then — 
When you shall leave off to adore new Faces , 
And paying only Broken Heads for places , 
As now you 're Foibles , then we 'll show your Graces . 
And next — 
Let not our Woman's Tyring-rooms be Haunted , 
Boast not of favours which they never granted : 
Tick not with Orange Wench ; nor Side-box Misses , 
( Alas they live by Love , and feed on Kisses ▪ ) 
Grant this , and if they make not just requitals , 
  our Consents Gratis , to STOP THEIR VITALS . 
( Demme ) Exit like a Beau.  FINIS . 

Sergeants Books Printed and Sold by Isaac Cleave , next to Serjeants-inn in Chancery-lane . 

The Life of the most illustrious Monarch Almanzor ; and of the several Revolutions of the mighty Empire of the Caliphs' , and of the African Kingdoms : Together with the History of the Conquest of Spain by the Moors . Translated out of Arabic , and made English by an eminent hand . 

Sylva Syvarum ; or a Natural History , in ten Centuries : whereunto is newly added , The History , Natural and Experimental , of Life and Death , or of the prolongation of Life : By the Right Honourable . Francis Lord Verulam , Viscount St. Alban . 

A Complete Guide for Justices of Peace , according to the best approved Authors ; in two parts ; the first containing the Common and Statute Laws relating to the Office of a Justice of the Peace . The second consisting of the most authentic Precedents which do properly concern the same . By I Bond , of Grays-inn , Esq. . To which is added , A Table , referring to all the Statutes relating to a Justice of the Peace . By E. Bohun , Esque . Continued down to this time . 

FINIS . 

