THE VIRTUOSO . A COMEDY , Acted at the Duke's Theatre . Written by THOMAS SHADWELL . 

Licenced , 

May 31. 1676.  ROGER L'ESTRANGE . 

LONDON , Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman , at the Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange , 1676.  

To the Most Illustrious Prince WILLIAM , Duke of NEWCASTLE , etc.  

May it please your Grace , 

SO long as your Grace pèrsists in Obliging , I must go on in Acknowledging ; nor can I let any opportunity pass of telling the World how much I am favoured by you ; or any occasion slip of assuring your Grace , that all the actions of my life shall be dedicated to your service ; who by your Noble Patronage , your Generosity and Kindness , and your continual Bounty , have made me wholly your Creature : nor can I forbear to declare , that I am more obliged to your Grace , than to all Mankind . And my misfortune is , I can make no other return , but a declaration of my grateful Resentments . 

When I showed your Grace some part of this Comedy , at Welbeck , being all that I had then written of it , you were pleased to express your great liking of it , which was a sufficient encouragement for me to proceed in it : And when I had finished it , to lay it humbly at your feet ; what ever I write , I will submit to your Grace , who are the greatest Master of Wit , the most exact Observer of Mankind , and the most accurate Judge of Humour , that ever I knew . And were I not assured of the Greatness of your favour , I should be afraid of the excellency of your judgement . 

I have endeavoured in this Play at Humour , Wit , and Satyr , which are the three things ( however I may have fallen short in my attempt ) which your Grace has often told me , are the life of a Comedy . Four of the Humours are entirely new ; and ( without vanity ) I may say . I n●…'r produced a Comedy that had not some natural Humour in it not represented before , nor I hope ever shall . Nor do I count those Humours which a great many do , that is to say , such as consist in using one or two By-words ; or in having a fantastic , extravagant Dress , as many pretended Humours have ; nor in the aff●…ctation of some French words , which several Plays 〈◊〉 shown us . I say nothing of impossible , unnatural Farce Fools , which some intent for Comical who think it the easiest thing in the world to write a Comedy , and yet will sooner grow rich upon their ill Pl●…yss 〈◊〉 write a good one : Nor is downright silly folly a Humour , as some take it to be for 't is a 〈◊〉 natural Imperfection ; and they might as 〈◊〉 call it a humour of Blindness in a blind man , or L●…meness in a lame one : Or as a celebrated French 〈◊〉 has the humour of one who speaks very fa●…t , and of another who speaks very slow : But Natural imperfections are not fit Subjects for Comedy , since they are not to be laughed at , but pitied . But the Artificial folly of those , who are not Coxcombs by Nature , but with great Art and Industry make themselves so , is a proper object of Comedy , as I have discoursed at large in the Preface to the Humorists , written five years since : Those slight circumstantial things mentioned before are not enough to make a good Comical Humour : which ought to be such an affectation , as misguides men in Knowledge , Art , or Science , or that causes defection in Manners , and Morality , or perverts their minds in the main Actions of their lives . And this kind of Humour I think I have not improperly described in the Epilogue to the Humorist . 

But your Grace understands Humour too w●…ll not to know this , and much more than I can say of it . All I have now to do , is , humbly to dedicate this ●…lay to your Grac●… , which has succeeded beyond my expectation , and the Humours of which have been approved by Men of the best Sense and Learning . Nor do I hear of any professed Enemies to the Play , but some Women and some Men of Feminine understandings , who like slight Plays only , that represent a little tattle sort of Conversation like their own ; but true Humour is not liked or understood by them , and therefore even my attempt towards it is condemned by them . But the same people , to my great comfort , damn all Mr. Johnson's Plays , who was 〈◊〉 the best Dramatic Poet that ever was , or , I believe , ever will be ; and I had rather be Author of one Scene in his best Comedies , than of any Play this Age has produced . That there are a great many faults in the conduct of this Play , I am not ignorant . But I ( having no Pension but from the Theatre , which is either unwilling , or unable , to reward a Man sufficiently , for so much pains as correct Comedies require ) cannot allot my whole time to the writing of Plays , but am forced to mind some other business of Advantage . ( Had I as much Money , and as much time for it ) I might perhaps write as Correct a Comedy as any of my Contemporaries . But I hope your Grace will accept of this with all its imperfections ; which since the Royal Family have received favourably , I have all my aim , if it be approved by your Grace , who are next to them , in the greatest esteem and observance of , 

My Lord Your Grace's most obliged humble Servant , THOMAS SHADWEL . London , June 26. 1676.  

Prologue . 

You come with such an eager appetite 
To a late Play , which gave so great delight ; 
Our Poet fears , that by so rich a Treat , 
Your Palates are become too delicate . 
Yet ●…ince you've had Rhyme for a relishing Bitten , 
To give a better taste to Comic Wit. 
But this requires expense of time and pains , 
Too great , alas , for Poets slender gains . 
For Wit , like China , should long buried lie , 
Before it ripens to good Comedy ; 
A thing we ne'er have seen since Johnson's days , 
And but a few of his were perfect Plays . 
Now Drudges of the Stage must oft appear , 
They must be bound to scribble twice a year . 
Thus the thin threadbare Vicar still must toil , 
While the fat lazy Doctor bears the spoil . 
In the last Comedy some Wits were shown ; 
In this are Fools that much infest the Town . 
Plenty of Fops , grievances of the Age , 
Whose nauseous Figures ne'er were on a Stage . 
He cannot say they 'll please you , but they 're new ; 
And he hope's you will say , he has drawn ▪ 'em true . 
he 's sure in Wit he can't excel the rest , 
he 'd but be thought to write a Fool the best . 
Such Fools as haunt and trouble Men of Wit , 
And spite of them will for their Pictures sit . 
Yet no one Coxcomb in this Play is shown ; 
no one Man's humour makes a part alone , 
But scattered follies gathered into one . 
He says , if with new Fops he can but please ; 
he 'll twice a year produce as new as these . 
Drammatis Personae . 

Sir Nicholas Gi●…crack . The Virtuoso . 
Sir Formal Tri●…e . The Orator , a florid Coxcomb . 
Snarl . An old pettish Fellow , a great Admirer of the last Age , and a Declaimer against the Vices of this , and privately very vicious himself . 
Sir Samuel Hearty . A brisk , amorous , adventurous , unfortunate Coxcomb ; one that by the help of humorous nonsensical By-words , takes himself to to be a Wit.  
Longvil . In love with Miranda . Gentlemen of wit and sense . 
Bruce . In love with Clarinda . Gentlemen of wit and sense . 
Swimming Master . 
Hazard . 
Lady Gimcrack . Wife to the Virtuoso . 
Clarinda . In love with Longvil . Niece to the Virtuoso . 
Miranda . In love with Bruce . Niece to the Virtuoso . 
Flirt . The Virtuoso's Whore.  
Figgup . Snarls Whore.  
Betty . Clarindas' Chambermaid . 
Bridget . Lady Gimcracks Maid . 
Porter to Sir Nicholas . 
Ribband-weavers , Sick and Lame People , Porters , Servants , Masqueraders . 
Scene LONDON . 

THE VIRTUOSO . 

ACT I  

Bruce in his Gown , reading . Bruce .  Thou great Lucreti●…ss ! thou profound Oracle of Wi●… and Sense ! thou art no Trifling-lándskip-poet , no Fantastic Heroic Dreamer , with empty Descriptions of Impossibilities , and mighty sounding Nothings . thou reconcil'st Philosophy with Verse , and dost , almost alone , demonstráte that Poetry and Good Sense may go together . 

Reads . Omnis enim per se Diuûm Natura 〈◊〉 ●…st , 
Immortali aevo summà cum pace fruatur , 
Semota à n●…stris Rebus , sejunctaque long , 
Nam privata dolore omni , privata perîclis , 
Ipsa suis pollens opibus , nihil indiga nostri , 
Nec bene promeritis capitur , nec tangitur ira . 


Enter Longvil . Longu.   Bruce , Good Morrow ; what great Author ar●… thou ▪ chewing the Cud upon ? I looked to have found you with ▪ your ▪ Headache , and your Morning-qualms . 



Bruce .  We should not live always hotheaded ; we should give ourselves leave sometimes to think . 



Long.   Lucretius ! Divine Lucretius : But my Noble Epicurean ▪ what an Unfashionable Fellow ▪ art thou , that in this Age art given to understand Latin ? 



Bruce .  't is true , Longvil , I am a bold Fellow to pretend to it , when 't is accounted Pedantry for a Gentleman to spell , and where the Race of Gentlemen is more degenerated than that of Horses . 



Longu.   It must needs be so : for Gentlemen care not upon what strain they g●…t ●…heir So●… , nor how they 〈◊〉 'em , when they have got 'em : the best of 'em now have a kind of Education like Pages ; and you shall 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 a Young Fellow of this Age that does not look like one of those overgrown Animals newly manum●…tted from ●…unk-breechess . 



Bruce .  Some are first Instructed by Ignorant-young-housholdpedan●…s , who dare not whip the Dunces , their Pupils , for fear of their Lady-mothers' ▪ then before they can Construe and Pierce , they are sent into France , with sordid illiterate Creatures , called Dry'd-nurses , or Gou●…rnorss ; Engines of as little use as Pacing-saddies , and as unfit to Govern 'em as the Post-horses they ride to Paris on : From whence they return with a little smattering of that Mighty , Universal Language , without being ever able to write ●…rue English.  



Longu.   OH but then they 'll u●…lue 'em for speaking good French.  



Bruce .  Perhaps good French may be spoken with little sense ; but good English cannot . 



Lo●…gv .  thou art in the right : but then there are a sort of hopeful Youths that do not ●…ravel ; and they are either such as keep Company with their Sisters , and visit their Kindred , and are a great co●…fort to their Mothers , and a scorn to all others ; or they are sparks that early break loose from D●…scipline , and at Sixteen ●…or sooth set up for Men of the Town . 



Bruce .  Such as come Drunk and Screaming into a Playhouse , and stand upon the Benches , and toss their full Periwigs and empty Heads , and with their shrill unbroken Pipes , cry , Damn , this is a Damned Play ; Prithee let 's to a Whore , Jack . then says another with great Gallantry , pulling out his Box of Pills , Dam . Tom , I am not in a condition ; here 's my Turpentine for my Third Clap : when you would ●…hink he was not old enough to be able to get one . 



Longu.   Heaven be praised , these Youths , like untimely Fruit , are like to be rotten before they are ripe ! 



Bruce .  These are sure the only Animals that live without thinking : A Sensible Plant has more imagination than most of ' 'em . 



Longu.   Gad , if they go on as they begin , the Gentlemen of the next Age will scarce have Learning enough to claim the benefit of the Clergy f●…r Manslaughter . 



Bruce .  The highest pitch our Youth do generally arrive at ▪ is to have a ●…orm , a fashion of Wit , a Rotine of spe●…king , which they get by i●…itation ; and generally they imitate the extravagancies of witty Men drunk , which they very discreetly practise ●…ober ; but in so clumsy and awkard a way , that methinks it should make witty men out of love with their Vices ; as Prentices wearing Pantaloons , would make Gentlemen lay by the Habit.  



Longu.   These are sad Truths : but I am not such a fop to disquiet myself one minute for a thousand of ' 'em . 



Bruce .  You have Reason , say what we can , the Beastly Restive World will go its way ; and there is not so foolish a Creature as ●… Reformer . 



Longu.   Thank Heaven , I am not such a public-spirited fop , to lose one moment of my private pleasure for all that can happen without me . 



Bruce .  thou art a Philosopher : and now thou talk'st of private pleasure , what think'st thou of our Adventure with Clarinda and Miranda , the Vertuoso's , Sir Nicholas Gimcrak's Nieces ? See the danger of going to Church , Longvil : I advised thee against it ; 't was a ●…ine Curiosity , and has cost us dear . 



Longu.   Did ever I think we two should be caught any way in a Church ? 



Bruce .  't is a little strange that we , that have run together into all the Vices of Men , of Wit and Gentlemen , should at last together fall into the Vice of Fools and Country-squires , Love.  



Longu.   We that have wondered at all other amorous Coxcombs must now laugh at one another . I am amazed at thy passion for Clarinda . 



Bru●…e .  And I no lesle at thine for Miranda . there 's Witchcraft in 't , to love where there 's such apparent difficulty : for ●…irtuoso is as jealous as an Italian Uncle ; his jealousy , helped by the vigilancy and malice of that impertinent Strumpet his Wife , keeps 'em from all manner of address . Letters they have received from us , and we can have no answer ; what the devil 's left for us to do in this case ? 



Longu.   Fall down and worship me ! I have found out the Noblest Tool to work with , and the most excellent Coxcomb that Nature ever began , or Art ever finished . 



Bruce .  thou revivest my dying hope . Who is 't ? 



Longu.   A Rascal that is Vertuoso's Admirer , Flatterer , and great Confident , the only Man he 'll trust his Nieces with , who has discovered to me that he has a passion for your Clarinda . 



Bruce .  Curse on him : But a Rival's a very improper Instrument . 



Longu.   But this is a Rival so conceited of his own parts , that he can never be jealous of another's . He is indeed a very choice Spirit ; the greatest Master of Tropes and Figures : The most Cicero●…ian Coxcomb : the noblest Orator breathing ; he never speaks without Flowers of Rhetoric ; In short , he is very much abounding in words , and very much defective in sense , Sir Formal Trifle . 



Bruce .  he 's an Original indeed , the most Florid Knight alive ; I have some little knowledge of him . 



Longu.   I have persuaded him , that you and I are the greatest Philosophers , and the greatest Admirers of the Virtuoso and his Works that can be : This has already produced that good effect , that Sir Formal has this morning been with me from his noble Friend Sir Nicholas , to invite me to come to his House to see a Cock-lobster dissected , and afterwards to Dine with him ; and will be here with the same Message to you . 



Bruce .  How I applaud thy Wit ! but why wouldst not thou communicate thy design beforehand ? 



Longu.   I was resolved to surprise thee with it if it took , and to conceal it if it did not , 



Enter Bruce's Footman . Foot.   Sir Samuel Hearty has sent you word , he will come and give you a visit . 



Bruce .  there 's an Ass , an Original of another kind ; one that thinks that all Mirth consists in noise , tumult , and violent laughter : At once , the merriest and the dullest Rogue alive — One that affects a great many nonsensical by-words , which he takes to be Wit , and uses upon all occasions . 



Longu.   But the best part of his Character is behind ; he is the most amorous Coxcomb , the most designing and adventurous Knight alive ; a great Masquerader , and has forty several disguises to make love in ; and has been the most unlucky Fellow breathing , in that and all other adventures . He has never made Love where he was not refused , nor waged War where he was not beaten . Here he is . 



Enter Sir Samuel . Sir Sam.   Tom. Bruce . Good morrow to thee . Dear Jack Longvil , how dost do ? I'faith I wished you with me last night ; we were a knot of merry Rogues of thirteen or fourteen of us got together , sung , and tore , and roared , and ranted ' igad all weathers , and drunk and laughed Dagger out o'sheath , I vow to gad : We were upon the high Ropes , i'faith . Hey poop — troll — come aloft Boys — ha-ha-ha . Ah Rogues , that you had been with us , ' i'faith . Ha-ha-ha . 



Bruce .  〈◊〉 and would we had . 



Sir Sam.   ' Igad Boys : we 'd have paid you off . We swinged it away i'faith : We were so merry , o' my Conscience , you might have heard us half a mile . 



Long.   What a Divine hearing was that ? 



Sir Sam.   I'faith I was pure company , I was never on a better pin in my life . There was one of the Company would needs pretend to be a Wit forsooth ; but i'faith Boys I run him down so , the Devil take me , he had not a word to throw at a Dog about business . When ever he was impertinent , I took him up with my old repartée ; Peace , said I , Tace is Latin for a Candle ; and when ever he began again , Tace is Latin for a Candle again said I Thus I run him down with a Hey poop ! Who ! ha-ha-ha ! he had not a word , not one word , I vow to gad . Ha-ha-ha ! 



Longu.   ( to Bruce . ) As this Fellow thinks all mirth consists in noise , so he thinks all Wit is in running a Man down , as he calls it ; not considering that impudence does that better . 



Sir Sam.   I'faith I was very frolic ; and there came a fellow abruptly into our company . I whipped him up to . Hey ! slap , dash ! gave him a kick in the arse to drink , and made Pilgarlike go ten times faster down stairs than he came up , i'faith , Boys 



Bruce .  But this may cost you a Challenge , Sir Samuel . 



Sir Sam.   Challenge ! igad if he does challenge me , I 'll run him through the Lungs about that business . He shall not only blow out a Candle with his wound , but the Sun shall shine through him . Pox ! he 's a raw fellow , he does not know what 't is to have a Towel drawn through his Body . 



Longu.   This Fellow's brains , like some bottle-beer , fly all intofroth . 



Bruce .  So brisk and dull a Rogue I never saw . 



Sir Sam.   Come , i'faith we are choice Lads , and should make much of one another . I have indeed to night an Intrigo with a Lady , and I am to venture in a disguise . I give a Masquerade you know , and , I hope will be there . But to morrow night , i'faith I 'll be very drunk about business . ha Boys ! ha ! ha ! 



Enter Bruce's Footmen . Foot.   Sir , one Sir Formal Trifle bids me tell you , he 's come to pay his Devoir to you ; he charged me to use that expression , I know not what he means by it . 



Bruce .  'T was very quaintly expressed : desire him to come up . 



Sir Sam.   O I have often seen him at Sir Nicholas Gimcrack's house , the Virtuoso ; i'faith of a grave fellow , he 's a very ingenious Rogue , and i'gad he has a fine way with him — 



Longu.   I never knew any man that had a way with him ( as they call it ) that was not a Coxcomb . 



Sir Sam.   He has a notable Vein of Oratory , a brave Delivery ; and when he 's in the humour , i'gad he 'll speak finely , finely very finely . — 



Enter Sir Formal Trifle . Sir Form.   Gentlemen , I humbly kiss all your hands in general , but , Sir , yours in a more particular manner . 

[ To Bruce . 

Bruce .  Sir Formal , your most humble Servant ; you do me a great deal of honour in this visit . 



Sir Form.   Sir , I never could admit a thought within the slender Sphere of my imagination , that could once suggest to me the not meeting with a good reception , from a person that is so strictly obliged by , and so nicely practised in the severer rules and stricter methods of honour , as you are . 



Bruce .  Sir , you oblige me with your fair Char●…cter . 



Sir Form.   Upon my sincerity , I wholly eschew all Oratory , and Compliments , with persons of your worth and generosity . And though I must confess upon due occasions , I am extremely delighted with those pretty spruce expressions , wherewith Wit and Eloquence use to tric●… up human thoughts , and with the gaudy dress that smother Pens so finely clothe them in , yet I never used the least tincture of Rhetoric with my Friend , which I hope you 'll do me the Honour to let me call you — I think I am florid — 

[ Aside . 

Sir Sam.   I told you i'faith he 'd speak notably ; he has a Silver Tongue . 



Longu.   Oyes ! a Golden one ! What would such Coxcombs do , if there were not greater to admire them ? This Sir Formal is called a well-spoken man , with a pox to him — ▪ 



Bruce .  Sir , I shall think myself honoured with the Title of your Servant . 



Sir Form.   It is so much to my advantage , that I do assure you , Sir Formal Trifle shall never give Mr. Bruce any occasion to believe , that he shall omit any opportunity of avowing himself to all the World , to be the most humble and obedient of his Servants . Sweet Mr. Longvil , having already this morning paid my devoir to you , I shall at present only tell you that , which I hope is no news to you ; to wit , that I am your most humble Servant . There I think I was concise and florid . 



Longu.   You do me too much honour . 



Bruce .  Is 〈◊〉 so great a Rascal upon earth as an Orator , that would slur and top upon our understandings , and impose his false conceits for true reasoning , and his florid words for good sense ? 



Longv !  Your ●…ully , with his false dice and Box , is an honester man  



Sir Form.   ( To Sir Sam ) Truly Sir , I am afflicted at the late falling out between Sir Nicholas and your noble self , which has deprived me of so frequently enjoying the honour of kissing your fair hands there . 



Sir Sam.   OH Lord , Sir , your Servant , your Servant : i'faith I am very sorry for 't too . But I shall be glad to wait upon you , and drink his health in a glass of Burgundy , and be very merry about bus●…ness : he 's a fine person i'faith , though he does not care much for Wit ▪ 



Sir Form.   And now Mr. Bruce after these little digressions which my particular esteem of every person in this presence has engaged me to , I am to inform you , that my nob●…e Friend Sir Nicholas Gim●…rack does by me invite you , with your Friend , being Philosophers , and consequently his Admirers , to come to his house this forenoon , to see the dissection of a little Animal●… , commonly called a Chichester Cock-lo●…ster ; and afterwards to take a dish of meat , and discourse of the noble Operation , and to sport an Author over a Glass of Wine . 



Sir Sam   Ha! this will prove for my design . 



Longu.   Give me your Orator for dispatch . What a flourish the Rogue has made to invite us to dinner . 



Bruce .  Sir , I will not do myself the injure to fail two fuch Ingenious and Learned men as Sir Nicholas and yourself ▪ 



Si●… 〈◊〉 .  Alas , Sir , 〈◊〉 I am but his shadow , his humble Admirer ; but I will undertake for him ▪ Fame has not promised more of him to your expectation , than he will perform to your understanding . Trust me , he is the finest speculative Gentleman in the whole World , and in his Cogitations the most serene Animal alive : Not a Creature so little , but affords him great Curiosities : He is the most admirable person in the Meletetiques , viz. in Refl●…ctionss and Meditations , in the whole World. Not a Creature so inanimate , to which he does not give a Tongue ; he makes the whole World Vocal ; he makes Flowers , nay , Weeds , speak eloquently , and , by a noble kind of Prosopopeia , instruct Mankind . 

And , Sir , though I ignore not what the envy of Detractors have expressed of him , yet , in short , I opine him to be the most curious and inquisitive Philosopher breathing ; and I will let him know you intent to wait on him ; within two hours he will show . 't is his time of Operation . 



Bruce .  We will not fail . What an Employment has this Fool under him ? he is the Chorus to his Puppet-show . 



Longu.   I would rather be Trumpeter to a Monster , and call in the Rabble to see a Calf with six legs , than show such a Blockhead . 



Sir Sam.   Pray , Sir , commend me heartily to Sir Nicholas , and tell h●…m , Faith and Troth I am sorry my Wit should offend him ; and I shall henceforth endeavour to be as dull as I can to merit his esteem . I confess I was a little too airy and brisk about that bus ▪ ness : but i'faith I am his most humble Servant , and have a Sword and Arm at his service , and ' gad will draw it against any man breathing , in defence of his Person and Philosophy ; and so let him know from Sir Samuel . 



Sir Form.   I shall perform your commands , and doubt not but to do you service in it . Gentlemen again , I kiss your hands . 



[ Exit . Longu.   Sir Samuel , how came your Wit to offend the Virtuoso ? 



Sir Sam.   I'faith I was very well there ; but you know I am an airy brisk merry Fellow , and facetious : and his grave Philosophical humour , did not agree with mine . Besides , h does not value Wit at all , he won't be pleased with you , I assure you . 



Bruce .  Why so ? 



Sir Sam.   Why , he did not like me at all ; he 's an enemy to Wit , as all Vertuoso's are . 



Bruce .  Sure if he had liked Wit , he would have liked you . 



Sir Sam.   That I think without vanity , but you must know , I pretended to Miranda . 



Longu.   Pox on him , what says he ? 



Sir Sam.   And not to boast , I found my love would have had a good reception ; but her malicious Sister , Clarind●… , discovered my Intriguo , and Sir Nicholas forbade me his house upon that business . 



Bruce .  What exception had he against you ? 



Sir Sam.   Why faith he would not dispose of his Niece to a Wit , he said . 



Longu.   A Wit ! i'faith he might as well have called thee a Dromedary . 



Sir Sam.   Peace , I say ; Tace is Latin for a Candle , Ha-ha-ha . You know I can run you down . In short , he said ▪ I was a Wit , a flashy Wit. But if you have any kindness in the World for me , you might help me in this Intriguo . 



Bruce .  How so ? 



Sir Sam.   Now you are invited , let me wait on you in a Livery for one of your Footmen . I have forty several Periwigs for these Intriguo's and businesses : ' gad if you will whip ▪ slap-dash — I 'll bring this business about as round as a Hoop . 



Bruce .  Prithee , Longvil ▪ let him go , that we may make sport with him , and abuse the Rogue damnably . 



Longu.   ' 'Sdeath ! what , bring him to my Mistress ! 



Bruce .  Canst thou be jealous of so silly a Rascal ? 



Longu.   't is ill trusting the fantastic appetites of Women ; they are subject to the Green-sickness of the mind , as well as that of the body : One makes them love Fools and Blockheads , as the other does Dirt and Char-coal . 



Bruce .  she 's a Woman of Wit ; besides , let him wear your Livery , and by your prerogative you may kick your Rival all this day , if he should be saucy , which he will certainly be . 



Longu.   That consideration prevails with me . 



Sir Sam.   What say you , Boys ? is it not an admirable Intriguo ? — Ha ! — 



Longu.   Sir Samuel , there is some difficulty : but , to serve you , we can refuse nothing . You shall do me the honour to wear a Livery of mine ; I have new ones come home this morning my man will give you one . 



Sir Sam.   If I do not my bus'nes●… , Jack ▪ I am the Son of a Tinderbox . 



Longu.   Well! Pray Mr. Tinderbox , go about it quickly . 



Sir Sam.   Gad I 'll do 't instantly , in the twinkling of a Bedstaff . Ha-ha-ha . 



Bruce .  In the twinkling of what ? 



Sir Sam.   Hey ! pull away , Rogues ; in the twinkling of a Bedstaff ! a witty way I have of expressing myself . I 'll away . 



[ Exit . Longu.   Was there ever so senseless a Fop ? words are no more to him than breaking wind , they only give him vent ; they serve not with him to express thoughts , for he does not think . 



Bruce .  A Wit ! a flashy Wit ! a flashy Wit ! What a dull Villain is this Virtuoso ; But prithee take all occasions to kick this flashy Wit much ; he 'll give thee enough . 



Longu.   Pox on him ▪ he has read Seneca : he ca●…es not for kicking ; he never scaped kicking in any disguise he ever put on . 



Bruce .  Nor in ●…ny of his own habits neither . But I 'll in and dress me . 

[ Ex●…unt . 

Enter Mirand●… and Clarinda in the Gard●…n . Miran .  Were ever Women so confined in England by a foolish Uncle ? worse than an Italian . But that I should be loath to speak ill of the dead , I should think my Father was not Compos mentis when he made his Will , to bequeath us to the government of a Virtuoso only , because his first Wife was our Aunt . 



Clarin.   A Sot , that has spent 2000 l. in Microscopes , to find out the Nature of Eels in Vinegar , Mites in a Cheese , and the Blu●… of Plums , which he has subtly found out to be living Creatures . 



Miran .  One who has broken his brains about the nature of Maggots ▪ who has stud●…ed these twenty years to 〈◊〉 out the several sorts of Spiders , and never cares for un●…standing Mankind . 



Clar.   Shall we never get free from his jealousy , and the malice of ●…is impertinent Wife ? 



Mir.   Though he be jealous of us , yet h●…'s as tame a civil London Husband to his Wife , as she can wish — who certainly Cuckolds him abundantly . 



Clar ▪   She hate●… us in her heart , because she thinks we see too much . To be confined , and to such impertinence too , puts me beyond all patience . 



Mir.   ▪ 't will make Dogs ●…urst to be tied up , and sure 't will provoke freeborn Women more ? 



Clar.   We should have as good company in ●… Go a ; for none but Quacks and Fools come hither ; and one of the worst of 'em is my foolish florid Coxcomb , Sir Formal . 



Mir.   He has banished my Coxcomb , Sir Samuel ; a brisk airy Fool , that there is some diversion in . He had as many tricks as a well educated Spaniel , would fetch and carry , and come over a stick for the King : He had some tricks of a Man too , and may pass Muster among the young gay fellows of this Town ; and could sing all the new Tunes and Songs at the Playhouses . 



Clar.   And we are troubled with an old Fellow here in the House , his Uncle Snarl , a great Declaimer against the Vices of the Age , a clownish blunt Satirical Fellow ; a hater of all young people , and new Fashions . 



Mir.   But he is such a froward testy old fellow , he should be Wormed like a mad Dog.  



Clar.   We try his patience sometimes ; but I am pleased to hear him abuse the Virtuoso his Nephew , who bears all in hope of his Estate . Snarle is a Fellow spares no body , always speaks what he thinks , and does what he pleases . But yet ▪ Miranda , there 's a worse misfortune than all this , that we two should , in a Church , when we should ha' been thinking of something else , fall in love with two men of Wit and Pleasure , who are two much Men of the Town to think of Marriage , we being too little Women of the Town to think of any other Love.  



Mir.   We have Fortunes good enough to lure them to Matrimony , if that were all ; but the worst part of the story is , he whom I love is in love with yo●… , and your Man makes add●…esseses to me , as their Letters tell us : And even these Men we cannot see , but at Church , or at a Playhouse , when we are guarded by our malicious watchful Aunt . 



Clar.   If we could but see these Men privately , there yet might be some hopes ; we might each of us use our Lover s●…urvily , and him we love we might charm with kindness ; for they are men that have known the pomps and vanities of this wicked World , too much to love a face only . 



Mir.   If we could bring this about , I would stand out at ●…othing that might procure our freedom ; the mischief is , if we rebel , Virtuoso will allow us nothing out of our Fortunes till we come of age . 



Clar.   then we must even live upon the credit of a Reversion , as so●…e young fellows do that wish their Fathers hanged : I warrant thee we 'll find credit . 



Mir.   And loose our Reputations : we have much ado to keep 'em as we are . 



Clar.   Let what will come on 't , I am resolved to break out : he shall sooner stop a Tide than my Inclinations . 



Mir.   O if your Knight Errants and we agree upon the point , they 'll soon deliver us distressed Damsels from our Enchanted Castle . 



Enter Snarl and his Man  Snarl .  't is a fine morning : fetch me a Pipe of Tobacco and a Match into the Garden . 

[ Exit Man  

Clar.   here 's old Snarl , he has called for his Tobacco too : he smokes all day like a Kitchen-chimney . 



Mir.   Prithee let 's tease him a little , 't is the greatest pleasure we have . Morrow Uncle — 



Sn●…rl .  How now you Baggages ! what do you abro●…d thus early ? you used to be stewing a bed till eleven a clock , like paltry lazy Cockatrices , that are good for nothing , by the Mass : you 'll make excellent Wives , Cuckold your Husbands immoderately : You mind nothing but prinking yourselves up . A wholesome good housewifely Country Wench is worth a thousand of you , in sadness . 



Mir.   You have a course stomach , and to such a one a Surloin of Beef were better than a dish of Wheat ears . 



Snarle .  A man must have ●… lusty stomach that has a mind to any of ▪ the Town-ladies ; they have so many tricks to disguise themselves , washing , painting , patching , and their damned ugly new-fashioned dresses , that a Man knows not what to make on 'em , by t●…e Mass : Besides , I have not heard , that their Reputations are famous all over the World.  



Cla●… .  You are an old fashioned Fellow , Uncle ▪ and think no Dress handsome , but that which Ladies wore at the Coronation of the last King.  



Mir.   And think no Ladies honest , but your old formal Creatures , that were in fashion in the year 1640 ▪ and censure all Ladies that have freedom in their carriage . 



Snarl .  Freedom with a pox ! aye , 't is freedom indeed : But the last Age was an Age of innocence , you young Sluts you ; now a company of Jillflirts , flaunting vain Cockatrices , take more pains to lose Reputation , than those did to preserve it . I am afraid the next Age will have very few that are lawfully begotten in 't , by the Mass. Besides , the young Fellows are like all to be effeminate Coxcombs , and the young Women Strumpets , in sadness , all Strumpets by the Mass.  



Clar.   You are a fine old Sa●…yr indeed ; 't were well if you decried Vices for any other reason but that you are passed them . 



Snarl .  You pert Baggages , you think you are very handsome now , I warrant you . What a devil 's this pound of hair upon your paltry frowses for ? what a Pox are those Patches for ? what are your faces sore ? I 'd not kiss a Lady of this Age , by the Mass , I 'd rather kiss my horse . 



Mir.   Heaven , for the gener●…l good of our Sex , keep you still in that mind . 



Snarl .  Some Ladies with scabs and pimples on their faces invented patches , and those that have none must follow : Just as our young Fellows imitate the French ; their Summer fashion of going op●…-breasted came to us at Micha●…lmas , and we wore it all Winter ; and their Winter-fashion of buttoning close their strait-long-wasted Coats , that made them look like Monkeys , came not to us ●…ill A●…arch , and our Coxcombs wore it all Summer . Nay , I 'll say that for your comfort , the young fashionable Fellows of ●…he Town have as little Wit as you have . 



Clar.   You had a better opinion of our Sex sure in your youth , were you never in love ? 



Mir.   OH yes , with himself always ▪ 



Snarl .  Never with any such as you , I thank Heaven , I was never such an Ass ; I 'd not be such a Puppy for the World , in sadness . 



Cla●… .  Pish : you are an old insignificant Fellow , Nuncle , such as you should be destroyed , like Drones that have lost their 〈◊〉 and afford no Honey . 



Snarl .  Mary come up , you young Slut , are you so liquorish after the Honey of Man ? in sadness this is fine . 



Mir.   You have no pleasure but drinking , and smoking , and riding with your Gambadoes on your little pacing Tit , to take a Pipe , and drink a cup of Ale at Hamstead or Highgate . 



Snarl .  Prithee , you prating Slut , do not trouble me with your impertinence . What pleasure can a Man have in this coxcombly , scandalous Age ; in sadness , I am almost ashamed to live i●…ed , by the Mass.  



Clar.   then die in it , as soon as you can , if you do not like it ▪ 



Mir.   Met●…inks , though all pleasures have left you , you may go to see Plays . 



Snarl .  I am not such a Coxcomb , I thank God : I have seen 'em at Bla●…k-fryerss ; pox , they act like Poppets now in sadness , I , that have seen Joseph Taylor , and Lowen , and Swanstead : O a brave roaring Fellow ! would make the house shake again . Besides , I can never endure to see Plays since Women came on the Stage , Boys are better by half . 



Enter Snarls Man  Clar.   But here are a great many new Plays . 



Snarl .  New ones ! yes , either damned insipid dull Farces , confounded toothless Satyrs , or plaguy Rhyming Plays , with s●…urvy Heroes , worse than the Knight of the Sun , or Amadis de Ga●…l ; by the Mass. Pish , why should I talk with such foolish Girls . Here , Sirrah , give me my Pipe of Tobacco , with the Match . So — 

[ He smokes . Go now , and fetch me a lusty Tankard of Ale , with Nutmeg and Sugar in 't — 



Mir.   Prithee do thee fling away his Cane , and I 'll break his Pipe , which will almost break his heart — 



Clar.   Agreed . Fie Nuncle , is this your breeding , to take nasty Tobacco , and stink much before Ladies ? 



Mir.   A way with it . 



Clarinda Flings away his Cane , Miranda breaks his Pipe.  Snarl .  ' 'Sdeath ! you saucy Jades , what 's this ? I 'll thrum you ; 't was well you flung away my Cane , you young Sluts ; in sadness I 'd ha' made Bamboo fly about your Jackets else , by the Mass. Ha! 't is not broken all to pieces . 

[ He is stooping for his Pipe , one flings away his Hat and Periwig , the other thrusts him down . ' 'Ounds ! you young Jades , I 'll maul you , you Strumpets , you damned Cocka●…riceses : I 'll disinherit my Nephew , if he does not turn you out of doors , you Crocadills . 



Clar.   that 's it we 'd have , we 'll weary you both of your lives till you bring it about . 



Sna●…l .  You young Jades , you Strumpets . 



[ ●…it Snarl , looking ●…or his Hat and P●…riwig . Mir.   Let 's away , he ▪ ll beaten us . 



Enter Sir Formal . Sir Form.   Ladies , whither so gay , and in such haste ? Is Sir Nicholas here ? 



Mir.   no no , Clarinda , come away . 

[ He lays hold on Clar.  

Sir Form.   Let me first violently ravish a k●…ss from your fair hands ; I had this morning , ere I went out , tender ▪ d you my service of this day ; had I not opined , I should too early have disturbed your Beauty : but , Madam , you ignore not , that those venturous Blossoms , whose overhasty obedience to the early Spring , does anticipate the proper Season , do of●…en suffer from ●…he injuries of severer weather , unless protected by the happy patronage of some more benign shelter . 



Clar.   Farewell , I am in haste — 

[ Exit Clarin.  

Sir Form.   Her departure savours somewhat of abruptness — 



Enter Snarl . Snarl .  Strumpets , Jades ! 



Sir Form.   Sweet Mr. Snarl , had my eyes sooner encountered you , I had more early paid you the Tribute of my respect , which I opine to be so much your due , that though I ignore not that you are happy in having many Admirers , yet — 



Snarl .  ' 'Ounds , if I be not revenged on those Cockatrices . 



Sir Form.   Yet I say , none of 'em is endued with a more zealous heart to do you service , than your most humble Servant Sir ▪ Formal Triste . 



Snarl   Pox ! What do you trouble me with your foolish Rhetoric ? 



Sir Form.   What is it so disorders the Operative Faculties of your noble Soul ? But I beseech you argue yo●… me not of Or●…tory ; though I confess it to be a great virtue to be florid : nor is there in the whole World so generous and Princelike a Quality as Oratory — 



Snarl .  Princelike , Pimp-like in sadness ! I never knew a●… Orator that was not a Rascal , by the Mass : Orators are foolish flashy Coxcombs , of no sense or judgement , turned with every wind ; they are never of the same opinion half an hour together , nor ever speak of the opinion they are of . Pox o' your Tropes and Flowers . 



Sir Form.   Sir , upon my honour you mistake me still . I assure you I am a person — 



Snarl .  Whom I hope to see hanged — 



Sir Form.   OH Sir , you are in a merry humour : but , in good earnest , there is not a person in the whole World that is a greater admi●…er of your politer parts than myself . 



Snarl .  Pshhaw ! pox of admi●…erss ; pish ! what care I whether you be or no. Prithee , pish ! you are very troublesome , in sadness . 



Sir Form.   Well Sir , you will have your pretty humours , you are disposed to be merry . 



Snar●… .  Merry ! O your Jack-pudding ! merry quo●…h a ! ●…ounds you lie — 



Sir Form.   Sir , I have often entreated you to avo●…d passion , it drowns your parts , and obstructs the faculties of your mind , while a serene Soul , like that which I wear about me , operates clearly , notwithstanding the oppression of Clay , and the clog of my sordid human Body . 



Snarl .  In sadness ! would you were hanged , that your serene Soul might be free from your sordid human Body ; 't is a very sordid one , by the Mass.  



Sir Form.   OH Sir , I will retire , and take away all occasions of your uttering things that r●… vera , are more injurious to yourself , than reflecting on me . I take my leave , Sir.  

[ Exit . 

Sn●…l .  You do well in so doing , by the Mass. it 's a fine life I live here : I am tormented with a couple of young ramping Sluts ; and then there 's my Nephew's Wife , the most impertinent foolish Creature breathing . then my Nephew is such a Co●…comb , he has studied ●…hese twenty years about the nat●…e of Lice , Spiders , and Infects ; and has been as long compiling a Book of Geography for the World in the Moon Did he not give me my Board for nothing , in hopes of my Estate , I 'd not stay here — But above all Villaim , and tedious insipid Blockheads , this Sir Formal is the greatest ; he is the most intolerable plague I have : I could — 

With any Fools but Orators dispense , 
Who love words so , they never care for sense . 


ACT II  

Enter Longvil , Bruce , and Sir Samuel ; ( Sir Samuel in the habit of Longvil's Footman . ) Bruce .  WE are here to our wishes ; and neither the Virtuoso , nor his Master of his Ceremonies within : If we could but meet with the Ladies now — 



Sir Sam.   Aye , if the Ladies were but here — you should see how I would show my parts . Whip-slap-dash . I 'd come up roundly with A●…iranda , faith Boy●… — ha — 



Longu.   A pox of 'is fellow , he 'll be intolerable : I see there 's no tempering with that Edge tool called a Fool — 



Sir Sam.   I am disguised Cap a pe to all intents and purposes , and if any Man manages an Intriguo better than I , I will never hope for a Masquerade more , or expect to Dance myself again into any Lady's affection , and about that business . Come aloft , Sir Samuel , I say — 



Bruce .  But sweet Sir Samuel , if you discover yourself , you will be turned out of the house , and we for company . 



Sir Sam.   Let me alone ; pox , if I should be discove●…ed , Ill bring you off as round as a hoop , in the twinkling of an Oystershell . But gad I cannot conceal myself from my Mistress ; my Love and Wit will break out now and then a little about the edges , or I shall burst , faith and troth . 



Longu.   ●…onder come the Ladies — Good Sam. keep your Distance . 



Sir Sam.   My distance ! why the Ladies are by themselves ; I 'll present you to 'em , I 'll introduce you . Come along , pull away , Boy's . Now , my choice Lad●… . Hey poop , come alo●…t , Boy — ●…ah — 



Longu.   Do you hear , Sir Samuel , act the Footman a little better , or by Heaven I 'll turn you out-of my Livery . 



Sir Sam.   What a pox , you are upon the High Ropes now . Prithee , Longvil , hold thy peace , with a whip-stich , your nose in my breech , I know what I have to do must — Do you think to make a fool of Pilgarlick ? 



Longu.   By Heaven , Pilgarlick , I 'll cut your throat , if you advance beyond your post — Stand Sentry there . 



Bruce .  If you do not , Sam. you 'll find your Master very choleric , honest Sam.  



Sir Sam.   Choleric ! what a pox care I ; how shall I show my parts about this business ? if I should stand here . Pshaw , Prithe●… hold thy peace — 



Enter Clarinda and Miranda . Longu.   Sirrah , stand there , and mind your waiting — Dam stand still — 



Sir Sam.   What a pox does he mean now ? O' my Conscience and Soul he has been a drinking hard this morning , and is half-seas over already . 



Longu.   Ladies your humble Servant . 



Bruce .  How long have we pray●…d to Heaven for this opportunity of kissing your hands ! 



Clar.   I see then you can be devout upon some occasions . 



Longu.   We showed our devotion sufficiently the first time we saw you ; ' tw●…s in a Church Ladies — 



Mir.   Lo●… ! that it shoul●… be ou●… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ●…ee you in a place so little used by you . 



Clar.   I warr●…nt they came hither as th●…y do 〈◊〉 a Playhouse , bolting out of some eating-house , having 〈◊〉 else to do in an idle afternoon . 



Mir.   't is a wonder they do not come as the Spark●… do to a Playhouse too , full of Champagn , venting very much noise , and very little wit — 



L●…ngv .  What ever your intentions a●…e , I am sure it is a very wicke●… thing for you to go to Church . 



Mir.   How so , Sir ? 



Bruce .  Why to seduce zealous young men , as we might have b●…n , but for you . 



Clar.   Your zeal will never do you hurt I warrant you . 



Longu.   You for your part committed Sacrilege , and robbed Heaven of all my thoughts . 



Mir.   that 's strange , for I assure you , none of mine e'er strayed towards you . 



Longu.   I am glad to find you can be so very zealous : They that can be so very violent in that higher sort of zeal , will often be so in a lower — I am glad to see my Mistress violent in any passion ; 't is ten to one Love will have its turn then . 



Bruce .  You could not but observe my great zeal to you , Madam ; had I soared ne'er so high , you would have lured me down again . 



Clar.   Alas , Sir , you never soar so high , but any lure will bring you down with a swoop , I warrant you . 



Mir.   You are he that have pestered me with your Billets Doux : your fine little fashionable Notes tied with filk . 



Longu.   Yes , I have presented several Bills of Love upon you , and you would never make good payment of ●…ny of ' 'em . 



Mir.   Would you have one answer a Bill of Love at sight ? that 's only for substantial Traders : young Beginners dare not venture , they ought to be cautious . 



Longu.   Not , when they know him to be a responsable Merchant they have to deal with ? 



Mir.   Such , who keep a correspondence with too many Factories , venture too much , and are in danger of breaking . 



Clar.   My sister 's in the right : 't is more danger trusting Love with such , than Money with Go●…dsmithss ; especially considering most Men are apt to break in Woman's debts . I have received several honourable Summons from you , if I would have accepted the Challenges . 



Bruce .  I only provoked you fairly into the open Field ; and ' gad , I wonder you had not honour enough to answer me . 



Clar.   You would have drawn me into some wicked ambush or other , Matrimony or worse , I warrant you — 



Sir Sam.   What a pox do these Fellows mean ? I shall stand here till one of them has whipped away my Mistress about business , with a Hixius Doxius , with the force of Repartee , and this , and that , and every thing in the world . 

[ Offers to go to Clar.  

Longu.   Why Sirrah , Rascal ! 



Sir Sam.   Aye , 't is no matter for that Madam — 



[ Pulls Mir. by the sleeve . Longu.   You impudent Dog.  

[ Longu. kicks him . 

Sir Sam.   Psha ! psha ! I care not a farthing for this . This is nothing , I am hardened ; I have been killed and beaten to all inten●…ss and purposes an hundred times , about intriqus and businesses ▪ Madam , Madam , don't you know me ? 



Mir.   What impudent saw●…y footman 's this ? 



Bruce .  Poor silly Rogue , he must be beaten into good manners . 



Sir Sam.   Ha-ha-ha , that 's good i'faith ! Poor silly Rogue ! that 's well . Ha-ha-ha . But all these kicks , and these businesses , and all that , we Men of Intrigue must bear . Prithee , Longvil , do not play the Fool ; but let me discover myself — 



Longv   Sirrah , be gone , or I 'll beaten you most infinitely — 

Madam , let us not trifle away those few happy minute's Fortune lends us Lovers . We know your straits , and how few opportunities we are like to have ; and therefore let me tell you in short , I am most desperately in love with you . 



Sir Sam.   OH Traitor ! what says he ? I must discover myself quickly about this business , or whip slap — I shall be bobbed of my Mistress in the twinkling of a Bedstaff . 



Mir.   't is true , our opportunities are like to be rare ; but I 'll improve this so well , we shall need no more — Good Sir , let it not transport you too much : for I do assure you , I am extremely and desperately out of love with you , and shall be so as long as I live . 



Longu.   Say you so , Madam ? and are you absolutely and violently resolved upon this ? 



Mir.   I am . 



Longu.   Faith , Madam , I am glad to hear on 't . I never knew a Woman absolutely resolve upon any thing , but she did the contrary . 



Bruce .  I hope you'●… not take example by your hardhearted Sister , to nip so hopeful a Love in the Bud ; but nourish it , and in time 't will bring forth fruit worth the gathering . 



Clar.   It shall produce none for me , it 's a dangerous surfeiting fruit , and I 'll have none on 't . 



Sir Sam.   I 'll sing a Song that I used to entertain 'em with , and that will discover me . I shall be even with these impudent Fellow●… . 

Sings — She tripped like a Baron Do , etc.  


Longu.   ' 'Sdeath ! what does this Rascal mean ? 



Bruce .  Pox on him ; he sings worse than an old Woman a spinning . 



Clar.   how 's this ? I have heard that charming voice : 't is very like a coxcomb 's that used to come hither , one Sir Samuel Hearty . 



Sir Sam.   Peace , Envy , Peace , Coxcomb ; she never was so much in the wrong in her life : she was always malicious against me , because I could not love her , poor Fool — Coxcomb , whip-stich , your Nose in my Breech . — Pish.  



Bruce .  hang him , let him discover himself . 



Mir.   't is he sure — What project 's this ? he was ever a great Designer . 



Sir Sam.   I can hold no longer . Madam , you have lost your senses ? 



Longu.   ' 'Sdeath ! this Rascal puts me beyond all patience . Impudent Villain — 

[ Kick hi●… . 

Sir Sam.   Aye , aye , it 's no matter for that ; it 's no matter for that : I can bear any thing for my Mistress . Don't you know me yet ? 



Clar.   't is he : I 'll make as if I did not know him , and we 'll have excellent sport with him . 



Mir.   Hold Sir ; by your favour I am resolved to speak with him , and know the meaning of this . 



Longu.   Sirrah . 



Sir Sam.   Psha ! prithee hold thy tongue , Tace is Latin for a Candle , I say again . I knew I should screw her up to the tune of Love — Now do you know your faithful Servant Sir Samuel ? 



Mir.   I do ; but have a care , if my Sister discovers you , you are undone . 



Sir Sam.   I warrant you I 'll be as secret as a Cockle . 



Mir.   I am sorry you have been so exceedingly beaten and kicked , Sir — 



Sir Sam.   Psha ! psha ! it's nothing , nothing . Come , come — 't is well it 's no worse — Come , if any man in England outdoes me in passive-valor about Intriqus , I am the son of a Tinder box — 



Mir.   Have a care , she suspects something — 



Sir Sam.   Aye , let me alone — 



Clar.   What saucy impudent footman 's this ? Correct his insolence , and send him hence , I like not his face — 



Mir.   The truth is , the Rascal is saucy ; but he 'll learn better manners . 



Sir Sam.   Good ! how the Rogues Love makes her dissemble ! Ah cunning Toad ! 



Longu.   'Sdeath you Dog ! I 'll learn you better manners ; get you gone . 

[ Kicks him . 

Sir Sam.   Pox on you , you overact a Master , and kick too hard about business — 



Longu.   Do you hear ▪ you nonsensical Owl , be gone out of the Garden , or by Heaven I 'll run my Sword in your guts — 



Bruce .  Hold , Longvil , do not kill me ; 't will be something uncivil — 



Sir Sam.   Uncivil ! what a pox do you talk ? Uncivil ! why 't will be murder mun . Uncivil quoth a — Well , I must be gone with a cup of Content , to the tune of a damned beating , or so — This is a fine nimble piece of business , that a Man cannot make love to his own Mistress . But I 'll come upon him with a Quare impedit , and a good lusty cup of Revenge to boot — 



[ Exit Sir Samuel . Clar.   We have discovered your Fool. Do you want a Fool , that you must bring such a one as Sir Samuel along with you ? 



Mir.   Perhaps they thought themselves not able to divert us , and brought him to assist th●…m — 



Longu.   Faith Ladies , if you make trial of us , if we be not able to divert you , you shall find us very willing . 



Bruce .  I am sure if we do not divert you from your cruel resolutions , we are the most undone men that ever sighed , and looked pale for Ladies , yet — 



Clar.   I do not doubt but some Ladies , such as they are , may have made you look pale and wan . 



Mir.   But a civil Woman could never yet come near your hearts , or alter your faces . 



Longu.   The greatest Generals do not scape always unwounded ; you have done my business , Madam . 



Bruce .  I have held out a long time against the Artillery of Lady's eyes ; but a random shot has mauled me at last . 



Clar.   That cannot be ; you were the greatest Mutineers against civil Women that could be . 



Mir.   Always showing your parts against Matrimony , and defending the tawdry illbred fluttering Wenches o' the Town . 



Longu.   That may be , Madam ; but we are taken off . 



Bruce .  Aye , Madam ; we are taken off . 



Clar.   there 's no trusting you ; for though you seem to be taken off , as you call it , yet you 'll stick fast to your good old Cause . 



Mir.   A Man often parts with his honesty , but never with his opinion for a Bribe — 



Enter L. Gimcrack and Sir Samuel . L. Gim.   Mr. Bruce and Mr. Longvil in the Garden with my Nieces , say you ! young Sluts ! do they snap at all the Game that comes hither ? what are they discoursing of ? 



Sir Sam.   Why to the Tune of Love , Madam ; what should young Gentlemen and Ladies talk of else ? 



L. Gim.   OH impudent Gill-flirts ! cannot one young Gentleman scape ' 'em ? Are they making Love to my Nieces , say you ? 



Sir Sam.   Yes , that they are , Madam , with a helter-skelter , whip-dash , as round as a hoop , what should they do else ? I 'll retire — 

[ Exit . 

L. Gim.   that 's Mr. Bruce , a fine straight well-bred Gentleman , of a pleasing form , with a charming air in his face . The other , Mr. Longvil , who has a pleasing sweetness in his countenance , an agreeable straitness , and a grareful composure and strength in his Limbs . I am distracted in my choice on whom to fix my affection . Let me see , which shall I like best ? Mr. Bruce is a fine person really , and so is Mr. Longvil : and so is Mr. Bruce I vow , and so is Mr. Longvil , I swear . In short , I like 'em both best , and these fluttering Sluts shall have none of ' 'em . 



Clar.   Prithee , Sister , let 's change our Men , and then we shall be troubled with no love from 'em — 



Mir.   Agreed . But if we be , it is shifting of our torment , and that 's some ease . But hold , we are undone : here 's my Aunt . 



L. Gim.   Gentlemen , your Servant . So , Nieces , you are soon acquainted with young Gentlemen , I see , It will in modesty befit you to retire . 



Longu.   We heard Sir Nicholas was at home , and took the liberty of a turn in the Garden . 



Bruce .  Where by accident we found these Ladies , who have done us the honour to entertain some discourse with us — 



L. Gi●… .  They are always ready to show their little or no breeding ; you must pardon them they are raw Girls — 



Clar.   Thank Heaven ; we have not ●…ad the age and experience of your Ladi●…hip . 



Mir.   We will leave your Reverend Ladyship , to show your great wisdom and breeding . 



L : Gim.   How now , you pert Sluts — — 

[ Exeunt Clar. and Mir.  Gentlemen , you are not to take notice what these idle Girls say concerning my age : for I protest , Gentlemen , I exceed not Twenty two , upon my Honour I do not . 



Longu.   that 's well ; I remember her a Woman Twenty years ago . 



Bruce .  't is true . 

[ Aside . 't is ●…mpossible your Ladyship should be more . 



Longu.   You are in the very blossom of your age . 



L. Gim.   OH Lord , S●…rss ! now , I swear , you do me too much honour . Yet had I not had some cares in the World , and the truth on 't is , been ma●…ried somewhat against my will , I might have looked much better . But 't is no matter for that , I 'm disposed of — 



Bruce .  This is to let us know she does not care for her Husband . 



Longu.   She means to trust one or both of us . 



L. Gim.   Yet I confess , Sir Nicholas is a fine solitary Philosophical person . But my nature more affects the vigorous gaity and jollity of Youth , than the fruitless speculations of Age.  



Longu.   Those fitter for your youth and blood . But may we not have the honour we were promised of seeing Sir Nicholas ? 



L. Gim.   The truth on 't is , he is within , but upon some private business : but nothing shall be reserved from such accomplished persons as you are . The truth on 't is , he 's learning to swim . 



Longu.   Is there any Water hereabouts , Madam ? 



L. Gim.   He does not learn to swim in the Water , Sir.  



Bruce .  Not in the Water , Madam ! how then ? 



L. Gim.   In his Laboratory , aspacious Room , where all his Instruments and fine Knacks are . 



Longu.   How is this possible ? 



L. Gim   Why he has a Swiming-master comes to him . 



Bruce .  A Swiming-master ! this is beyond all precedent — He is ●…he most curious Coxcomb breathing — 

[ Aside . 

L. Gim.   He has a Frog in a Bowl of Water , t●…ed with a packthread by the loins ; which packthread Sir Nichol●…s holds in his teeth , lying upon his belly on a Table ; and as the Frog strike●… , he strikes ; and his swiming-master stands by , to tell him when he does well or ill . 



Longu.   This is the rarest Fop that ever was heard of . 



Bruce .  Few Virtuoso's can arrive to this pitch , Madam . This is the most curious invention I ever heard of . 



L. Gim.   Alas ! he has many such He is a rare Mechanic Philosopher . The College indeed refused him , they envied him . 



Longu.   Were it no●… possible to have the favour of seeing this Experiment ? 



L. Gim.   I cannot deny any thing to such persons . I 'll introduce you . 

[ Exeunt . 

SCENE opens , and discovers Sir Nicholas learning to swim upon a Table , Sir Formal and the Swiming-master standing by . Sir Form.   In earnest this is very fine : I doubt not , Sir , but in a short space of time , you will arrive at that curiosity in this watery Science , that not a Frog breathing will exceed you . Though I confess it is the most curious of all amphibious Animals ( in the Art , shall I say , or rather nature of Swimming . ) 



Swim . M●…st .  Ah! well struck , Sir Nicholas ; that was admirable , that was as well swom as any Man in England can . Observe the Frog , Draw up your Arms a little nearer , and then thrust 'em out strongly — Gather up your Legs a little more — So , very well — — Incomparable — 



Enter Bruce , Longvil , and L. Gimcra●…k . Bruce .  Let 's not interrupt them , Madam , yet but observe a little this great Curiosity . 



Longu.   't is a noble Invention . 



L. Gim.   't is a thing the College never thought on . 



Sir Nich.   Let me rest a little to respire . So it is wonderful , my noble Friend , to observe the agility of this pretty Animal , which , notwithstanding I impede its motion , by the detention of this Filum or Thread within my teeth , which makes a ligature about its loins , and though by many sudden stops I cause the Animal sometimes to sink or immerge , yet with indefatigable activity it rises and keeps almost its whole body upon the superficies or surface of this humid Element — 



Sir Form.   True , Noble Sir ; no●… do I doubt but your Genius will make Art equal , if not excced Nature ; nor will this or any other Frog upon the face of the Earth out-swim you — 



Sir Nich.   Nay , I doubt not , Sir , in a very little time to become amphibious ; a man , by Art , may appropriate any Element to himself . You know a great many Virtuoso's that can fly ; but I am so much advanced in the Art of Flying , that I can already out fly that pond'rous Animal called a Bustard ; nor should any Greyhound in England catch me in the calmest day , before I get upon wing : Nay , I doubt not , but in a little time to improve the Art so far , 't will be as common to buy a pair of Wings to fly to the World in the Moon , as to buy a pair of Wax Boots to ride into Sussex with . 



Sir Form.   Nay doubtless , Sir , if you proceed in those swift gradations you have hitherto prospered in , there will be no difficulty in the noble enterprise , which is devoutly to be effligated by all ingenious persons since the intelligence with that Lunary World would be of infinite advantage to us , in the improvement of our Politics . 



Sir Nich.   Right : for the Moon being Domina humidiorum , to wit , the Governess of moist Bodies , has , no doubt , the superior Government of all Islands ; and its influence is the cause so many of us are Dilirious and Lunatic in this . But having sufficiently refrigerated my lungs by way of respiration , I will return to my swimming — 



Swim . Mast.   Admirably well struck ! rarely swum ! he shall swim with any man in Europe . 



Sir Form.   Hold , Sir Nicholas ; here are those Noble Gentlemen and Philosophers , whom I invited to kiss your hands ; and I am not a little proud of the honour , of being the grateful and happy Instrument of the necessitude and familiar communication which is like to intervene between such excellent Virtuoso's . 



Bruce .  We are , Sir Nicholas' , and your most humble Servants . 



Longu.   We shall thi●…k ourselves much honoured with the knowledge of so celebrated a Virtuoso . 



Sir Nich.   You are right welcome into my poor Laboratory ; and if in aught I can serve you in the way of Science my nature is diffusive , and I shall be glad of communicating with such eminent Virtuoso's as I am let to know you are . 



Longu.   We pretend to nothing more than to be your humbl admirers . 



Sir 〈◊〉 .  All the ingenious World are proud of Sir Nicholas , for his Physico-mecha●…ical Excellencie●… . 



Sir Nich.   I confess I have some felicity that way ; but were I as praecelling in Physico-mechanical Investigations , as you in Tropical Rhetorical Flourishes , I would yield to none . 



Longu.   How the As●…eses claw one another ? 



Bruce .  We are both your admirers . But of all acquaint Inventions , none ever came near this of Swimming . 



Sir Form.   Truly I opine it to be a most compendious method , that in ●… fortnig●…ts prosecution has advanced him to be the best Swimer 〈◊〉 Europe . Nay , if it were possible to swim with any Fish of his Inches . 



Longu.   Have you ever tried in the Water , Sir ? 



Sir Nic.   no , Sir ; but I swim most tightly on land  



Bruce .  Do you intent to practise in the Water , Sir ? 



Sir Nic.   Never , Sir ; I hate the Water , I never come upon the Water , Sir.  



Longu.   then there will be no use of Swimming . 



Sir Nic.   I content my se●…f with the Speculative part of Swimming , I care not for the Practic . I seldom bring any thing to use , 't is not my way . Knowledge is my ultimate end . 



Bruce .  You have reason , Sir ; Knowledge is like Virtue , it 's own reward . 



Sir Form.   To study for use is base and mercenary , below the serene and quiet temper of a sedate Philosopher , 



Sir Ni●…h .  You have hit it right , Sir. I never studied any thing for use but Physic , which I administer to poor people : you shall see my method . 



Longu.   Sir , I beseech you , what new curiosities have you found out in Physic ? 



Sir Nic.   Why I have found out the use of Respiration , or Breathing , which is a motion of the Thorax and the Lungs , whereby the Air is impelled by the Nose ▪ Mouth ▪ and Windpipe into the Lungs , and thence expelled farther to elaborate the Blood , b●… refrigerating it , and separating its fuliginous steams . 



Bruce .  What a secret the Rogue has found out ? 



Sir Nic.   I have found too , that an Animal may be preserved without respiration , when the wind-pipe's cut in two , by ●…ollicular impulsion of Air ; to wit , by blowing wind with a pair of bellowss into the Lungs . 



Longu.   I have heard of a Creature preserved by blowing wind in the Breech , Sir.  



Sir Nic.   that 's frequent . Besides , though I confess , I did not invent it , I have performed admirable effects by tra●…sfusion of Blood ; to wit , by putting the Blood of one Animal into another . 



Sir Form.   Upon m●… integrity he has advanced transfusion to the Achme of perfection , and has the Ascendent over all the Virtu●…si in point of that Operation . I saw him do the most admi●…able effects in the World upon two Animals ; the one a Domestic Animal ▪ commonly called a Mangy Spaniel ; and a lesle Fame●…lick Crea●…ure , commonly called a Sound Bull-dog . Be pleased , S●…r to 〈◊〉 it . 



Sir Nic.   〈◊〉 I made , Sir , both the Animals to b●… Emittent and Recipie●… 〈◊〉 ●…he same time , after I had made Ligatures as hard I 〈◊〉 , f●…r ●…ear of s●…rangling the Animals , to render the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , I opened the ●…arotid Arteries , and Jugular 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 at one time , and so caused them to change Blood 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ano●…her . 



Sir 〈◊〉 .  Indeed that which ensued upon the Operation was miraculous ; for the mangy Spaniel became sound , and the sound Bull-dog mangy . 



Sir N●…c .  Not only so , Gentlemen , but the Spaniel became a Bull-dog , and the Bull-dog a Spani●…l . 



Sir Form.   Which considering the civil and ingenuous temper and education of the Spaniel , with the rough and untaught savageness and ill-breeding of the Bull-dog , may not undeservedly challenge the name of a Wonder . 



B●…ce .  't is an Experiment you 'll deserve a Statue for . 



Enter Clarinda , Miranda , and Sir Samuel . Clar.   Sir , I must beg your pardon for my intrusion : but I have found out such a practice upon my Sister , as will nearly concern you to prevent it . 



S●…r Sam.   What does she mean now ? 



Sir Nic.   Against Miranda , say you ? 



Clar.   This Footman has brought a Letter , and has been tempting her fr●…m that vile Man Sir Samuel Hearty . There ' 't is . 



Mir.   't is no matter for her persecution . Be confident of me , you can endure any thing — 



Sir Sam.   Aye , any thing , the most substantial be●…ting under the Sun. I have had a pretty parcel o kicks already about this business : but as long as I find love , I care not for ●…icking . 



Longu.   A pox oh ' this Rascal , he 'll undo us — 



Sir Nic.   This is a Villain indeed , to tempt my Niece from that Knight ; why he is a Spark , a Gallant , a Wit o' th' Town ; the greatest debaucher of Youth , and corrupter of Ladies in England . 



Sir Sam.   The Rogue has hit me to a Cow's thumb , he 's as cunning a Fellow as any within forty shillings of his head . 

[ Aside . 

Sir Form.   The Man indeed has spruce , polite , Mercurial , and pretty concise parts ; but he 's a little too volatile and flashy ; he would make a fine person if he were but solid . 



Sir Sam.   Good ! solid ! would he so ? that 's as dull a Fellow as a man wou●…d wish to lay his leg over . 



Longu.   I confess he is my Footman , but shall be no longer so ; let him be sound pumped and tossed in a Blanket . 



Sir Nic.   Truly it is an injury beyond all sufferance , and with your leave , I 'll have him so exercised . Call in my people . 



Sir Sam.   Hold , hold , Sir ! what do you mean ? Sir Samuel desired me to deliver this Note ; and he 's a person I am much beholding to , that 's all I know o' th' matter , only that he is a fine Gentleman , and a w●…tty facetious perso●… as any wears a head . 



Longu.   Here ! where are my Servants ! 

Enter Seru●…ntss . Sirrah ! strip that Rascal's Coat over his ears . 



Sir Sam.   Hold , hold , Longvil ! what are you mad ? I shall catch cold in the twinkling of a Bedstaff , man  



Sir Nic.   Do you hear , let him be taken , and first pumped sound , and then ●…ossed in a blanket . 



Longu.   Impudent Rascal ! away with him . 



Mir.   Pump him sound impudent Fellow . 



Sir Sam.   Ah , my pretty little dissembling Rogue . 

[ Aside . 

Sir Nic.   See it done to purpose , and then turn him out a doors . 



Sir Sam.   What a Devil shall I do ? but she love's me still . Come — 't is well it 's no worse — my intrigue goes on rarely — 

[ They hale him out . 

Cl●…r .  Let 's see the execu●…ion . 



Mir.   Come on let 's see how generously he suffers . 



[ Exit Clar. and Mir.  Sir Nic.   But now to return to my transfusion . 



Longu.   That was a rare Experiment of transfusing the blood of a Sheep into a Madman . 



Sir Nic.   Short of many of mine . I assure you I have transfused into a human Vein 64 ounces Haver du pois weight , from one Sheep . The emittent Sheep died under the Operation , but the recipient Madman is still alive ; he suffered some disorder at first . The Sheep's blood being Heterogeneous , but in a short time it became Homogeneous with his own . 



Sir Form.   Ha! Gentlemen , was not this incomparable ? but tyou shall hear more . 



Enter Snarl . Sir Nic.   The Patient from being Mania●…l , or raging mad , became wholly Ovine or Sheepish ; he bleated perpetually , and chewed the Cud : he had Wool growing on him in great quantities , and a Northamptonshire Sheep's Tail did soon emerge or arise from his Anus or human Fundament . 



Snarl .  In sadness Nephew , I am ashamed of you , you will never leave Lying and Quacking with your Transfusions and Fools tricks . I believe if the blood of an Ass were transfused into a Virtuoso , you would not know the emittent Ass from the Recipient Philosopher , by the Mass.  



Sir Nic.   OH Uncle ! you 'll have your way ; he 's a merry Gentleman . 



Snarl .  Pox ! merry ! prithee leave prating and lying ; I am not merry , I am angry with such Coxcombs as you are . 



Sir Form.   Well , Sir , you are very pleasant , and will have your facetious pretty humours . 



Snarl .  You are the Z●…ny to this Mountebank . 



Sir Nic.   Pray , Uncle , interrupt us not . ●…o convince you Gentlemen , of the truth of what I say , here is a Letter from the Patient , who calls himself the meanest of my Flock , and sent me some of his own Wool. I shall shortly have a Flock of 'em ; I 'll make all my clothes of 'em , 't is finer than Beaver . Here was one to thank me for the Cure by Sheep's blood just now — 



Snarl .  OH yes ! he did not speak , but bleated his thanks to you . In sadness you deserve to be hanged ▪ You killed four or five that I know with your transfusion — 



Sir Nic.   Sir , alas ! those men suffered not under the Operation , but they were Cacochymious , and had depraved Viscera , that is to say , their Bowels were gangrened . 



Snarl .  Pish ! I do not know what you mean by your damned Cacochymious canting ; but they died in sadness . Prithee make haste with your canting and lying , and let 's go to dinner , or you shall quack by yourself — — 



Longu.   A pleasant blunt old Fellow — 



Bruce .  he 's in the wro●…g in abusing Transfusion : for excellent Experiments may be made in changing one Creature into the nature of another . 



Longu.   Nay , it may be improved to that height , to alter the flesh of Creatures that we eat , as much as grafting and inoculating does Fruits — 



Sir Nic.   't is very true , I do it , I use it to that end . 



Snarl .  Pox ! let me see you invent any thing so useful as a Mousetrap , and I 'll believe some of your Lies . Prithee ! did not a fellow cheat thee with Eggs , which he pretended were laid with hairs in them , and you gave him ten shillings apiece for the Eggs ; till I discovered they were put in at a hole , made by a very fine Needle . 



Sir Form.   Well Mr. Snarl , you have the prettiest way of drolling . Gentlemen , pray let me recommend him to you , he 's a fine facetious witty person indeed . 



Snarl .  You recommend me ! Prithee , damned Orator , hold thy tongue . In sadness you are a foolish flashy Fellow — 



Bruce .  We shall be glad of the honour to know you . 



Snarl .  I desire no acquaintance with any young Man of this Age , no●… I  



Longu.   Why so , Sir ? 



Snarl .  Why then are vicious illiterate foolish Fellows , good for nothing but to roar and make a noise in a Playhouse . To be very brisk with pert Whores in Vizards , who , though never so illbred , are most commonly too hard for them at their own weapon , Repartee — And when Whores are not there , they play Monkey-tricks with one another , while all sober men laugh at them . 



Bruce .  They are even with them , for they laugh at all sober men again . 



Longu.   no Man's happy but by comparison . 't is the great comfort of all the World to despise and laugh at one another . 



Snarl .  But these are such unthinking Animals , and so weary of themselves , they can never be alone ; always complaining of short life , yet never know what to do with the time they have . 



Bruce .  This snarling Fellow's sometimes in the right . 



Snarl .  Thei●… top of ●…heir Educa●…ion is to sma●…er French : for in Fr●…nce they have been to learn French V●…ceses to spend English Estates with ; with an insipid gaity , which is to be slight and bright , very pert and very dull . 



Sir Ni●…h .  S●…r I beseech you to be civiller to my Friends . 



Snarl .  I am transported with passio n against the young Fellows of the Age.  



Longu.   Old Fools always envy young Fools . 



Snarl ,  ●…hey are all forward and positive in things they understand not ; they laugh at any Gentleman that has Art or Science , and make it the property of a well bred Gentleman , to be good for nothing , but to make a Figure in the Drawing-room , set his Periwig in the Glass , smile , whisper , and make legs and foolish faces for an hour or two , without one word of sense in s●…dness . 



Bruce .  The snarling rogue 's very tart upon the Youngsters . 



Longu.   When the pleasures of Wine and Women , the jo●…ss of Youth leaves us , Envy and Malice the lusts of Age , succeed 'em — 



Snarl .  Besides , they are all such Whoring fellows , in sadness ●… am ashamed of ' 'em . The last Age was an Age of Modesty — 



Bruce .  I believe there was the same Wenching then : only they dissembled it . They added Hypocrasie to Fornication , and so made two Sins of what we make but one . 



Longu.   After all his virtue , this old Fellow keeps a Whore. I ▪ ll tell you m●…re on 't . 



Sir Ni●… .  I hope you will pardon the rough n●…ture of my Uncle , who sp●…res no body . Now if you please , Gentlemen , we 'll retire . I am sorry I cannot perform the dissection of the Lobster , wh●…ch I promised . My Fi●…h-monger that serves me for that Operation , has failed me : but I 'll assure you it is the most curious of all Testaceous or Crustace●…us Animals whasoever . 



Sir 〈◊〉 .  But we will read an Author , and sport about a little Gr●…k and Latin bef●…re Dinn●…r . The one is a noble ref●…ction of the Mind , as the other is of the Body . 



Lon●…v .  We wait on you . 



Sir Ni●… .  After Dinner we will have a Lecture concerning the Natu●…e of Infects , and will surveyed my Microscopes , 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 , Pn●…umatick Engin●…ss , St●…ntrophonical Tub●…ss , and the like — 



B●…uce .  We ●…re infinitely obliged to you , Sir. But all this does not edify with our Mistresses , Longvil . 



Longu.   We must find a way to get rid of ●…hese insipid Fools . I have a way to get rid of the Lady . 



Sir Form.   G●…ntlemens , we most humbly attend your motions . 



Bruce .  We wait on you . 

[ Ex●…unt omnes . 

ACT. III  

Ent●…r Longvil and Miranda . Longu.   Dear Madam ! tender the life and welfare of a poor humble Lover . 



Mir.   What a fashionable Gentleman of this Ag●… , and a Lover ! it is impos●…ible ! They are all Keepers , and 〈◊〉 tawdry things from the Ex●…hange or the Play-●…ouse , and make the poor Creatures run mad with the ex●…remity of the alt●…ration ; as a young Heir , being kept short , does at the death of his Father . 



Longu.   I was never one of those Madam : nothing but age and impotence can reduce me to that condition . I had 〈◊〉 kill my own Game , than send to a Poulterers . Besides , I never eat Tame things , when wild of the same kind are in season . I hate your cooped crammed Lady ; I love 'em as they go about , as I do your Barn-door Fowl.  



Mir.   't is more natural indeed . 



Longu.   But had I been ne'er so wicked , you have made such an absolute whining Convert of me , that forgetting all shame and reproach from the Wits and Debauchees of the Town , I can be a Martyr for Matrimony . 



Mir.   Lord ! that you should not take warning ! ●…ave not several of your married Friends , like those upon the Ladder , bidden all good people take warning by them . 



Longu.   For all that , neither Lovers nor Malefactors can take it ; one will make experiment of Marriage , and th' other of Ha●…ging at their own sad costs . Neither of the Executions will e oer be left off . 



Mir.   They are both so terrible to Women , 't is hard to know which to choose . 



Longu.   If you Ladies were willing , we Men are apt to be civil upon easier terms . 



Mir.   no ; those terms are harder than the other . 



Longu.   You are so nimble , a Man knows not which way to catch you . 



Mir.   Once for all I assure you , I will never be catched any way by you . 



Longu.   Do not provoke Love thus , lest he should revenge his cause , and make you dote upon some nauseous Coxcomb , whom all the Town scorns . 



Mir.   Let Love do what it will , I neither dare nor will talk on 't any longer . 



Longu.   You are afraid of talking of Love , as some are of reading in a Coujuring-book , for fear it should raise the Devil . 



Mir.   What ever you can say , will as soon raise one as the other in me . But I must take leave of you and your Similes . My Uncle will want you . 



Longu.   Will you not in charity afford me one interview more this afternoon ? 



Mir.   Provided I hear not one word of Love , and my Uncle and Aunt be secure ; I shall be in the Walk on the East-side of the Garden an hour hence . But , by your leave , I shall meet another there — 

[ Aside . [ Exit Mir.  

Longu.   A thousand thanks for the honour . Yonder come Bruce and Clarinda ; I 'll retire — 

[ Exit Longu.  

Enter Bruce and Clarinda . Bruce .  I have taken more pains to single you out , than ever Woodman did for a Deer . 



Clar.   If the Woodman were no better a Marksman , the Deer would be safe for all his singling . Besides , I am not so tame to stand a shot yet , I thank you — 



Br●…ce .  Lovers are quick Aimers , and can shoot flying . 



Clar.   Not , if they fly so fast as I shall from you . 



Bruce .  Come , I see this way will not do : I 'll try another with you . Ah , Madam ! change your cruel intentions , or I shall become the most desolate Lover , that ever yet , with arms across , sighed to a murmuring Grove , or to a purling Stream complained . Savage ! I 'll wander up and down the Woods , and carve my passion on the Barks of T●…eeses , ●…nd vent my grief to winds , that as they fly shall sigh and pity me ▪ 



Clar.   How now ! what foolish Fustian's this ? you talk like an Heroic Poet.  



Bruce .  Since the common downright way of speaking sense wou●…d not please you , I had a mind to try what the Romantic way of winning Love could do . 



Clar.   no more of this , I had rather hear the tattling of Gossips at an Upsitting , or Christening , nay , a Fanatic Sermon , or , which is worse than all , a dull Rhyming Play , with nothing in 't but lewd Hero's huffi●…g against the Gods.  



Bruce .  Why , I 'll try any sort of Love to please you , Madam ; I ▪ ll show you that of a gay Coxcomb ; with his full plumes , strutting and rustling about his Mistress , like a Turkeycock , baiting her with brisk airy motion , and fashionable nonsense , thinking to carry her by dint of Periwig and Garniture , or by chan●…ing some pretty foolish sonnet of Phillis or Coeli●… ; or at best , treating her with nothing but ends of Plays , or second-hand Jests , which he runs on tick with witty men for , and is never able to pay them again . 



Clar.   no , there are too many of these fine Sparks you talk of , who perhaps may be very clinquant , slight and bright , and make a very pretty show at first ; but the Tincel-gentleman do so tarnish in the wearing , there 's no enduring them . 



Bruce .  But I am of good metal , Madam , and so true , that I shall abide any Touchstone , even that of Marriage . 



Clar.   But it 's an ill-bargai●… , where I must buy my Metal first , and touch it afterwards . 



Bruce .  You shall touch it first , Madam , and if you do not like it , I 'll take it again and no harm done . 



Clar.   no : I 'll take care there shall be no harm done ▪ Pray divert this unseasonable Discourse of Love , for I will never hear on 't more . Farewell , I see my Lady Gimcrack in the Garden . 



Bruce .  Let me but beg to have one Treaty more with you this afternoon : if I convince you not of the error of your hard heart , I must submit and be miserable . 



Clar.   If you love to hear the same thing again , I will declare it to you an hour hence in the green Walk on the other side the Wilderness — Farewell — But , by your leave , you shall find another in my place — 

[ Exit Clar.  

Enter Lad●… Gimcrack at another door . Bruce .  Your ladyship 's humble Servant . I have been taking the fresh air in the Garden , Madam . 



L. Gim.   I am come with the same intention , and am happy in the company of a person , who is so much a Gentleman . 



Bruc●… .  Your Ladyship does me too much honour . 



L. Gim.   By no means , Sir , your accomplishments command respect from all Ladies . I doubt not but you have been happy in many Lady's affections — 



Bruce .  What will th●…s come to ? — 

[ Aside . 

L. Gim.   But Women will be frail , while there are such per●…onss in the world , that 's most certain . 



Bruce .  Your ladyship 's in a merry humour , to rally a poor young Gentleman thus . 



L. Gim.   Far be it from me , I swear ; your perfections are so prevalent , that were I not in honour engaged unto Sir Nicholas ( and Honour has the greatest Ascendent in the World upon me ) I assure you I would not ●…enture myself alone with such a person : But honour 's a great matter , a great thing , I 'll vow and swear . 



Bruce .  You Ladies will abuse your humble Servants ; we are born to suffer . 



L. Gim.   Lord , Sir , that you should take me to be in jest ! I swear I am in earnest , and were I not sure of my Honour , that never fai●…ed me in a doubtful occasion , I would not give you this opportunity of tempting my frailty ; not but that my virtuous inclinations are equal with any Ladies : but there is a prodigious Witchcraft in opportunity . But honour does much , yet oppo●…tunity is a great thing , I swear a great thing . 



Bruce .  Aye , Madam , if we use it when it offers itself . 



L. Gim.   How Sir ! ne'er hope for 't ! ne'er think on 't ! I would not for all the World I protest . Let not such ●…houghtss of me enter into your head . My honour will protect me . I make use of an opportunity — I am none of those I assure you . 



Bruce .  ' 'Sdeath ! how apprehensive she is ? I shall forget the Speculative part of Love with Clarinda , and fall to the practic with her . But I shall ne'er hold out that long journey , without this or some other bait by the way . 



L. Gim.   Yet , as I was saying , opportunity 's a bewitching thing ▪ Le●… all Ladies beware of opportunity , I say , : for alas , if we were not innocent and virtuous now ▪ what use might we make of this opportunity now ? 



Bruce .  she 's so damnably affected , and silly , 't would palls any one's appetite but mine . Folly and affection are as nauseous as deformity . 

[ Aside . 

L. Gim.   Should we now retire into that cool Grotto for refreshment , the censorious world might think it stra●…ge ; but honour will preserve me . Honou●…'s' a rare thing , I swear , I defy temptatio●… . 



Bruce .  you 'll not give a man leave to trouble you with much . I have not observed that Grotto ; shall I wait on you to surveyed it . 



L. Gim.   Aye Sir , with all my heart to surveyed that ; but if you have any wicked intentions , I 'll swear you 'll move me prodigiously . I●… your intentions be dishonourable , you 'll provoke me strangely . 



Bruce .  Try me , Madam . 



L. Gim.   Hold ! hold ! have a care what you do . I will not try if you be not sure of your Honor. I 'll not ven●…re , I protest . 



Bruce .  What ever you are of mine , you are sure of your own . 



L. Gim.   Right , that will defend me . Now tempt what you will though we go in , nay , though we shut the door too : I fear nothing ; it 's all one to me as long as I have my Honour about me . Come . 



Bruce .  Yonder comes Longvil , Madam . 



L. Gim.   For Heaven's sake remove from me , or he 'll suspect my Honour . 



Bruce .  So , this accident has p●…eserved me honest . I am as constant a Lover as any man in England , when I have no oppo●…unity to be otherwise — 

[ Exi●… Bruce . 

Enter Longvil . L. Gim ▪   Fa-la-la-la ▪ OH me Sir 〈◊〉 swear ▪ you frighted me ▪ I protest my heart was at my mouth . Alas ! I shall nor recover the disorder a good while . 



Longu.   What'●… the matter , Mad●… ? 



L. Gi●… .  You brought a G●…tlemens that'●… 〈◊〉 ●…o fresh into my mind , one 〈◊〉 wa●… the ●…st Object o●… my 〈◊〉 and Affections , no●… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 se●… you 〈◊〉 . 〈◊〉 I th●…ught it had been his Ghost , upon my word . 



Longu.   I am happy in resembling any one you could love , Madam 



L. Gim.   I have long forgotten my passion for him ; but the sight of you did stir in me a strange Jè ne scai quoi towards you ; and but that I am another's now — otherwise — But I say too much . 



Longu.   ( aside . ) I have been too much acquainted with her character to doubt her meaning . Madam , you honour me so much , I cannot acknowledge it enough by my words , my hearty actions shall speak my thanks . 



L. Gim.   Actions ! O Heaven ! what actions ? I hope you mean honourably . I swear you brought all the blood of my body into my face . Actions , said you ! I hope you are a person of honour , my honour 's dearer to me than the whole Word . I would not violate my Reputation for the whole Earth . 



Longv ▪   Let us retire , Madam . If I do not show myself a Man of Honour , may your Ladyship renounce me . 



L. Gim.   Retire ! Heaven forbid ! Are we not private enough ? W●…ll , you put me more and more in mind of my first Love , I swear you do . 



Longu.   By your leave , Miranda , I can hold no longer . Though I am as true as Steel , any handsome Woman will strike fire on me . Let us repose a while in the Grotto , Madam . 



L. Gim.   OH Heaven , Sir ! do not tempt me . What , give myself an opportunity ! Consider my Honour , Sir ; I am another's ▪ 



Longu.   And shall be so still ; Madam , whatsoever use I shall make of your Ladyship , I shall return you again , and ne'er alter the property . Dear Madam , retire . 



L. Gim.   OH Lord , Sir ! what do you mean ? you fright me so , I protest my heart is at my mouth . I am no such person . Dear Sir , mistake me not , misconstrue not my freedom ; I would not for the World — Well , I swear you are to blame now , mever 〈◊〉 you are — But 't is your first fault , I can forgive you . 



Longu.   I am sorry I have offended . But let us retire into the Grotto , and I 'll make as many acknowledgements as I can . 



L. Gim.   Well , Sir , since you are a little more civil , I am con●… for discourse sake , for I love discourse mightily — 



Longv ▪   W●…l , I 〈◊〉 a 〈◊〉 ▪ Dear Miranda , forgive me this once . Come , dear Madam . 



L. Gim.   I 'll follow . But d' ye hear , Sir , if you be the least uncivil , upon my honour I 'll cry out . Remember , Sir , I give you warning . Do not think on 't , I swear and vow I will ; do not , I say , do not . 



Longu.   no , no , I warrant y●…u ; I 'll trust you for that . How fearful she is I should not think on 't ? 

[ Aside . 

Enter Sir Formal . Sir Form.   Sweet Mr. Longvil , Sir Nicholas Gi●…crack desire's your noble presence : ●…e being now ready to impart those secrets about Infects , which I d●…re be bold to say , no Virtuoso , Domestic or Foreign , has explored but himself . 



Longu.   I wait on you . 



Sir Form.   I humbly kiss your ladyship 's fair hands . 



[ Exit Longvil and Sir Formal . L. Gim.   Shame on this unlucky Fellow : I have discovered the cross love between my Nieces and these Gentlemen , and will make work wi●…h it . 



Enter Maid to Lady Gimcrack . Maid .  Madam , here 's a Letter for your Ladyship ; the Messenger would deliver it to none but me . 



L. Gim.   Ha! it is from my dear Hazard . 

Reads . Madam , I am extremely impa●…ient to see your Ladyship at 〈◊〉 old place of assignation , as well for a great ●…eal of Love , as for a little Business . 



L. Gim.   Well , I will go , though it cost me money . I know that 's his little business . I know not why we Ladies should not keep as well as Men sometimes . But I shall neglect ●…y important affair with these two fine sweet persons . But that 's uncertain , this is su●…e . 

[ Exit . 

Enter Snarl and Mistress Figgup . Snarl .  How happy am I in thy Love ! here I can find re●…eat , when tired with all the Rogues and Fools in Town . 



Fig.   Aye , Dearest ! come to thine own Miss ; she love's thee , Buddy , poor Buddy . Coachee , coachee . 



Snarl .  OH my poor Rogue . But when didst thou see thy Friend ▪ Mistress Flirt , my Nephew Gimcrack's Mistress ? 



Fig.   OH shame on her ! out upon her ! OH name her not . 



Snarl .  Why , what 's the matter , Bird ? 



Fig.   OH filthy Creature , I cannot abide her ▪ she 's 〈◊〉 she 's naught . 



Snarl .  Why , what 's the matter , Figg ? what has she done to thee ? 



Fig.   Done ! I 'll never forgive her while ●… ha'breath . Do not speak of her , she 's a base Creature ; name her not , I ha' done with her . 



Snarl .  Has she affronted thee , poor Rogue ? I 'll have her mauled . Filthy Creature . 



Fig.   Aye , birds-nyes , she 's a Quean . But do not thee trouble thyself with her ; 't is no matter . 



Snarl .  I will know what she has done to thee . In sadness , if you do not tell me , I won't love thee , Pigsney . 



Fig.   Well , I will , but won't you laugh at me then ? 



Snarl .  no , by the Mass , not I  



Fig   Nay , but thou wilt , Bird.  



Snarl .  In sadness I won't . 



Fig.   Why would you think it ? I wish I might ne'er stir out of 'is place , if the lewd Carrion had not the impudence to tell me , that Sir Nicholas Gim●…rack was a handsomer Man than thou art . no , I 'll ne'er forgive her while I ha've breath . 



Snarl .  Poor Rogue ! thou art a dear Creature in sadness . 



Fig.   Impudent Flirt's ! but I swear our Sex grows so vicious and infamous , I am ashamed of 'em , they have no modesty in ' 'em . 



Snarl .  In sadness it 's a very wicked Age ; men make no conscience o' their ways , by the Mass. In the last Age we were modest and virtuous , we spent our time in making visits , and playing at Cards with the Ladies , so civil so virtuous , and well-bred . 



Fig.   For my part , I blush at the impudent Creatures of the Town , that 's the truth on 't . 



Snarl .  So do I , in sadness . To see Villains wrong their sweet Wives , and , while they keep them short , let little dowdy Strumpets spend their Estates for 'em , by the Mass my heart bleeds , to see so great a decay of Conjugal affection in the Nation . 



Fig.   Out upon 'em , filthy Wenches ; I wonder they dare show ●…heir hardened faces . They are so bold , 't is a burning shame they should be suffered I vow . 



Snarl .  Nay , the young Coxcombs are worse ; nothing but swearing , drinking , whoring , tearing , ranting , and roaring . In sadness I should be weary of the world for the vices of it , but that thou comfort'st me sometimes , Buddy . 



Fig.   Prithee , dear Numps , talk no more of 'em ; I spit at 'em ; but I love n'own Buddy Mun. Predee kiss me . 



Snarl .  Ah poor Budd , poor Rogue ! we are civil now ; what harm 's in this ? 



Fig.   None , none . Poor Dear , kiss again , Mun.  



Snarl .  Ah poor thing . In sadness thou shalt have this Purse ; nay , by the Mass thou shalt . 



Fig.   Na●… p●…sh ! I cannot abide the money , not I ▪ I love thee , thou art a civil , discreet , sober person of the last Age.  



Snarl .  Ah poor little Rogue ! in sadness I 'll bite thee by the lip , i'faith I william thou hast incenc'st me strangely , thou ha●…t fired my blood , I can bear it no longer , i'faith I cannot . Where are the instruments of our pleasure ? Nay , prithee do not frown , by the Mass thou shalt do 't now . 



Fig.   I wonder that should please you so much , that pleases me so little ? 



Snarl .  I was so used to 't at Westminster-school , I could never leave it o●…t since . 



Fig.   Well : look under the Carpet then if I must . 



Snarl .  Very well , my dear Rogue . But dost hear , thou art too gentle . Do not spare thy pains . I love C●…stigation mightily — So , here 's good provision . 



[ Pulls the Carpet , t●…ree or f●…ur gr●…at Rods fall down . Within .  Ho there within ! open the door . 'Sdeath I 'll break it open . What Rascal have you got with you ? I 'll maul him . 



Fig.   OH Heaven ! this Rascal will undo me . What shall I do ? 't is my Brother . 



Snarl .  In sadness I shall be ruined . 



Fig.   Run , run , if ●…ou love me , into the Wood-●…ole quickly . I 'll get rid of him . For Heaven's sake take the Birch along with you 



Snarl .  Ah Hectoring Rascal ! we had none of 'is in the last Age. Rogues ! Dogs ! A man cannot be in private with a Sister , but he must be disturbed by th'impertinent Brother , in sadness . 



Fig.   In ! in ! I 'll out to him — 

[ Ex●…unt . 

Sir Nicholas , Sir For●…al ▪ Bruce , Longvil : 

Sir Form.   I do assur●… you , Gentlemen , no man upon the 〈◊〉 of the earth is so well seen in the Nature of ants , Flies , Humble-bees , Ear-wigs , Millepedes , Hogs-lices , Maggots , Mites in a Cheese , Tadpoles , Worms , Newts , Spiders , and all the noble products of the Sun , by equivocal Generation . 



Sir Nic.   Indeed , I have found more curious Phoenomina in these minute Animals , than in those of vas●…er magnitude . 



Longu.   I take the Ant to be a most curious Animal . 



Sir Nic.   more curious than all Oviperous or Egg-laying Creatures in the whole World. There are three sorts , Black , Dark-brown , and Fillamot . 



Longu.   Right , Sir.  



Sir Nic.   The Black will pinch the Dark-brown with his forceps , till it kills it upon the place ; the like will the Dark-brown do by the Fillamot — I have dissected their Eggs upon the object plate of a Microscope , and find that each has within it an included Ant , which has adhering to its Anus or Fundament , a small black speck , which becomes a Vermicle , like a Mite , which I have watched whole days and nights ; and Sir Formal has watched 'em thirty hours together . 



Longu.   A very pretty employment . 



Sir Form.   And a long time we could find no motion , but that of Flexion and Extension : but ●…t last it becomes an Ant , Gentlemen . 



Bruce .  What does it concern a Man to know the nature of an Ant ? 



Longu.   OH it concerns a Virtuoso mightily : so it be Knowledge , 't is no matter of what . 



Bruce .  Sir , I take 'em to be the most politic of all Infects . 



Sir Form.   You have hit it , Gentlemen ▪ they have the best Government in the World : What do you opine it to be ? 



Longu.   O! a Commonwealth most certainly . 



Sir Nich.   Worthy Sir , I see you are a great Observer ; it is a Republic resembling that of the States-general . 



Bruce .  Undoubtedly ! and the Dutch are just such industrious and busy Animals . 



Sir Form.   Right . But now I beseech you be pleased to communicate some of your quainter Observations to these Philosophers , about those subtle and insidious Animals called Spiders . 



Sir Ni●… .  I think I have found out more Phoenomena's or Appearance●… of Nature in Spiders , than any Man breathing : Would you think it ? there are in E●…gland si●… and thirty seuèral sorts of Spiders ; there 's your Hound , Greyhound , Lurch●…r , Spaniel Spider . 



Longu.   But , above all , your Tumbler-spider is most admirable . 



Sir Nic.   OH Sir , I am no Stranger to 't : it catches ●…liess as T●…mblerss do Coneys . 



Bruce .  Good ! how these Fools will meet a lie halfway . 



Longu.   Great Liars are always civil in that point ; as there is no lie too great for their t●…lling , so there 's no●…e too great for their believing . 



Sir Nic.   The Fabric or Structure of this Insect , with its Texture , is most admirable . 



Sir Form.   Nor is its Sagacity , or Address , lesle to be wondered at , as I have had the honour to observe under my noble Friend ; as soon as it has spied its Prey , as suppose upon a Table , it will crawl underneath till it arrive to the An●…ipodeses of the Fl●… , which it discovers by sometimes peeping up ; and if the capricious Fly happens not to remove itself by crural motio●… , or the vibration of its wings , it makes a fatal leap upon the heedless prey , of which , when it has satisfied its appetite , it carries the remainder to its Cell , or Hermitage . 



Sir Nic.   It will teach its young ones to hunt , and discipline 'em severely when they commit faults ; and when an old one misses its Préy , it will retire , and keep its Chamber for grief , shame and anguish , ten hours together . 



Sir Form.   Upon my integrity it is true , for I have several times , by Sir Nicholas' command watched the Animal , upon thi●… or the like miscarriages . 



Sir Nic.   But , Sir , there is not in the World a more docible Creature , I have kept several of 'em tame . 



Bruce .  that 's curious indeed ▪ I never heard of a tame Spider before . 



Sir Nic.   One above all the rest , I had called him Nick , and h●… knew his name so well , he would follow me all over the house ▪ I fed him indeed with fair Flesh-flies . He was the best natured , best conditioned Spider , that ever I met with . You ●…ew Nick very well , ●…ir Formal , h●… was of the Spanie●… breed , Si●… — 



Sir Form.   knew him ! I knew Nick intimately well ▪ 



Longu.   These Fools are beyond all that Art or Nature e'er produced . 



Bruce .  These are the admirable Secrets they find out — 



Longu.   Have you observed that delicate Spider called Tarantula ? 



Sir Nic.   Now you have hit me , now you come home to me ; why I travelled all over Italy , and had no other affair in the world , but to study the secrets of that harmonious Insect . 



Bruce   Did you not observe the Wisdom , Policies , and Customs of that ingenious people ? 



Sir Nic.   O by no means ! 't is below a Virtuoso , to trouble himself with Men and Manners . I study Infects ; a●…d I have observed the Tarantula , does infinitely delight in Music , which is the reason of its poison being drawn out by it . there 's your Phaenomenon of Sympathy ! 



Longu.   Does a Tarantula delight so in Music ? 



Sir Nich.   O extravagantly . There are three sorts , Black , Grey and red , that delight in three several sorts and modes of Music . 



Bruce .  That was a curious Inquisition ; how did you make it ? 



Sir Nic.   Why I put them upon three s●…veral Chips in water , than caused a Musician to play , first a grave Pa●…in , or Almain , at which the black Tarantula only moved ; it danced to it with a kind of grave mo●…ion , much like the Benchers at the Revels . 



Enter Servant . S●…rv .  Sir , The Gentleman that 's going for Lapland , Russi●… , and those parts , is come for your Letters and Queries which you are to send thither . 



Sir Nic.   I 'll wait on him . I keep a constant correspondence with all the Virtuoso's in the Nor●…h and North-east parts . Ther●… are rare Phaenomena's in those Countries . I am beholding to Finland , Lapland , and Russia , for a great part of my Philosophy . I send my Queries thither . Come , Sir Formal , will you help ●…o dispatch him ? 



Sir Form.   I am proud to serve you . 



Sir Nic.   Be pleased to take a turn in the Garden . When we have dispatched , we will impart more of our Microscopical 〈◊〉 . 



〈◊〉 .  Your humble Servant — This is a happy deliverance . 



[ Ex●…unt Sir Form. and Sir Nic.  Lo●…gv .  I have removed the Lady by writing to Hazard , to send for her , and keep her an hour or two . 



Bruce .  And I have sent my man to find out Sir Nicholas his Strumpet , as soon as he has found her , she 'll send for him . 



Longu.   For all his Virtue and Philosophy . This grave Fool will be in the fashion too . Now if we can get rid of this wordy Fool Sir Formal , we have the Ladies to ourselves . In the mean time , let 's to our several and respective assignations . 



[ Ex●…unt . Enter Miranda in the Garden . Mir.   What shall I say to this Bruce ? O unjust Custom ! that has made Women but passive in Love , as if Nature had intended us for Ciphers only , to make up the number of the Creation . 



Enter Bruce . Bruce .  yonder 's my Clarinda : Now Love inspire me , I am infinitely transported with this honour you do me . 



Mir.   If I have done you any honour , pray make your best on 't . 



Bruce .  Is it you , Madam ? this honour was unexpected . 



Mir.   Why whom did you expect ? OH I see you are not so much transported as you thought you were . 



Bruce .  The honour of your Ladyship's company I did not expect . 



Mir.   Nor much care for , I see . 



Bruce .  'T were Blasphemy if I should say so . 'T was your Sister I expected . 



Mir.   My Sister ! so , I am not fit for your company it seems . 



Bruce .  If I would tell you how I prise the honour , I should invade the interest of my Friend . 



Mir.   Your Friend ! if you had no more interest in him , than I am resolved he shall ever have in me : he 'd be the worst Friend you have . 



Bruce .  he 's a Man of Honour , and of Wealth : and if any man could deser●…e you , he might . 



Mir.   The World is not so barren , but I have found a fitter man : but , Sir , 't was not my Sister ; ●…twas my Lady Gimcrack you hoped to meet here . You are a Man of Honor. The Grotto is a fine Scene of Love. The Lady not very unwilling , 't was well you were interrupted , Sir.  



Bruce .  ' 'Sdeath ! how came she to know that ? but I must bear it out ; I cannot guess your meaning : but I see you love your Sister well , to be jealous of her . 



Mir.   no , I assure you , I have no reason to be jealous for her : for to my knowledge , she has irrecoverably disposed of her heart in another place . 



Bruce .  what 's that ? What says she ? she 's certainly jealous for herself then . ●…here must be something in this . 



Mir.   In what confusion am I ? ●…hiss can never end well ▪ What! I see you are troubled that I have told you a Secret of my Sisters , and discovered one of yours . Come , walk and consider on 't . 



Bruce .  I am surprised so , I know not what to do in this exigence — 

[ Exeunt . 

Enter Longvil and Clarinda . Clar.   You stare about like a Hare-finder : what 's the matter ? 



Longu.   Faith ▪ Madam , I expected to have met your Sister here . 



Clar.   Say you so ? the truth on 't is , she desired me to take the trouble off her 〈◊〉 . 



Longu.   I am sorry , Madam , she thinks it so . 



Clar.   You see , Sir , I am content to suffer for her sake . 



Longu.   You have a mind to try me for your Sister , Madam . 



Clar.   no : I assure you , Sir , she 's resolved never to make trial of you herself , nor by another . 



Longu.   What can the meaning of this be ? 



Clar.   Come , Sir , I will be a little plainer with you ; She has disposed of her heart to another , without power of revocation . 



Longu.   Why would she not meet me ▪ to tell me so herself ? 



Clar.   She thought me fitter fort : besides , perhaps this has given her an opportunity to see one she likes better . 



Longu.   I see , Madam , she has not the same kindness for you , to send yo●… to one she likes so ill . 



Clar.   You do not know●… , but she may have taken as great a trouble off my hands , and kept me from one I like as ill , as she does you . 



Longu.   there 's nothing but Riddle in Woman , they deceive as much with the Vizards of their mind , as they do with those o●… the●…r faces — 



Clar.   I discover Sir ▪ Formal . We must be private no longer . 



[ As they are going out . Enter Bruce and Miranda . Longu.   So Bruce , you are a happy man , I fee.  



Bruce .  You are a pleasant one , I see ▪ you and I must come to a cleari●…g of this business . 



Longu.   Ladies , we ha●… 〈◊〉 to impart to you , but shall be hindered by ●…his Coxcomb , Sir For●…al 



Clar.   We must have some consultations too with you . Sister , we 'll catch him in a Trap — 



Mir.   here 's a Trap-door of a Vault , where my Uncle keeps h●…s bottles of Air , which he weighs , of which you●…ll hear more anon . we 'll snap him in that , and then we shall have the plac●… to ourselves . 



Enter Sir Formal . Clar.   Let me alone , I 'll catch him . 



Sir Form.   Gentlemen and Ladies , some affairs have engaged my noble Friend , Sir Nicholas to borrow himself of you a while ; and he has commanded me ●…o pawn my person till he shall redeem it with his own — 



Mir.   Very quaintly expressed . We were just desiring you●… company . 



Clar.   And we were admiring this Talon of yours , your excellent manner of speaking ; and i  engaged to give you a Subject to show your parts upon to these Gentlemen . 



Sir Form.   What ever is within the Sphere of my activity , you must command . I must confess , I have some felicity in speaking . 



Mir.   Dear Sis●…er , give him a subject ; you shall hear what Oracles hang on his lips . 't is all one what subject he speaks upon , great or little . 



Sir Form.   That it is , Madam ; we Orators speak alike upon all Subjects — My speeches are all so subtly designed , that whatever I speak in praise of any thing , with very little alteration , will serve in praise of the contrary . 



Clar.   Let it be upon seeing a Mouse enclosed in a Trap.  



Sir Form.   't is all one to me , I am ready to speak upon all occasions . 



Clar.   Stand there , Sir , while we place ourselves on each side . 



Sir Form.   I kiss your hand , Madam . Now I am inspired with Eloquenc●… Him ! him ! Being one day , most noble Audit●…rss , musing in my Study upon the too fleeting condition of poor human kind , I observed , not far from the Scene of my Meditation , an excellent Machine , called a Mousetrap ( which my Man had placed there ) which had included in it a solitary Mouse , which pensive Prisoner , in ●…ain bewailing its o●…n 〈◊〉 ▪ and the precipit●…tion of it●…●…oo 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ▪ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ●…or liber●…y ag●…inst the too stubborn opposition of solid Wood , and more obdurate Wire : at last , the pretty Mal●…factor having tired , alas , it 's too feeble limbs , till they became languid in fruitless e●…deavorss for its excarceration . The pr●…tty Felon , since it could not break Prison , and its offence being beyond the benefit of the Clergy , could hope for no ●…ail , at last sat still pensively lamenting the severi●…y of its Fate , and the narrowness of its , alas ! too withering durance : after I had contemplated a while upon the no little curio●…ty of the Engine , and the subtlety of its Inventor ; I began to reflect upon the i●…ticement which so fatally betrayed the uncautious animal to its sudden ruin , and found it to be the too , alas ! specious bait of Cheshirec●…eese , which seems to be a great delicate to the palate of this Animal , who in seeking to preserve its life , OH misfortune , took the certain means to death ; and searching for its livelihood , had sadly encountered its own destruction . Even so — 



Clar.   Now let the Trap go — 



Sir Form.   Even so , I say . 



Clar.   Even so , I say , I have catched the Orator — 

[ He sink●… . 

Sir ●…orm .  Help ! help ! murder ! 

[ Below . 

Longv ▪   Let the florid Fool lie there . 



Mir.   I warrant him . 



Bru●…e .  He uses as many Tropes and Flourishes about a Mousetrap , as he would in praise of Alexander . 



Enter Sir Samuel in Woman's habit . Sir Sam.   This is the subtlest disguise to make love in that e'er was invented ; this has served me upon many intriqus . Well , she shall see , for all the sufferings of this day , to the Tun●… of Kicking , Beating , Pumping , and Tossing in a Blanket , and all that ▪ that nothing shall hinder me in my Love. Shall Sir Samuel be frighted from an Intrigue ? No!  



Longu.   Whom have we he●…e . 



Sir Sam.   Ladies , I was commanded by my Lady Pleasant to wait on you with choice of good things , which she ●…old me , you would buy . 



Mir.   what 's the meaning of this ? 



Clar.   Since she came from my Lady , we must see what she would sell.  



Sir S●… .  I have choice of good Gloves , Amber , Orangery , Genoa , Roman , Frangipand , Neroly , Tuberose , Jessimine , and Marshal ; all manner of Tires for the Head , Locks , Tours , Frowzes , and so forth ; all manner of Washeses , Almond-water , and Mercury-water for the Complexion ; the best Peter and Spanish Paper that ever came over ; the best Poma●…umss of Europe , but one rare , one made of a Lamb's Caul and May dew — Also all manner of Confections of Mercury and Hog●…bones , to preserve present , and to restore lost Beauty . If any outdoes me in these businesses , or have better Goods than I , I am the Son of a Tinde●…-box . OH Devil ! what did I say ? I shall bet●…ay myself — 



Mir.   how 's thi●… , the Son of a Tinderbox ? 



Sir Sam.   Pish ! I mean the D●…ughter of a Tinderbox . 



Bruc●… .  This is the Rascal Sir Samuel in disguise . 



Sir Sam.   In the first place try a pair of Gloves , Madam , don't you know me ? 



Mir.   How should I know you ? 



Sir Sam.   Le●… me tell you , Sir Samuel's as true a Lover , as e'●… wo●…e a head . 



Clar.   what 's the meaning of ●…his private discourse ? 



Sir Sam.   Pox on her envy ; she 's always for a Cup of Mischief . I 'll put this Note into a Glove , and that will do my business . Slap-dash — as flat as a Flounder . I have no private business — Be pleased to try on this Glove , Madam . Do not you know me yet ? — I am Sir Samuel . 



Mir.   what 's ●…hiss ? a Note within it . 



Sir Sam.   Keep it to yourself . 



Clar.   What note 's that ? from Sir Samuel Hearty ? O Heaven ! this is a Bawd.  



Longu.   A downright Bawd , and Bawd to that Rascal . 



Bruce .  ' 'Sdeath ! pull the Bawd in pieces . 



Mir.   Lay hold on the Bawd , we 'll hau●… her Carted . Sei●…e her till Sir Nicholas comes in ; we 'll ha●…e her sent to Bridewell , and sound whipped there , and then Carted . 



Sir Sam.   So ! this is a fine merry way of proceeding . I've made ●…imble wo●…k on 't . Let me go , I am a●… honest Woma●… , and l●…bour in my vocation . Let me go , or as I am an honest man I 'll sue you about this business . 



Longu.   how 's this ? a Man ▪ nay then I 'll try a good kicking , upon you . 



Sir Sam.   Hold ! hold ! What do you mean to beaten a Woman ? will you make me miscarry ? I am with child , and for aught I ●…now , you have kill ▪ d that within me , 



Bruce ▪   You said , a●… you were an honest man  



Sir Sam.   OH Dunce that I am ! that 's a way I have of expressing myself . Bu●… I 'll make you know I am a Woman . 



Mir.   It is my Fool Sir Samuel ; prithee Clarinda , let 's put him to Sir Formal , and secure him till my Uncle comes ; it will make excellent sport . 



Clar.   Do you set him upon the Trap , it will do rarely . 



Mir.   One word with you . Come this way , Sir Sa●…uel . I cannot tell you how much I am afflicted for your sufferings . 



Sir Sam.   Shakstone ! it's no ma●…er . Come it 's well it 's no worse . 



Mir.   Now Clarinda — 

[ Sir Sam. sinks . 

Sir Sam.   OH murder , murder ! who 's here ? the Devil ? 



Clar.   So , now we have the Garden to ourselves . Let 's walk , ●…nd consult about our affairs — 

[ Exeunt . 

ACT. IU.  

Sir Formal and Sir Samuel in the Va●…lt . Sir Form.   I Can no longer contain myself . This Lady , joined with darkness and opportunity , the Midwife of Vice , as we may so say , has so inflamed me , that I must farther attempt ●…er chastity : I am confident she must be handsome , ●…nd no mean person , by her silken Garments . M●…dam , as I was saying , since we are unwittingly enclosed in dark●…ess , which yet cannot be so , since enlightened by the Rays of your Beauty . 



Sir Sam.   For all your Oratory about this business , I cannot see my hand , it is so dark . 



Sir Form.   Ah , Madam ! the bright enlightner of the day , by which all Creatures see , is yet itself deprived of vision . 



Sir S●…m .  ●…ox of 'is damned Rhetoric ! what will become of me ! I must either discover myself , which I would ●…ot for the world , or be sent to Bridewell , and be whipped with a Certiorari ; and yet methinks I h●…ve no need on'●… , for I have been very plentifully kicked and beaten about this business to day already — 



Sir Form.   L●…t me be ●…evenged on this fair ▪ Enemy , the prettiest , 〈◊〉 , a●…d ●…ving hand I ever had the honour ●…o imprint my kisses on ; she has inflamed me mightily : I 'll try her this way . Do me the honour to accept of this Purse , and the contents thereof . 



Sir Sam.   I 'll take the Rogue's P●…rse , what e'er come on 't . 



Sir Form.   Sweet Lady , let 's make our condition as happy as in us lies . 



Sir Sam.   Nay , good Sir ! OH Lord , Sir , what d●…'e mean ? fie , Sir.  



Sir Form.   Let me approach the honour of your lip , far sweeter than the ●…hoenix Nest , and all the spicy Treasures of Arabia . 



Sir S●…m .  't is your goodness , Sir ; but pray forbear — 



Sir Form.   Nay strive not , upon my sincerity I william  



Sir Sam.   Nay , good Sir , be not uncivil , I am no such person . Nay pish ! I never saw the like ; you are the strange●…t man Well , take it then . I vow you make me blush If I were not in apparent danger of being whipped damnably , a●… mis●…ing my masquerade , I could be merry with ●…his Fool.  



Sir Form.   The sweets of Hybla dwell upon thy lips ! Not all the fragrant bosom of the Spring affords such ravishing perfumes . 



Sir Sam.   OH Lord , Sir ! you are pleased to compliment ! Ah , lying Rogue , my brea●…h smells of Tobacco . 



Sir Form.   Our time may be but short , pardon the unbecoming roughness which my passion prompts me to . Come , my dear Cloris . 



Sir Sam.   Lord , what a pretty name is that ! I was ne'er called Cloris before . 



Sir Form.   Come , my dear Nymph , let us be more familiar : the solitary darkness of the place invites us to Love's silent pleasures . Now , dearest Cloris , let us taste those sweets — 



Sir Sam.   Nay pish ! fie ! Lord ! what do you mean ? what would you be at ? Keep off . I protest I 'll call out . Nay pish ! never stir I william  



Sir Form.   thou hast provoked my gentle spirit so , it is become furious , and it is decreed I must enjoy thy lovely body — 



Sir Sam.   Out upon you ! my body , I de●…e you ▪ I am an honest woman . I sco●…n your words . I will call-out for some b●…dy to pro●…ect my honour . 



Sir Form.   Your Honour 〈◊〉 suffer ; none can see us ▪ a●…d : who will declare it ? 



Sir Sam.   Out upon you ! get you gone , you Swine . I will not s●…ffer in my honour , I am virtuous . Help ! help ! a Rape ! a Rape ! help ! help . 



Sir Form.   Be not obstreperous , none can hear you . You have provoked me contrary to my gentle temper , even to a Rape , Come , I will , I must , i'faith I must . 



Sir Sam.   ' 'Sdeath ! the Rogue begins to pry into the difference of Sexes , and will discover mine — I must try my strength with him . Out lustful Tarquin ! you libidinous Goat , have at you . 



Sir Sam. beats Sir Form. kicks him and flings him down . Sir Form.   Help ! help ! murder ! murder ! 



Sir Sam.   Be not obstreperous , none can hear you . 



Sir Form.   Upon my verity I think this be an Amazon ! Well , I can bear this ; but — 



Sir Sam.   Do you again attempt my Honour ? I 'll maul you , you las●…vious Villain . 



Sir Form.   Hold ! hold ! I beseech you ; I humbly rest contented , I acquiesce . 



Sir Sam.   Get you from me , lustful Swine — Be gone — 



Sir Form.   I go , Madam : But I know not whether this Vault doth terminate here , or whether it doth issue farther . 



[ They retire : SCENE , a Bedchamber . 

Enter Snarl and Mistress Figgup . Snarl .  Come , now we are safe in this hold , none will interrupt us in our great design . Ah pox o'these wicked Hectors , vicious impudent Rogues ! a Man cannot retire with a Lady for his private satisfaction , but these ranting Rogues must roar and interrupt us ; 't is a very impudent vicious Age in sadness . 



Fig.   But my Dear , if any body else should have a Key to this Room ( as I know they have ) thongh I dare not tell him , it is a common Scene of Love matters . 



Snarl .  Fear not , the Landlady tells me , no body has a Key but myself . I h●…ve agreed to give her a Gui●…ney a week for these private occasions . In sadness 't is a fine place : Here a man may bring a Lady , and even none of the house observe it . There is not such a convenience in all the Pall-mall for these occasions , though som●… there are , much given to such diversions . How glad am I to have thee here , poor Pigsn●…e — 



Fig.   Ah Lord ! there 's some body at the door — 



Snarl .  In sadness there is . ●…here's one with a Key too . In into the Wood-hole quickly , or we shall be discovered — quick , quick — 



Enter Hazard and Lady Gi●…crack . Haz.   Come , my Dear Lady , now we are safe from interption ; how happy am I in your favours ? 



L. Gim.   Ah! so you say ; but if ever I hear of your inconst●…cy , you shall be no longer happy , as you call it : I cannot suffer a Riu●…l . 



H●…z .  Nothing shall e'er divert me from the happiness I enjoy in you ; nor am I lesle impatient of a Rival than you are . I am so covetous of you , that the thought of your Husband keeps me still inquiet . 



L. Gim.   Fear not a Husband . Husband's are such phlegmatic indifferent Rivals , they ne'er can hurt the Gallants ; they poor easy Souls , do every thing as if they did it not . 



Haz.   They do but court and keep a pother , 
To make one Gamesome for another . 


L. Gim.   You are in the right . 



Haz.   Nay , I think a Husband is very insipid foolish Animal . and is growing out of fashion . 



L. Gim.   We shall begin to lay 'em by . Husband's will be left off , as Gentlemen Ushe●…ss are : indeed they are more unnecessary Instruments , than those formal spindle-sh●…nkt finical Fools , with Nosegays and white Gloves were . 



Haz.   Those , though they could do no service themselves , would make way for them that could ; but a Husband is a Clog , a Dog in a Manger , a Miser , that hordes up Gold from others , and will not make use on 't himself — 



L. Gim.   Nay , a thousand times worse ; a Miser would keep to himself what he love's , and a Husband what he does not care for . Out on him . A husband 's an Insect , a Drone , a Dormouse — 



Haz.   A foolish Matrimonial Lump — 



L. Gim.   A Cuckoo in Winter — 



Haz.   An Opiate for Love — 



L. Gim.   A Body without a Soul — 



Has ,  A Chip in Porridge . — 



L. Gim.   A White of an Egg — 



Haz.   All Phlegm , and no Choler — 



L. Gim.   A Drudge — 



Haz.   An ●…xcuse — 



L. Gim.   A necessary thing — 



Haz.   A Cloak at a pinch — 



L. Gim.   A pitiful Utensil — 



Haz.   Good for nothing , but to cover shame , pay Debts , and own Children for his Wife . 



L. Gim.   In short , a Husband is a Husband , and there 's an end of him ; but a Lover is — 



Haz.   Not to be expressed but in action . I 'll show you what a Lover is with a vengeance , Madam . Come on . ' 'Sdeath ! there 's a Key in the do 't . 



L. Gim.   What shall we do ? 



Haz.   Run into the Wood-hole quickly ; I 'll bear the brunt , and I may perhaps make a discovery into the bargain — 



[ She goes in . Enter Sir Nicholas and Mistress Flirt . Sir Nic.   Come , Dearest , the Landlady is not at home , or we would have a Collation here . 



Flir●… .  OH Heaven ! who 's this , Hazard ? 



Haz.   'Sdeath , Sir ! How dare you invade my room ? 



L. Gim.   Oh! who 's here ? the Devil , the Devil — 

Enter Lady Gimcrack . O Heaven ! who 's this ? my Husband with a Whore ! 



Sir Nic.   Death and Hell ! my Wife with a Hectorly Fellow here ! O my disgrace . 



L. Gim.   O vile false Man ! thy falsehood I have long suspected ; now this happy opportunity has discovered all . 



Sir Nic.   What means her impudence ? 



L. Gim.   Was I not sufficient for thee , vile Man , but thou must thus betray me ? I cannot look on thee with patience . I shall faint ! I shall faint ! Oh! Oh!  



Haz.   Help , help the Lady . 



Sir Nic.   hang the Lady . O Womankind ! what artifice is this ? I was informed by this Lady I should find you here ; I wonder not at your disorder upon this unexpected surprise . OH vile treacherous Woman ! 



L. Gim.   Take him from my sight , I shall die else . Have I been always your obedient , virtuous Wife , and am I thus requited ? Heaven sent this honourable Gentleman to assist me in the discovery , who on purpose got a Key to this Room , it seems the filthy Scene of all thy lust and baseness . Be gone — thou infamous Wretch , I am not able to support the sight of thee — 



Sir Nic.   Lewd Woman ! thou abstract of impudence and falsehood ! tremble at my revenge . Have I at length found out your base lascivious haunt . 



L. Gim.   OH insufferable ! do you add to all your barbarous injuries this of aspersing my innocence ? 



Flirt .  ( to Haz. ) False man ? did I for this give my affection jto thee ? and canst thou think I 'll bear this unrevenged ? 



Haz.   ( aside ) ' 'Sdeath ! this Wench will undo me with my Lady . 



L. Gim.   What do I hear ? is he false too ? then my misfortunes are complete . Base vile ungrateful Fellow ; is this your constancy and gratitude to me ? 

[ Too Haz. ▪ 

Haz.   Madam , this is a Lady of a great Estate , whom I should have married ; and this accident , I fear , has ruined all my Fortune . 



Sir Nic.   ( to Flirt . ) Has my kindness deserved th●…s ? is this your Gallant too ? O this Villain has made me doubly a Cuckold . 



Flirt .  ( to Sir Nic.  Do not mistake me ; this Fellow took me for a great Fortune , and should have marri ▪ d me . 

Are you consulting for my ruin ? 

[ To them . 

L. Gim.   ( to Haz. ) This is a flame , I 'll not believe it ▪ This S●…rumpet has doubly betrayed me . Lewd Creature , first I 'll take revenge on thee . 



Flirt .  ( to L. Gim. ) I thought I should at last find out the cause of my misfortune . 

( To Haz. ) You are like to make a good Husband , that can make so ill a Lover . 



Haz.   After I have heard all your accusation , which is false , let me ●…ell you , I have been informed of your frequent coming hither with Sir Nicholas , and was resolved at once to be revenged of him and you , by bringing my Lady hither to discover both . 



Flirt .  OH insolence ! I never saw the place before . 



Sir Nic.   ●… am too well satisfied of he●… falsehood , and though ●…t be something below a Philosopher to draw a Sword , yet to punish her I william  



Haz.   Hold , Sir , first you must try with me . 



Sir Nic.   What are you , her Stallion , and her Bravo too ? 



L. Gim.   Was ever Woman yet so miserable , to be betrayed , by one whom she has loved so much better than her life ? she would have laid it down to have done him any kindness : and yet to perfect all his cruelty , he blots my reputation . And since the only ▪ ●…reasure of my life is gone , p●…ay ●…ake that too . Do not resist him ; let him pierce this breast , that ne'er bore any Image but his own . Come on then , cruel man  



Sir Nic.   Wha●… can this mean ? 



Flirt .  ( to Sir Nic. ) For Heavens' sake do not betray me to him ; if I be no●… cleared in this I am und●…ne . 



Haz.   Now hear me Sir : This Lady , on my honour , Sir , is free from all blemish , I believe even in thought . But I being informed you use to come with that Lady to this House , of ill reputation , in anger to you both betrayed you to my Lady : I dogged her Mess●…nger from her ●…odging to you , and immediately gave notice to my Lady ; and in all hast we came — 



Sir Nic.   Indeed I have been acquainted with this Lady , being a Vir●…uosa , upon Philosophical matters , but never saw her here , till we now came for this discovery . She informed me , she saw you two come hither , and my Wife being gone out before me , and alone , gave me more suspicion . 



Fliat .  I having seen you privately talking with my Lady in the Mall , susp●…cted you ; and to revenge my s●…lf on her and you , I sen●… for him , and we have dogged you hither . 



Sir Nic.   But why was she hidden to avoid my sight , if she came for a discovery ? 



Haz.   She thought to have discovered more by being unseen , and overhearing your discourse . 



L. Gim.   Now see , injurious man , how you have wronged me . 



Sir Nic.   ( ●…o himself ) Though I hope I have deceived her with a lie , yet what she says looks like truth . 

( To her ) It must be so . Come , no more ; I will believe you t●…ue , and so am I  



Flirt .  Though this shame passes upon him , I know too well you are guilty , good Mr. Hazard , and I hate you for 't . 



Haz.   Prithee hold thy peace , I am kept by her , as I know ou are by him — I am kept , I — 



Sir Nic.   Heaven knows I am true . 



L. Gim.   And Heaven can witness for my innocence . 



Haz.   I am glad that all things are thus happily cleared . 



Sir Nic.   But what was it frighted you within , my Dear ? 



L. Gim.   There is some body in the Wood-hole . 



Haz.   Now all 's over , I 'll see who it is . Come out here . what 's here ? a Woman — 

[ Pulls out Fig.  

L. Gim.   A shame on her ; how sneakingly she looks ? This is some Strumpet I warrant you . Oh! Foh ! how I hate such dattle ! Heaven grant she did not hear me and Hazard . 



Haz.   here 's a Man too . Come out of your hole . Mr. Snarl is it you ? 

[ Pulls him out by the heels . 

Sir Nic.   Is this the fruit of your virtue , and declaiming against the vice of the Age ? 



L. Gim.   Heaven ! if he overheard me , I am ruined eternally . I 'll try him . We met all here upon a mistake , which is now happily rectified . But 't is too apparent , Uncle , you came for wickedness and abomination . 



Fig.   I scorn your words , Madam , I am civil and virtuous . 



Snarl .  Aye in sadness are we ; our intentions were honourable . I meet this Lady upon a virtuous account , by the Mass. I love and honour her in a civil way , and scorn your filthy lascivious Beasts of this Age.  



Sir Nic.   Remember , Sir , I have you on the hip ; no more will I endure your frumps and taunts about my Philosophy , and the noble exercise of my parts . 



Snarl .  Nephew , let me tell you , you are an Ass in sadness , and Iwill make you know this Lady is virtuous , yes , as virtuous as your Ladyship ; and I will defend her honour with my Sword by the Mass ; and he that dares be so presumptuous to contradict it , let him draw . 

[ he draws . 

Sir Nic.   Gad forgive me , what means he ? 



Haz.   no , none are so much concerned at it — But what are these Rods which I drew out with you ? what do they mean ? 



Snarl .  OH Devil — I shall be betrayed . Ha! Rods ! what a pox know I what they are ? I believe the Mistress of the House is a School-mistris . 



Haz.   Yes , she keeps a very virtuous School , for the disciplining of hopeful towardly old Gentlemen . 



●…ig .  Now my honour 's clear . Let 's go , Sir. Besides , h●…res that base Creature Flirt ; I cannot abide the sight of her , since she discommended thee , my Dear . 



Snarl .  Come , Madam — In sadness this is very fine . Two civil persons cannot meet privately in an affectionate way , but such as you must censure them . But I will make you know this Lady is honourable ; I will , in sadness , and so fare you well . 



[ Ex. Snarl and Fig.  Sir Ni●… .  Come , my Dear , now let 's go home : do not grieve at my unhappy jealousy , since my belief of thy dear Truth is more confirmed by it — Come , my Dear — 

[ Exeunt . 

Enter Longvil , Bruce , Miranda , and Clarinda . Mir.   Come , to divert this insipid talk of Love , a ●…heme so threadbare , no man can speak new sense upon it : My Maid shall sing you a new Song she learned the other day . 



Clar.   You must expect much Wit in it : for Poets are grown such good Husbands , they 'll lay out none upon a Song . 



Mir.   All we must look for , is smooth Verse , and a good Tune . 



Clar.   And how a good Tune , and tinkling Rhyme atones for nonsense , the Songsters and Heroics of the time may sufficiently convince you . 



Mir.   They make nonsense go down as glib without t●…sting , as a seditious Lie is swallowed in a City Coffee house , or Commonwealth Club , without examination . 



Clar.   But now let 's hear it — 



SONG . 

How wretched is the Slave ●…o Love , 
Who can no real pleasures prove ; 
For still th●…y're mixed wi●…h pain●… : 
When not obtained , restless is the desire . 
Enjoyment puts out all the fire , 
And shows the Love was vain . 
I●… wanders to another soon , 
Wanes and En●…reases like the Mo●…n , 
And like her never rest●… : 
〈◊〉 Tides of Pleasure now , and then of Tear●… ; 
Makes Ebbs and Flow●… of Joys and Cares . 
〈◊〉 ●…overss wau●…ring breasts . 
●…ut 〈◊〉 of Love I will be free , 
And tri●…mph in the liberty : 
I wi●…hout him enjoy . 
〈◊〉 ▪ worst of Prisons I 'll my Body bind , 
Rather than Ch●…in my free-bor●… mind . 
For such a foolish Toy . 
Longu.   't is ve●…y well , Madam . 



Bruce .  But to us ●…here is no Music like Love , or Harmony like the consent of Lover's hearts . 



Mir.   But as Music is improved by practice , Love decay●… by it , and therefore I scarce da●…e talk on'●… . 



Clar.   Let what harmony soever be between Lovers at first , in a short time it ●…urns to scurvy jangling ; and therefore can you blame u●… if we divert so dangerous a thing any way — 



Longu.   I confess it may come to discord , but 't is ●…s i●… Music ▪ if it be made good , it makes the following concord ●…etter . 



Bruce .  If they pla●… upon one another , till they are out of Tune , they must needs jangle . 



Longu.   In that case they must lay by , and tune again , and then ●…rike up afresh . 



Mir.   That Simile , will never hold ; for when Love grows once out of Tune , they may scew and keep a coil ▪ but 't will ●…ever stand in Tune ●…gain . 



Clrr.   't is most certain : when Love comes once ●…o bend , it breaks presently . 



Bruce .  But perhaps it may be set again like a broken Limb , and be the stronge●… for 't . 



Mir.   no : when Love breaks , 't is into so many splinter●… , 't is never to be set again . 



Enter Maid to Miranda . Maid .  shift for yourselves , Sir Nichol●… a●…d my 〈◊〉 ●…re both ●…eturned home again . 



Clar.   OH mischievo●… ill for●…ne . 



Mir.   U●…lucky accident . 



Clar.   I mu●…t look af●…er Sir Formal . 

[ Ex●…nt Ladi●… . 

Longu.   Their ca●…riage , si●…ce their cross appoin●…ment in the Garden , has too evidently decl●…red their i●…tentionss . We have mistaken , I see , if we de●…gn to 〈◊〉 , we must change Mistr●…eses . 



Bruce .  't is too evident , we have pl●…ced our Love's wrong , They are handsome , rich , and honest , three qualities that seldom meet in Women . 



Longu.   't is true , and since ' ●…will be necessary , after all our Rambles , to fix our unsettled lives , to be grave , formal , very wise , ●…nd serve our Country , and propagate our species ; Let us think on 't here . 



Bruce .  Let us walk and consult about this weighty affair . 



Exeunt Bruce and Longu.  Enter Sir Nicholas , Lady Gimcrack , Clarinda , Miranda . Sir Nich.   A Woman with a Letter , a Tirewoman too ! are they all Bawds ? Their very Art of washing and adorning Women i●… implicit Bawding , but this is downright explicit Bawdry . 



Mir.   Good Sir , let her be made an Example to all vile Women . 



Clar.   We have secured her in the Vault here . 



Sir Nic●…   You have done well , she shall be brought to condign punishment . 



Mir.   But we can tell you yet a stranger thing ; Sir Formal is privately shut up with this lewd Woman , and has been this hour . 



Clar.   't is very true ; what his intentions are , I know not , but ▪ 't is a very scandalous thing . 



Sir Nic.   OH Monstrum horrendum ! Is my Friend , that seeming virtuous man , fallen into the snare ? 



L. Gim.   OH Virtue , whither art thou fled ? my House is dishono●…red , abused ! I am ready to faint when I hear of lewdness . My Dear , do not endure it ; I shall never endure my House again ; let it with all speed , and let 's remove . 



Sir Nic.   Prithee , Dear ; be pacified . 



L. Gim.   O I cannot be pacified : my b●…ood rises when I hear of lewd whoring Fellows ; I would have 'em all hanged . 



Mir.   Excellent Hypocrite ! 



Sir Nic.   Well , Heaven be praised , I am the happiest Man in a Wife . I will rebuke him : but for the Baw●… , I 'll have a Warrant from the next Justice ; I will have her Whipped and Carted . Come , bring 'em out here . 

[ Serva●…ts bri●…g in Sir F●…rmal and Sir Sam●…el ▪ Truly Sir Formal , I am much ashamed , to find a 〈◊〉 in such a posture with a lewd woman . 



Sir Form.   Why , Sir , upon my sincerity . 



L. Gim.   Out upon you , have you the face to speak in your own defence , or in defence of this odious Vice ? Out on 't ! you think to bring all off with your Eloquence ; but I 'll not hear it : You have defil●…d my house , and committed lewdness within the walls . 



Sir Form.   Why , Ladies , you know — 



Mir.   What , you are angry we have discovered you . 



Cl●…r .  Would you have had us keep your pernicious counsel ? had that been becoming our virtue ? 



Sir Form.   Why , Sir Nicholas , I profess — 



L. Gim.   I cannot suffer it . ' ●…is fit such Hypocrites should be punished . Is this your Virtue ? your sereneness of mind ? and are all your Flowers of Rhetoric come to this ? 



Sir Nic.   I know not what to say in your excuse , to retire with such a lewd Creature . I did not think you could have fallen into so shameful a scandal . I am sorry , fince 't will be a reproach to all Virtuoso's . 



Sir Form.   By my Integrity . 



L. Gim.   You are a man of integrity , to meet privately with a filthy Creature , a Bawd ! an ugly Bawd too ! 



Sir Sam.   I scorn your words ; neither a Bawd , nor ugly , neither by your leave — Ugly , and Bawd , quoth she ? 



Sir Form.   Can I not be heard ? shall Oratory have no place ? 



L. Gim.   You think to bewitch us with your Oratory , but 't is too apparent ; you have dishonoured my house . 



Sir Form.   Here are some Phae●…omena's' of scandal , but I will dissolve all in a punctum of time . 



Both speak together . L. Gim.   I will never endure you , you shall solve none of your Phaenomena's hear more . 



Sir Form.   't is true , I confess I was found here ( privately with this Woman , but no lesle true — 



Sir Nic.   Pray let me hea●… him speak — 



Sir Form.   My Oratory was never sl●…ghted before ; when did I open my mouth in vain before ? I confess — 



Mir.   Why look you , Sir , he confesses it ; what would you have ? 



Clar.   Will you not believe us , he has been privately with her this hour ? 



Sir Nic.   I say , Peace ; I will hear him . 



Sir Form.   I confess to you all — 



Mir.   d' ye see ●…gain ? ●…e confesses to us all — 



Enter Snarl Sir Form.   Now my shame comes upon me . 



Snar●… .  What! is my florid Fool catched with a Whore ? an ugly Whore ? does your noble Soul operate clearly without the clog of your sore did human Body now ? you are a fine formal Hypocrite , in sadness ; by the Mass it 's a fine world we live in . 



Sir Nic.   I am confident my Friend is innocent . 



Sir Sam.   He innocent ? hang him , he would have ravished ●…e , if I had not been stronger than he , and beaten him sound : my Honour h●…d suffered upon that business — 



Sir Form.   OH Tempo●…a ! OH Mores ! but I doubt not but I shall shine clearer after this Eclipse ; I will bear these wrongs with a ●…erene temper of mind . 



Sn●…rl .  hang you ! never trust your Orator , in sadness they will all lie like Dogs : by the Mass I would go fifty miles to see an Orator hanged . Orators are Rogues , the very grievances of the Nation , always putting in an Oar , and prating and disturbing the business of the Nation , with their foolish Tropes , and care not which way matters go so they may show their parts . 



Sir Nic.   I do believe you , Sir Formal . You young Sluts ; will you never leave ? 



●…ir .  Will you not take the Woman's word ? 



Sir Nic.   What a Bawd's word ! she suffer in her honour one that brought a Letter to you — 



Sir Sam.   A Bawd ! I scorn your words ; I brought a Letter from a Gentleman that makes honourable Love , and would marry her . 



Snarl .  A Matchmaker ! that 's worst of all . 



Sir Nic.   Your Marriage ▪ Bawd , your Canonical-bawd is worst of all ; they betray people for their lives-time . Here , carry her , and lock her up in the green-room ; I 'll maul your Bawdship . 



Sir Sam.   O Heaven ! I shall be whipped , nay , which is ten times worse , I shall disappoint the Town , and have no Masquerade to ●…ight . But I 'll bail myself with Money , if it be possible — 



●…ir .  Courage ! my Sist●…●…ought this upon you but I 'll re●…eem all . 



Sir Sam.   Nay , if I succeed in my love , I care not if I be beaten , kicked , and whipped , as if Heaven and Earth would come together . 



L. Gim.   Come , I 'll see her locked up safe myself ; filthy Creature ! 



[ Exit L. Gim.  Clar.   Not a word more of 'is business . I could not forbear the trick ; but you will find me more favourabl●… ▪ 



Sir Form.   I shall be content to suffer any thing for your swee●… sake . — 

[ Exit Clar. and Mir.  

Enter Longvil and Bruce . Snarl .  If you had come sooner , you might ha'taken this Orator , this flashy Fellow , with a Whore , in sadness , a foul deformed S●…rumpet — 



Sir Form.   Upon my ho●…our , Gentlemen , I am wronged ; but he was taken with a Lady , and Rods too , in German-stree●… , abou●… an hour since . 



Longu.   What , this virtuous Gentleman of the last Age ? 



Bruce .  One that so justly repro●…ches the Vices of this ? I●… cannot be . 



Snarl .  O Dog ! Rogue ! Nephew , I 'll be revenged . no , it cannot be , it is not . The Orator's a Son of a Whore , and my Nephew a foolish Rascally Philosopher , one good for nothing but an empty noise of florid words , without sense , in ●…adness . And the other good for nothing but useless Experiments upon Flies ▪ Maggots , Eels in Vinegar , and the Blue upon Plumbs , which he finds to be living Creatures : but all the world will find him an Ass , and so I leave him and all of ye , with a pox t'ye . But in sadness , Orator , I will beaten thee migh●…ily . I with a Whore ? I scorn your words by the Mass.  



Exit Snarl . Sir Nic.   I know he 's in a rage , but 't is true ; Sir Formal , we 'll no more endure his taunt●… . But now he talks of Eels , I 'll show you million in a Saucer of Vinegar ; they resemble other Eels , save in their motion , which in others is sideways , but in them upwards and downward , thus , and very slow . 



Longu.   We have heard of these , Sir , often . 



Sir Nic.   Another difference is , these have sharp stings in their ●…ailss . By the way , the sharpest Vinegar is most full of ' 'em . 



Bruce .  then certainly the sharpness , or biting of Vinegar , pro●…eeds from those stings , striking upon the Tongue . 



Sir Nic.   I see you are a most admirable ob●…erver : it must needs be so . So , this is a rare Phaenomenon solved by the by . 

( aside . ) I have often conclud●…d that before — The whole Air is full of living Creatures , a thousand times lesle visible than those living Creature●… , mistaken for Motes in the Sun ; I know most of 'em d●…stinctly by my Glasses . 



Sir Form.   ●…lk of use . These are the Mysteries of Nature's Closet . 



Bruce .  This foolish Virtuoso does not consider , that one Bricklayer is worth forty Philosophers . 



Sir Nic.   then for the Blue upon Plumbs , it is nothing but many living Creatures . I have observed upon a Wall-plum ( with my most exquisite Glass●…ss , which cost me several thousands of pounds ) at first beginning to turn blue , it comes first to Fluidi●…y , then to Orbiculation , than Fixation , so to Angulization , th●…n Christallization , from thence to G●…rmination or Ebullition , than Vegetation , than Plantan●…nimation , perfect Animation , Sensation , Local Motion , and the like — 



Enter Servant to Sir Nicholas . Seru.   Sir , there are a great number of sick men waiting in the Hall for your Worship , and desire to be dispatched . 



[ Exit . Sir Nic.   Now , Gentlemen you shall see my method of practice . Sir Formal , will ●…ou go and rank ' 'em ? 



Sir Form   I obey in my wont Office. G●…ntlemens , I humbly ki●…s your hands . 

[ Exit Sir Formal . 

Sir Nic.   He ranks the 〈◊〉 people in their ●…everal Classes , Forms , or Orders of Di●…easeses . To save trouble , you shall s●…e all . 



Seru●…nt returns . Serve   Sir , the Constable is come with a Warrant to carry the Bawd away . 



S●…r Nic.   Come , we will deliver the Bawd into their Clu●…cheses , ●…nd w●…en I have admi●…istred to my sick , we 'll take the air ▪ By ●…he way , Gentlemen , what Country air do you like best ? 



Bru●…c .  ●…hy we cannot travel far for 't this evening . 



Sir Nic.   Tr●…vel ! I thought I should have you . Why I never travel , I take it in a close chamber . 



Longu.   Why you can take but one kind of nasty smoky air in a Chamber . 



Sir Nic.   Th●…re's' your Mistake . Choose your Air , you shall have it in my Chamber ; N●…wmarket , Banstead-down , Wil●…shire , Bury-air , Norwich-air ; what you william  



Bruce .  Would a man think it possible for a Virtuoso to arrive at this extravagance ? 



Longu.   Yes , I assure you ; it is beyond the wit of man to invent such extravagant things for them , as their folly finds out for themselves . Is it possible to take all these several Country Airs in your Chamber ? 



Sir Nic.   I knew you were to seek . I employ men all over England , Factors for Air , who bottle up Air , and weigh it in all places , sealing the Bottles Hermetically : they send me Loads from all places . That Vault is full of Country-air . 



Bruce .  To weigh Air , and send it to you ! 



Sir Nic.   OH yes , I have sent one to weigh Air at the Picque of T●…nerifss , that 's the lightest Air. I shall have a considerable Cargo of that Air. She●…rness and the Isle of Dog's Air is the heaviest . Now if I have a mind to take Country Air , I send for , may be , forty Gallons of Bury Air , shut all my windows and doors close , and let it fly in my Chamber . 



Bruce .  This is a most admirable invention . 



Longu.   But to what purpose do you weigh Air ? 



Sir Nic.   That I shall tell you as we are taking it . Now let 's see this Bawd disposed of : every thing in its order . 

[ Exeunt . 

Sir Samuel in the Chamber solus . Sir Sam.   How long shall I expect my fate ? Well! there never was such a Ma●…tyr in Love , to be kicked , be●…en , pumped ; tossed in a blanke●… about business , and now in danger of being whipped with a slap-dash . But she love's me ! come , 'tis well 't is no worse ! but to miss my Masquerade , that 's the sum of all : but I 'll bribe my Justice and escape . 't is a Trade ; som●… of the Justices are liker Malefactors than Magistrates : but 't will cost me a plaguy deal , for this damned Vertuo●…o ▪ will prosecu●…e furiously . Ha! what 's h●…re , a Rope ? I am delivered as Rabbi Busie was by Miracle . I 'll slide down from th●… window into the garden ▪ The back-door's open : so I save my money ipso facto , and go to my Ball ; and , Whip stitch , your 〈◊〉 in my Breech , Sir Nicholas . I 'll leave my C●…oathss behind me . Though I am Bawd above , I am Sir Samuel underneath . So Tyre-woman , lie thou there , and away Knight . 't is well 't is no worse — 

Ex Sir Sam.  

Enter Sir Nicholas , Longu. Bruce , L. G. Clar. Mir. Servants , Constable's , Officer's . Sir Nic.   Come ! where is this Bawd ? now we shall make her an example . Here ! where are you ? Ha! here 's no body . 



L. G.   I am sure I saw her locked in . 



Seru.   The door was locked when we came in : here are her Clotheses to●… . 



Longu.   The Rogue has stripped himself , and has escaped ●…aked . 



L. G.   OH Heaven ! this must be the Devil : the House is haunted . 



Enter Sir Formal . Sir For●… .  I have set all the sick men in order , and they wait for your prescription . 



Mir.   OH Sir Formal , your Mistress is flown , and has left her case behind her ▪ 



L. G.   The doors are fast , and she is flown out of the Chimney : have a care , Sir Formal , if you were naught with her , you will be torn in pieces . 



Sir Form.   Not I upon my sincerity . 



Sir Nic.   It was undoubtedly a Spirit . I could have told you that before , but I was afraid I should fright you all . 



Bruce .  How , Sir ! was it a Spirit say you ? 



Sir Nic.   You must know , Sir , I am much skilled in Rosacrucian Lea●…ning . I am one of the Vere ad●…pti , as simple as I stand here . I discovered i●… by my sight , having familiar Conversation with Spirits . 



Clar.   OH the subtlety of this Vertuoso . This notable Spirit Sir Sa●…el makes a ball to night ; we will steal out one way or other . 



Bruce .  you 'll remember the Masquerade Ladies . 



Mir.   Yes , yes ! we will se●… the Spirit . 



L. G.   I see your cross Love , and will plague ye , ye young Sluts , for it . 



Sir Nic.   You converse with a great many people which you take to be men and women ▪ but we Rosa-crucians know 'em to be spirits . Now let us go to my sick people , and administer . 

[ Exeunt . 

SCENE , is the Court-yard full o●… several Lame and Sick people . 

Enter Sir Nicholas , Sir Formal , Longvil , and Bruce . Sick peo .  Heaven bless your Worship . 



Sir Nic.   Come , Gentlemen , you must know I have studied all manner of C●…seses , and have Bills ready written for all Diseases ; that 's my way , I give 'em advice for nothing . 



Sir Form.   Not more resorted to th●… Temple of Aesculapius ; I am sure not so many found relief , as from my Noble Friend : You have reason , good languishing people , to be Trumpeters to his Illustrious Fame , whose indefatigable care , for the good of feeble and distressed Mankind , with his transcendent skill , each day cures even incurable diseases . 



Long.   Your Orators are very subject to that Figure in Speech , called a Bull.  



Sir. Nic.   I still administered to the incurable in Italy , and never failed of success . Here are my Bills . Where is the Roll ? call it over . 



Sir Form.   Gout . 



2 Gout .  Here — 

[ halting . 

Sir Nic.   there 's a Bill for you two , take it betwixt you . 



Sir Form.   Stone . 



2 Stone .  Here , Sir.  



Sir Nic.   there 's one for you two . 



Sir Form.   Scurvy . 



4 Scurv .  Here , Sir.  



Sir Nic.   there 's a Bill for you four . 



Seru.   Go , pass by as you are served . 



Sir Form.   Consumption . 



2 Consume .  Here.  



Sir Nic.   Take your Bill . 



Sir Form.   Dropsy . 



2 Drops .  Here , Sir.  



Sir Nic.   there 's for you two . 



Sir Form.   There is a Madman I have set by for transfusion of blood . 



Sir Nic.   that 's well . The truth on 't is , we shall never get any but Madmen , for that Operation . But proceed . 



Sir Form.   These are the last , but not the least . 

Pox.  



Ent●…r a great number of Men and Women . All.   Here , here , here — 



Sir. Nich.   There are three or four Bills for you , you are so many . 



All.   Heaven bless your Worship — 

[ Ex●…unt omnes . 

ACT. v.  

Enter Sir Formal and Clarin●…a . Sir. Form.   How long shall I languish in expectation of your noble favour , for the enjoyment of whic h , my desires are as great , as my deserts are little ? 



Clar.   Truly , Sir Formal , I am so sensible of your service , and so troubled with my confinement under my Uncle , that at length I have determined by you , to free myself from him . 



Sir Form.   Hold , Madam , I am too suddenly blessed , I am all Rapture , all Ecstasy , my Soul , methinks , is fled from its corporeal clog , and I am all unbodied , Divinest Lady . Let me kneel and adore that hand , that snowy hand , to which the Snow itself is tanned and Sunburnt . 



Clar.   Not too mnch of this : but in short , conduct my Sisters and me out of these doors to the Masquerade ; for we canno ' get out without your authority with the Porter , and after you have returned to my Uncle sometime ; procure the habit of Scaramoncha , that I may know you , and come to us , and you shall absolutely dispose of me . 



Sir Form.   Madam , I 'll fly ; nay , outfly Sir Ni●…holas himself , to do ●…ou service , or any Vertuoso in England ▪ But how shall I know you ? you 'll be disguised . 



Clar ▪   ●… ll find you out ; besides , you know this Ri●…g and Bracelet . We must have our Maids with us , for we ll no●… return . Let 's find my sister , and about it instantly . 



Sir Form.   I am all obedience . I should not envy now an Universal Mona●…ch — I hear my Lady's vo●…ce — 

[ Ex●…unt . 

Ent●… ▪ Sir Nicholas , Longvil , a●…d Servant to Sir Nicholas . Seru.   Mr. Bruce is coming to wait on you . 



Enter Bruce . Sir. Nic.   Sir , your Servant . Now open the Bottles , and l●…t the Air fly , Gentlemen , be ready to snuff it up . OH this Bur●…air is delicate , 't is delicious ; OH very refreshing . 



Bruce .  OH admirable — who would go to Bury to take it ? 



Sir Ni●… .  Not I , 't is much the better here ; it takes so much the fresher for being bottled , as other Liquors do . For let me tell you , Gent●…emen , Air is but a thinner sort of Liquor , and drinks much the better for being bottled . 



Longu.   Most certainly the world is very foolish , not to snuff up bottled Air , as they drink bottled Drink . 



Bruce .  The foolish World is never to be mended . For all this , your Glass-coach will to Hyde-park for Air. The Suburb-fools trudge to Lambs-conduit or Tottenham ; ●…our sprucer sort of Citizens gallop to Epsom ; your Mechanic gross Fellows , showing much conjugal affection , strut before their Wives , each with a Child in his Arms , to Islington , or Hogsdon . 



Sir Nic.   Aye poor d●…ll Fools ! 



Longu.   But to what end do you weigh this Air , Sir ? 



Sir Nic.   To what end should I ? to know what it weighs . OH knowledge is a fine thing ; why I can tell to a Grain what a gallon of any Air in England weighs . 



Bruce .  Is that all the use you make of these Pneumatick Engines ? 



Sir Nic.   no , I eclipse the light of rotten Wood , stinking Whiting and Thornback , and putrid Flesh when it becomes lucid . 



Longu.   Will stinking Flesh give light like rotten Wood ? 



Sir Nic.   OH yes ; there was a lucid Surloin of Beef in the Strand , foolish people thought it burned , when it only became lucid and crystalline by the coagulation of the aqueous juice of the Beef , by the corruption that invaded it . 't is frequent . I myself have read a Geneva Bible by a Leg of Pork . 



Bruce .  How , a Gen●…va Bible by a Leg of Pork ? 



Sir Nic.   OH Aye , 't is the finest Light in the World : but for all that , I could eclipse the Leg of Pork in my Receiver , by pumping out the Air ; but immediately upon the appulse of the Air let in again , it becomes lucid as before . 



Long.   Is it so curious a Light ? 



Si●… Nic.   OH admirable ! I am now studying of Glow-worm's , a fine Study ; it is a curious Animal : I think I shall preserve 'em light all the year , and then I 'll never use any other light in my Study but Glow-worm's and Concave-glasses . 



Bruce .  What do you with the Speaking-trumpet ? 



Sir Ni●… .  OH that Stentrophonical Tube , though not invented by me , yet is improved beyond all men's expectation●… . 



Long.   They can hear distinctly a League at Sea by them alrea●…y . 



Sir Nic.   Pi●… ! ●…hat'ss noth●…ng ; I have made one , you may hear e●…ght mile about , and I shall improve it very much more : for 〈◊〉 no stop in Art But of all La●…guageses , none is heard so far as Greek ; your joni●…k Dialect of O●…o does so roll in the found . I make Sir Formal speak Gr●…ek of●…en in it . 



Br●…ce .  This Sir Formal●…as ●…as a great many pretty Employments under him . 



Sir Nic.   I doubt not but in three months to improve it so , that from the chief Mountain , H●…ll , or Eminence in a County , a man may be heard round the County . 



Long.   This will be above all wonder . 



Sir Nic.   I have thought of this to do the King service ; for when I have perfected it , there needs but one Par●…on to Preach to a whole County ; the King may then take all the Church-lands into his own hands , and serve all England with his C●…aplainss in Ordinary . 



Longu.   This is a most admirable project . But what will become of the rest of the Parsons ? 



Sir Nic.   It is no matter , let 'em learn to make Woollen Cloth , and advance the Manufacture of the Nation ; or learn to make Nets , and improve the Fishing-trade ; it is a fine sedentary life for those idle Fel●…owss in black . 



Bruce   These illiterate Virtuoso's hate all that have relation to Learning . 



Longu.   You cannot blame ' 'em . But there being no stop in Art , you may advance this Trumpe●… so far , ●…ou may make 'em talk from one Nation to another . 



Sir Nic   So I may in time . 



Bruce .  By this Princes m●…y converse , treat , congratu●…ate , and co●…dole , without the great charge and trouble of Ambassadors . 



Sir Nic.   I hope to eff●…ct it ▪ But I wonder Sir Form●…l is not returned ; I sent hi●… to fix my Tellescopes for surveying the Moon . 



Long.   Do you believe the Moon is an Ear●…h , as you told us ? 



Sir Nic.   Believe it ! I know it ; I shall shortly publish a Book of Geography for it . Why , 't is as big as our Earth ; I can see all the Mountainous parts ▪ and Valleys and Seas , and Lakes in it ; nay , the larger sort of Animals , as Elephants and Camels ; but public Buildings and Ships very easil●… . I ●…ave seen several Battles fought there . They have great Guns , and have the use of 〈◊〉 . At Land they fight with Elephants and Castles . I h●…ve seen 'em — 



Bruce .  no Phan●…tick that has lost his Wits in Revelation , is so mad as this Fool.  



Longu.   You are mistaken , this is but a faint Copy to some Originals among the Tribe . 



Sir N●…c .  Th●…re's' now a great Monarch , who has Armies in several Countries in the Moon , which we find out , because th●… Colours which we see are a●…l alike . There are a great many S●…ateses , which we take to be Confederates against him . He is a very ambitious Prince ▪ and aims at Universal Monarchy ; but the rest of the Moon will be too hard for him . 



Enter Sir Formal . Sir Form.   I have fixed the Tubes in the Garden ; and , if we be not deceived , the great Monarch is making an Attaque upon a Town , and they are in very hard Service . 



Sir Nic.   't is probable — W●…'ll haste to see it . But ●…irst do me the favour to speak two or three Greek Verses in this Trumpet . 



Sir Form.   With all my heart . 



[ Sir Formal sp●…aks some ●…ersess out of Homer . Enter Sir Nicholas' S●…rvant . S●…rv .  Sir , Sir ! stand upon your Guard ; the House is beset by a great Rabble of People , who threaten to pull yo●… out of it , and tear you in pieces . 



Sir Nic.   OH Heaven ! what is the matter ? 



Seru.   Sir , they are Ribbon-weavers ; who have been informed , that you are he that invented the Engine-loom , which has provoked 'em to rise up in Arms , and they are resolved to be revenged for 't : L●…sten , Sir , you may hear ' 'em . 



Sir. Nic.   OH what will become of me ! Gentlemen , Gentlemen , for Heavens' sake do something for me ; I protest and vow they wrong me , I never invented any thing of use in my life , as gad shall mend me not I  



Bruce .  We shall be beaten for being in such damned company , and faith we shall deserve it . 

[ A noise without . 

Sir Nic.   Mercy on me ! how loud they are ! 

OH Gentlemen , What is to be done ? 



Longu.   Get your Guns and Pistols charged . The Rabble , like wild Beasts , are frighted at Fire-arms . 



Sir Nic.   Go , get 'em charged quickly . 



Sir Form.   Now is the time for me to show my parts . I have another Weapon . Let me alone with them . 



Sir Nic.   What Weapon , Sir Formal ? 



Sir Form.   Eloquence : I warrant ye . Let me alone . I 'll go out among ' 'em . 



Sir Nic.   OH 't will never do ; they are very outrageous Rogues . What will become of us ? 



Sir Form.   You know not the charms of Oratory . 

'T was my fortune to be near the Temple ▪ stairs , when the Watermen , who had drunk too deep of a Liquor , somewhat stronger than that which is the Scene of their Vocation , were stirred up into so popular a heat and fervour , that its fury threatened the adjacent Society — The Watermens were themselves ( as I may so say ) blown into a Tempest , when straight I ventured in among the intemperate Crowd , and by the force of Rhetoric , dispelled the barbarity of their overboyling Ale , and too much fermented Choler , and gently recomposed their minds into a sedate and quiet temper : and I doubt not but to have the same effect upon these . 



Sir Nich.   Quickly then , dispatch . Tell 'em I am innocent , I never invented any thing in my life . Go-go , quickly . 

[ Exeunt . 

The SCENE the Street , a great Rabble of People together , and Snarl , etc.  

Snarl .  What ever they say , this Sir Nicholas , and one Sir Formal thats with him , invented the Engine-loom , to the confusion of Ribbon-weavers . I shall be sufficiently revenged on the Rogues now . 

[ aside . 

1.  Weav .  OH Villains ! we 'll maul ' 'em . Are these the tricks of a Vertoso ? have they studied these fourteen years for this ? 



Snarl .  Yes , for much lesle . The truth is , 't is a burning sham●… that poor men shou●…d be ruined by such Fellows , in sadness 't is — 



2.  Weav .  I never thought these Vertoso's would do any thing but mischief , for my part . 



3.  Weav .  Where are the Rogues ? Come out of your Den.  



All.   Come ou●… ! where are the Vertoso's here ? 



1.  Weav .  Break open the house . Open the do , , or we 'll demolish — 



Porter within .  What would you have ? stand off ? 



1.  Weav .  What would you have , you S●…n of a Whore ; the Engine , and the Rogues that invented it . 



Porter within .  here 's no Engine , no Rogues , nor Inventors neither — 



Enter Sir Formal . Sir Form.   Now will I try my Eloquence . Come , Gentlemen , What is it you would have ? What is the fountain of your discontents ? now for the power of Oratory ! Come , come , come — 



1.  Weav .  here 's one of the Rascals , take him amongst you . 



Sir Form.   Why , Gentlemen . 



2.  Weav .  Tear him in pieces . 



Sir Form.   I say , Gentlemen — 



3.  Weav .  Cut off his ears . 



1.  Weav .  Take him and hang him upon the next Sign ▪ 



Sir F●…rm .  I beseech you . 



All.   Aye , hang him up quickly . 



Sir Form.   Hold ! hold ! shall I not speak ? 



2.  W●…av .  Yes , if you can after you are hanged . 



Sir Form.   Why , Gentlemen , I am of your side . If you commit this rash outrage , you will be sound punished upon a Quare ●…remuerunt G●…ntes — 



So●…e .  Let him speak . 



Others .  no , he shall not speak ; hang him — 



1.  Weav .  Hold , Neig●…bourss and Friends , let 's hear him ; he●… may perhaps discover something of this business . 



All.   Let him speak — 



Sir Form.   By what occasion or accident this unheard of Torrent of tempestuous-rage was thus in●…lamed , ●… very much ignore . But let it ●…ot be said that Englishmen , good commonwealth's men , and sober discreet Ribbon-weavers , should be thus hurried by the rapid force of the too dangerous Whirlwind , or Hurricane of passion . 



1. W●…av  He speaks notably . 



2.  Weav .  he 's a well-spoken man truly — 



Sir Form.   Of p●…ssion , I s●…y , which with its sudden and , alas ! too violent circumgyrations , does too often shipwreck those that are agitated by it , while it turns them into such giddy confusion , that they can no longer trim the Sails of Reason , or steer by the Compass of Judgement . 



1.  ●…veav .  His tongue 's well hung , but I know not what he means by all this stuff . 



Sir Form.   I say , Gentlemen . 



2.  Weav .  Pox on you , ●…ou shall say no more . what 's this to the invention of the Loom ? 



3.  Weav .  This is one of the Inventors , hang him . where 's tother ? break open the house 



Enter Sir Nichola●… , Bruce , and Longvil above . Sir Form.   Do but hear me ? 



1.  Weav .  no , Rascal , we will not hear you . 



[ Th●…y beaten him , kick him , and fling Oranges at him . Sir Form.   All this I can bear , if you will but hear me , Gentlemen — I am a person — 



2.  Weav .  A person , a Rogue , a Villain ! a damned Vertoso ! A perso●… ! 



Sir Form.   I say , Gentlemen , I am a person — 



1.  Weav .  Pox on you — we 'll use you like a Dog — Sir — 



Sir Form.   Quousque tandem efsrenata jactabit audacia . 

This is a barbarity which Scythians would blush at . 



1.  Weav .  Scythians ! What a pox does he call us names ? take him , and hang him up . 



Sir Nic.   I see Sir Formal's Oratory cannot prevail ; What shall I do ? 



●… . Weav .  OH there he is . Come down , or we 'll fetch you down , and your Engine too . 



Longu.   Nay , then 't is time to sally out — 



Bruce .  Give us Pistols , quickly — 



Sir Nic.   Hear me , Gentlemen , I never invented an Engine in my life ; as gad shall sa ' me you do me wrong . I never invent●…d so much as an Engine to pair Cream ▪ cheese with . We Vertuoso's 〈◊〉 find out any thing of use , 't is not our way . 



1.  Weav .  hang your way . You are a damned lying Vertoso . Break open the door quickly — 



Enter Longvil and Bruce below with Pistols , Servants . Bruce .  Where are these Dogs ? 



[ Discharge their Pistols , all run out . Sir Form.   Murder ! murder ! 

[ Falls down . 

Enter Sir Nicholas creeping out with a Blunderbus . Sir Nic.   Where are these Rogues ? 



Long.   Sirrah , go and call the Guard , lest they should rally again . 



Bruc●… .  Sir Formal is shot , and all the Rabble is escaped u●…hurt . 



Sir Nic.   OH my Friend ! Sir Formal ! Sir Formal ! 



Sir Formal .  I am alive , Sir Nicholas , but surely I ●…m shot . 



Sir Nic.   Let 's search — Here is no hole in your clotheses . 



Sir Form.   Hum — I find no blood . Truly I did opine that I was shot — but I am exceedingly beaten and bruised , Though there be no discretion , I have suffered much confusion . 



Sir Nic.   I see your Oratory could not prevail . 



Sir Form.   no , no , these Barbarians understand not Eloquence . I must go in , and discover this disorder — 

[ Exit Sir Form.  

Bruce .  Let 's take this opportunity to get rid of the Vertuoso , and go to the Masquerade . 



Footm.   Sir , the Guard was coming to suppress the tumult ere I went ; they seized some of the Mutineers , and dispersed the rest . 



Long.   Now we are safe , Sir. We humbly take our leaves till to morrow — 

[ Exit ▪ Longvil and Bruce . 

Sir Nic.   Gentlemen , your humble Servant ; 

Where are my Wife and Nieces ? 



Porter .  They are gone abroad , Sir.  



Sir Nic ▪   At this time o night ? Did they go together ? 



Port.   no , Sir , my Lady went alo●…e ▪ 



Sir Nic.   And did you let my Nieces go out , Villain , without your Lady ? 



Port.   Sir Formal carried them out . 



Sir Nic.   ' Death ! what design is this ? they are gone to the Masquerade : My Wif●… alone too ! I like not this ▪ The story in German-●…treet was very suspi●…ious . I shall find out ●…hese practices . 



The SCENE is a larg●… Room , with a great number of M●…squeraderss , Men and Women , in many 〈◊〉 habit●… . 

Enter Sir Samuel and Hazard . Sir Sam.   Now , Hazard , let 's enjoy ourselves : I am never in my Element , but when I am adventuring about an Intriguo , or Masquerading about business . Now you shall see me show my parts . 



H●…z .  Do. Sir Samuel , you are excellent at these things . 



Sir Sam.   Nay , if any man outdoes me about this business . Well , no more to be said . Is not mine a very pretty Disguise ? Ha!  



Haz.   An admirable one — 



Sir Sam.   I have forty of 'em upon Intriguo's and b●…sinesseses . But now to work . Do you know me ? 

[ To Clar.  

Clar.   no : yet methinks you look through your disguise like a foolish Fellow I have seen . 



Sir Sam.   A foolish Fellow — Hey poop ! you were never so much in the wrong in your life , as gad mend me — 



Clar.   I do not think so ; a Mask might cover deformity , but not folly . You have the very Mien of a Coxcomb ; all the motions of your body declare the weakness of your mind . 



Sir Sam.   Pish ! what you are upon the high Ropes now . Whip st●…ch , Your nose in my breech . Pish ! ay ▪ ll talk no more with her . 



Haz.   Do you know me ? 

[ Too Mir.  

Mir.   no ; I neither know ye , nor care to know ye . 



Haz.   They who have so little curiosity , have lesle pleasure . 



Mir.   I guess your inside to be no better than your outside . 



Haz.   Try 'em both , and you 'll be of another opinion . 



Mir.   The Conviction's not worth the Trial.  



L. Gim.   I wonder which is Haz●…rd . But my business is not with him . 



Sir Sam.   These are very angry Ladies , Hazard . Just now we met ●…wo were very kind to us . Pretty Rogues . They had delicate hands , arms and necks — and they were Women of Quality , I 'm sure by their Linen ▪ — 



Haz.   that 's no rule — for Whores wear as good Linen as honest Women : fine clothes and good Linen are the Working-tools of their Trade . 



Sir Sam.   But I know by their Wit and Repertees they were fine persons . I am confident my Woman knows me , and has a kindness for me . 



Haz.   Methought they seemed to be rank Strumpets — 



Sir Sam.   Prithee hold thy peace . T●…ce is Latin for a Candle . I am used to these Intrigues and Businesses — 



Enter Longvil and Bruce in their own clothes , Masked . Clar.   Longu. and Br●…ce ! let 's watch them , and see where they 'll direct themselves . 



Mir   Like right-bred men o'th'town ; I warrant upon the next they light on . 



Sir Sam.   ' Odds my life , I have lost my Laced Handkerchief — 



Haz.   ' Death ! I ha●… ' lost mine too . Heart ! all my money 's gone — 



Sir Sam.   Ha! Money ! what a pox , mine 's all flown too . Whip , slap-dash — 



Haz.   Whip , slap-dash ! a pox o' your Women of Quality , they are flown too . Whip , slap-dash — But you have been used to such Intriguo's and Businesses — 



Sir Sam.   I durst ha'sworn I could not be deceived . Though I ha ▪ been often served so by Vizard Masques in the Pit , they are mightily given to 't ; we men of adventure must bear this ▪ Come , no more to be said . Come , 't is well it 's no worse . Come ! 



Longu.   This is a fine civil Assembly ●…ruly . The Knight has great conveniences of Coaches and Retiring-rooms . 



Bruce .  It is a very rank Ball ; there 's like to be very much Fornication committed to night . 



Longu.   A M●…squerade's' good for nothing else , but to hide blushes , and bring bashful people together , who are ashamed to sin barefaced . there 's a Lady hover about you , and longs to pickeer with you . 

[ Lady Gim. stairs on Bruce . 

●…ruce .  OH that it were Cl●…rinda in a good mind . 



Longu.   I wish it be not Miranda in a bad one ; her shape 's like hers — 



Sir Sam.   Come , Fiddles , be ready — Shall I wait on you in a D●…nce about business — 

[ Takes out Clar.  The Bor●… — 

[ They D●…nce , Sir Samuel leaves her , She tak●…s in another . 

Cl●…r .  A Corant . 



Bruce .  May I no●… have the honour to know who yo●… ar●… ▪ 



L. Gim ▪   't is sufficient to tell you , I am one you have no ill wishes to , and would not tell you this but in Masque . 



Bruce .  she 's finely shaped , and by her Jewels a Woman of some condition . Come , off with this Cloud to a good face , and Ornament ●…o a bad one . 



L. Gim.   no : but if you will withdraw into another Room , I 'll let yo●… know more of my mind , though not of my face . 



Bruce .  The temptation is too strong to be resisted . Let 's steal off . 

[ They steal out . 

Entry of Scaramouchi and Clow●…s . [ Dance : Sir Sam.   Very fine , I swear very fine — 

Where the devil 's this ●…iranda ? I cannot find her out for my life — 



Cl●…r .  Did you not see Bruce steal off with a Lady ? 



Mir.   Yes , and cannot bear it . I am so foolish , I would I were not . 



Sir Sam.   But hold . Who held my Sword while I danced ? 'T was a French Sword , cost me fifteen Pistols : a curse on him , he ▪ s rubbed off with — But Come , 't is well it 's no worse yet — 



Longu.   This Bruce stays somewhat long , I like it not . If I could find out either Clarinda or Miranda here , I should be out of doubt — Let me see , who are you ? 



Fig.   What authority have you to examine me ? — 



[ She speaks in a Poppets voice . Long.   What have we here , a Poppet ? 



Fig.   Such a Poppet as you 'll be glad to change for the Player you keep — 



Longu.   You are mistaken , I love the Stage too well to keep any of their women to make 'em proud and insolent , and despise that Calling , to take up a worse . 



Fig.   then you are none of the Fops I ●…ook you for . 



Enter Bruce and Lady ●…imcrack . Bruce .  I can never rest till I know who has obliged me . 



L. Gim.   Since you are so importunate , I 'll give you a Note will discover it , if you 'll give me your Honour not to open it ●…ill the Masquerade be done . 



Bruce .  Upon my Honour I will not . 



L. Gi●… .  Now show yourself a man of Hono●…r . 



B●…uce .  Gad I think I have already — 



Enter Sir Formal in Scaramoucha's h●…bit . Clar.   yonder 's Sir Formal . You have your Cue , Be●…ty . 



Bett.   I warrant you , Madam . 

( To Sir F●…rm ) You see I am as good as my word . 



Sir Form.   't is she by her Bracelet and Pendants . Madam , had not some disaster intervened , I had sooner kissed your hands . But of that , more anon . 



Enter L. Gimcrack in ●…nother dis●…uise . L. Gim.   Now for the rest of my Plot. I shall disappoint these young Sluts , or make mischief enough . 



[ Exit Longu. and L. Gimcrack . Ent●…r Snarl b●…re-faced . Mir.   Did not you see Longvil steal out with a woman ? 



Cl●…r .  Too well Our ●…overss are well matched . 



S●…arl .  In sadness I think Bedlam's broke loose and come hither . What a company of Antic Puppies are here ? Pox on ' ●…m all . But where is this Figgup ? by the Mass I 'll not suffer her to go to these Schools of Bawdry ; in sadness she 'll be too ap●… a Scholar I am afraid . 



Sir Sam.   Hey Snarl ! What , do you come to a Masquerade barefaced ? 



Snarl .  Yes , that I do , nor am I ashamed of my face , as Rogues and Whores are . Whose Fool are you ? 



Clar.   Sir , will you please to dance ? 



Snarl .  no indeed won't I I thank God I am not such a Coxcomb yet in sadness . — What do you find in my face to think me such an Owl ? 



Mir.   What do you come for then ? 



Snarl .  Why to find one that should be wiser than to be here , by the Mass.  



Fig.   He means me , I shall be undone . 



Clar.   Whom do you mean ? she that was in the Wood hole ? 



Mir.   She that was discovered in Germin-street . 



Snarl .  'Ounds ! I shall be a Byword all over the Town , in sadness . 



Ent●…r Sir Nicholas . Sir Nic.   My Uncle here ? 



Clar.   Is it she you look for ? 



Snarl .  What pert-snivelling , squeaking-bagg●…ges are you ? here 's a squealing with you , with a pox to you . 



Haz.   To him , Sir Samuel . 



Sir Sam.   Sir , let me ask you one civil question . 



[ In a squeaking tone . Snarl .  What civil question would you ask now ? 



[ Mocking him . Sir Sam.   Were not you with a Lady in Germin-●…treet pulled out by the heels to day ? 



Snarl .  'Ounds ! What Rogue art thou ? I could find in my heart to beaten thee most exorbitantly . 



Haz.   Your Landlady in Germin-street is a School-mistris , is she not , Sir ? 



Snarl .  OH my shame comes upon me ! In sadness you are all a company of squealing Coxcombs ; would you were all Eunuches by the Mass , that you might always keep your treble Voices . 



1.  Bull.   What , was this virtuous Gentleman taken with a Whore ? 



2.  Bull.   Sir , do you very much delight in Birch ? 



Sir Sam.   Yes , for mortification-sake . he 's a great doer of Penance . 



Haz.   A fine old Gentleman , with grey hairs , to be over-taken . 



Sir Form.   Truly I am sorry a person of your gravity should so expose your discretion . 



Snarl .  What damned antic rascal 's this ? 

[ Kicks him . 

Sir. Form.   As gad mend me it was uncivil . But , Madam , we will retire , if you please . 



Sna●…l .  What a Devil , shall I be overset with Rogues and Fools here — 



1.  Bull.   Damn Rogues and Fools . 



Snarl .  So I say , in sadness . The Men are all Rogues and Fools , and the Women all Strumpets , by the Mass , or which are ten times worse , scandalous honest Women . In sadness it is a shame such Bawdy doings should be suffered in a civil Nation ; my heart bleeds for 't , by the Mass. It was not so in the last Age. Why , what do I talk with a company of Owls for ? I come to find one whom I 'll never seek again ; if she will not appear now — 



Fig.   OH Buddy , I am here ; but I was afraid you 'd be an angered . 



Snarl .  In sadness I wonder you are not ashamed ●…o come to these vicious scandalous bawdy places . Come away for shame — 



[ Exeunt Snarl and Fig.  Enter Longvil and Lady Gimcrack . Longu.   I never yet knew one so free of her body , and so nice of her face before . Shall I know no more of you ? 



L. Gim.   Since you will have it so — there 's a Note will inform you more : But upon your Honour you must not open it till the Masquerade be over . 



Longv   I will not . 



Sir Ni●… .  My Dear , I wondered I could not see you before . 



L. Gim.   OH Hazard , have I found thee ? this is good luck , my Dear . 



Sir Ni●… .  OH infamous damned Woman ! 



L. Gim.   It makes me break my Spleen almost to think , what an Ass we made of Sir Nicholas to day . 



Sir Nic.   Aye , so it does mine . Ha-ha-ha — A curse on Womankind ! 



L. Gim.   He , poor Fool , believes ●…s all this while to be as innocent . Now shall you have free liberty to come home to me . 



Sir Nic.   Shall he so , Madam ? 

[ L. Gim. shrieks out . 

Sir Sam   what 's here ? one offering violence to a Lady ! 



Haz.   Who , this my Lady Gimcrack ? 



L. Gim.   It is my Husband ! for Heaven's sake keep him here , till I run home . 

[ Exit Lady Gim.  

H●…z .  Villain ! how dare you abuse a Lady ? 

[ Kicks him . 

Sir Nic.   it 's no matter for that , I shall not discover myself . 



Haz.   It is Sir Nicholas ; now you may lock him up , and be revenged of him — — 



Sir Sam.   no more to be said . Hey ! who waits there ? Take this Fellow and lock him up , till I talk with him about business . 



Sir Nic.   ' Death ! What will become of me ? 



Longu.   I have fixed upon almost every Woman of the Masquerade , and cannot find which is either Clarinda or Miranda . 



1.  B●…ll .  'Ounds you lie . — 



2.  Bull.   Take that , Rascal . 

[ They draw , and all draw . 

Exeunt all , women shrieking . Sir S●…m .  These damned Bully Rogues have spoiled my Intrigue ; a pox o●…'em all , the Ladies are gone . But I 'll find a way ●…o be conveyed into Miranda's Chamber to night yet 



[ Exit Sir Sam.  Enter Longvil , Bruce , and Porter . Long.   Is not Sir Nicholas within ? 



Port.   no : but my Lady and the two Ladies are come ; my Lady is gone up to my Master's Closet , and the young Ladies are in the Garden . 



Bruc●… .  We come to tell Sir Nicholas ,   wholly quelled the Mutiny , and seen the Offenders committed . 



Port.   He will be within presently — 

[ Exit . 

Long ▪   I do not see the Ladies here : but this was a very strange adventure at the M●…squerade . 



Bruce .  The Circumstances are so like , had I not seen two several habits , I should believe 't was the same Woman I have a Note to , and received the same injunction not to open it . 



Longu.   Let me read your Note , and you shall read mine ; the Moonlight will serve for that . 

By that means I may discover something . 

[ Aside . 

Bruce .  Agreed . I may perhaps make a discovery . 

[ Aside Reads . You see I dare not own my kindness , but when I h●…d something to ●…ide ●…y blushes . I hope you 'll use the Conquest like a Gentleman . Clarinda . 



Longu.   How ! this is to the same effect , subscribed by Miranda . There needs no further argument of your treachery , and such as I did not think a Gentleman could be guilty of . 



Bruce .  ' Death ! Do you accuse me of Treachery , who are yourself so great a Traitor ? Draw — 



Longu.   Are you so ●…imble ? Have at you — 

[ Fight . 

Enter Clarinda and Miranda . Cla.   Hold ! hold ! hold ! for Heaven's sake hold ! 



Mir.   Hold ! hold ! hold ! for Heaven's sake hold ! 



Clar.   What means this madness in this place ? 



Bruce .  I suppose you guess at the meaning . 



Longu.   If not , Miranda can inform you . 



Mir.   This is absolute distraction , Gentlemen . 



●…ruce .  You let Lo●…gvil know mo●…e of your mind ▪ 〈◊〉 , in a private Room at the Masquerade to night . 



Longu.   If she did not , this Lady was kind enough to you there . 



Mir.   What madness is this ! I spoke ne'er a word to either of you there . 



Clar.   Nor I , Heaven knows ! but we saw each of you steal away with a Lady — 



Bruce .  Do you know that hand , Madam ? 

[ To Clar.  

Longu.   Or you this , Madam ? 

[ Too Mir.  

Clar.   My na●…e subscribed ! 



Mir.   And here is mine . 



Clar.   This mischief is too evident . This is my Aunt's hand . 



Mir.   And this is her Character too . This malice is beyond example , and your baseness , so soo●… to entertain such thoughts of u●… . 



Clar.   That senseless vanity , that makes them think so well of themselves , made ' e●… think so ill of us . 



Longu.   O Heaven ! what have we done ! I beg a thousand pardons for my fault . 



Bruc●… .  Hear but my acknowledgement , on my knees I beg forgiveness for my ill thoughts of so excelle●…t a Lady . 



Clar.   Be gone , unworthy Men , ●…nd never see us more . 



Mir.   I 'll ne'er forgive the Man that thus dare injure me . 



[ Ex●…t Clar. and Mir.  Longu.   This damned Lady ha●… put herself upon us for two Women . Let 's not leave ' e●… , till we have satisfied them of the occasion of our jealousy . 



Bruce .  Let 's follow at a distance — 



[ Longu. and Bruce 〈◊〉 . Enter Clarinda and Miranda , and go into an Arbour . Long.   They are gone into that Arbour : Let 's do an ▪ ungenerous thing for once , and listen . 



Bruce .  Agreed ; we then perhaps may hear what thei●… resentments are . 



Mir.   I see we must carry ourselves with more reservedness , since Men of Wit and Pleasure are so apt to think ill of our Sex.  



Clar.   For all this , I love Longvil●…o ●…o that height , I cannot be ●…eserved to him , I can forgive him any thing . 



〈◊〉 .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ●…oo al●…ost to distraction , and could venture any thing but honour for him . 



Clar.   〈◊〉 loose 〈◊〉 Life and Love a thousand times before my Virtue . But our cross Love can never meet . 



Mir.   The breach was great enough before : but this falsehood and malice of my Lady has made it wider . But hold , we are overheard . 



Clar.   OH Heaven ! here are Longvil and Bruce — 



[ They run away shr●…king . Longu.   Our case is plain , we have no hopes of succeeding in our inten●…ed Loves ; or if I had , I would not have the Body without the Mind . 



Bruce .  A man enjoys as much by a Rape as that way . But I am so pleased to find Miranda love's me , that I 'd not change for any but C●…arinda . 



Longu.   I have the same opinion of Clarinda's love ; and could you be contented , I would willingly change . Gratitude to her will move my heart , more than Miranda's charms with her aversion can . 



Bruce .  Since our affections will not thrive in the soil we had placed them in , we must trasplant them . 



Longv ▪   Love , like the Sunbeams , will not warm much , unless reflected back agai●… . It is resolved it shall be so . 



Bruce .  Let 's follow them now ; and while the metal 's hot , 't will take a Bend the easier . 

[ Ex●…unt . 

SCENA ultima . 

Enter Sir Nicholas , Lady Gimcrack . Sir Nic.   Infamous , vile Woman , I●…l be revenged on all your lewdness . 



L. Gim.   I have broken open your C●…oset , and her●… are all ●…our Le●…terss from your several Whores : And do you think I●…ll bear your falsehood without revenge ? 



Sir Nic.   Be gone out of my doors , I cast you from me ; and I have here another Mistress of this House . Come in . 

〈◊〉 Flirt . To you I give possession of all here , Madam . Out of m●… doors . 



L. Gim.   Is this one of the Creatu●…es you converse with about Philosophical matters ? fare ye well . I have , thanks to my Friends , a settlement for separate maintenance , and I have provided for my sel●… too ▪ A wo●…hy 〈◊〉 : Com●… in , Sir ; he will defend my Person , and my Honour . 



Enter Hazard . Sir Nic.   Who ever shall make such settlemen●…s hereafter , may they be plagued as I am ! Vil●… Creature — 



L. Gim.   Sir , I shall publish your Letters into b●…rgain and send 'em to Gresham-colledge ; then you 'll be more despised than now you are there — 



Sir Nic.   OH misfortune ! that will be worse than all the miseries can happen to me . Hold , Madam , I have thought on 't ; and to show how mu●…h I can be a Philosopher , I am content it should be a drawn Battle betwixt us : Do you forgive , and you shall find that I can do so too . 



Enter Steward . Stew.   OH Sir ! I bring you the moft unfortunate news that e'er you heard . 



Sir Nic.   more c●…osseses still ! 



St●…w .  Several Engineers , Glass-makers , and other people you have dealt with for Experiments , have brought Executions , and Extents , and seized on all your Estate in the Country . 



L. Gim.   't is very well ; you were all this while Botling of Air , and studying Spiders and Glow-worm's , stinking Fish , and rotten Wood  



Sir Nic.   This last affliction is too great to bear ; but I am resolved to ●…orgive ●…hee , my Dear , and be a good Husband , and redeem all . 



L. Gim.   no , Sir , I thank you ; my Settlement is without inbrance , and I 'll preserve it wi●…hout you , which you are the greatest a Woman can have . 



Enter Sir Forma●… and Be●…y . Sir Form.   Sir , I humbly implo●… your pardon , for a crime , which Love , w●…ch was too s●…ong for my resistance , caused in me . 



Sir Nic.   What do you mean ? 



Sir Form.   I have m●…rrid ' Clarinda ; the pretty Creature had an odd fancy to be marr●…d in 〈◊〉 ▪ I hope 〈◊〉 I pardo●… it ; Love is not in our power . 



Sir Nic ▪   OH Heau●…n ! 〈◊〉 is to 〈◊〉 to all the r●…st . no , base man , I never will forgive it . 



B●…tty .  ( 〈◊〉 ) Si●… , you ma●… if you please , and he ●…oo ; consider , Sir , Love is not in our power . 



Sir Form.   I am amazed , I am struck dumb , I ne'er shall speak again ! 



Sir Nic.   I am sorry for you , Sir Formal ; but I have grea●…er sorrows of my own : Yet I have my Uncle Snarl in reserve , I 'll try his bounty — O here he is ! 



Enter Snarl and Figgup . Snarl .  Here ! Where is this Coxcomb ? Nephew — This Ver●…uoso , I was with a Whore in Germin-street , was I ? and your Ladyship reproached me too ; she is your Aunt in sadness . 



Si●… Nic.   How , Sir ! What do you mean ? 



Snarl .  Mean ! why what should I mean ? she is my Wife , I am married to her — 



Fig.   Yes , Sir , we are married , I assure you . 



Sir Nic.   O this is worst of all , I have lost all hopes of his Estate , for which i  so long suffered all his frowardness . 



Ent●…r Long●…il , Bruce , Clarinda , Miranda . L. Gim.   O Heaven ! are they so soon come to a right understanding ? I am undone . Curse on ' 'em ! 



Snarl .  OH Gen●…lemens ! that foolish V●…rtuoso , and that wordy Puppy Sir Formal , said , I was taken with a Whore in Germin-street : This is the Lady , and she 's my Wife . 



Haz.   Be pleased to give Sir Formal joy ; he is married to Mistress Betty too . 



Sir Form.   Upon my sincerity , Madam , it was very uncivilly done , to slur your Maid upon me in your stead : But I must rest contented ; no more to be said . 



Clar.   B●…tty , I wish thee joy ; Sir Formal , she 's as good a Gentlewoman as you a Gentleman . 



Snarl .  I thought my foolish flashy Orator would be catched at last . Ha-ha-ha ! what , marry a Chambermaid ! 



Sir Form.   But , Sir , I have not married a S●…rumpet , as you have . 



Longu.   How ! Is this virtuous Gentleman of the last Age so over-●…aken ? 



Br●…ce .  Did Gentlemen and men of Honour marry Whores in the last Age ? 



〈◊〉   In sadness they have much ado to avoid it in this ; if I have married one , she is my own ; a●…d I had better marry ●…y own than another man's , by the Mass , as 't is ●…fty to one I should , if I had married elsewhere , in sadness . 



Sir Ni●… .  I have yet a reserve : Nieces , my Land in the Country is Extended , and my Goods are seized on : The Money which I have of yours will redeem all , and I will accounted with you . 



Clar.   Sir , I can do nothing , but by my guardian 's consent ; and I have chosen Mr. Longvil for mine . 



Mir.   And Mr. Bruce has undertaken the pro●…ection of my Fortune . 



Sir Nic.   ' Death ! now all my hopes are cut off ; I thought to have made a good sum of money of my Nieces . Was this the Philosophy you came for , Gentlemen ? 

Enter two Porters with Sir Samuel in a Ch●…st . How now ? Whom have we here ? 



Port.   Sir , here is a Chest of Goods directed to Mrs. Miranda , and we were commanded to bring it to her . 



●…ir .  For me ! set it down there . 



P●…t .  Sh●…ll we not carry it into your Chamber , Madam ? 



●…ir .  no : there 's something for you : ●…e gone . 

[ Ex. Port.  

Clar.   It stands in the way ; Footmen , set it upon one end . 



[ They ofs●…r to turn Sir Samuel with his head down . Sir Sam.   Hold , hold ; murder , murder ! 



Sir Ni●… .  how 's this ? some Rogue and Thief ! pull him out . 



Sir Sam.   Rogue and Thief ! I scorn your words . 



Snarl .  An Antic Coxcomb ; I have seen a Baboon with more common sense . 



Sir Sam.   I came hither to my Mistress Miranda , and would marry her about this business . 



Bru●…e .  You must ask my leave , she has chosen me for her Guardian ; and I will cut your throat if you attempt to make Love to her any more . 



●…ir Sam.   And do you own what he says , Madam ? 



Mir.   I must be ruled by my Guardia●… . 



Sir Sam.   Why then I have been kicked , beaten , pumped , and tossed in a blanket , etc. to no purpose : I am unfortunate in this Intriguo . But no more to be said . Come ; 't is well it 's no worse yet . 



Sir. Nic.   Su●…e , Sir Form●…l , you 'll not deny me that . 



Sir Form.   Truly I opine it not reasonable for one , who has married one with nothing , to be security for another . 



Sir Nic.   ●…hat I should know Men no better ! I would I had studied Mankind instead of Spiders and Infects . Sure , my Dear , thou wilt not leave me ! 



L. Gim.   I am resolved to part this moment . 



Sir Nic.   Well , I have something left yet ; and here 's one love's me , she has told me so a thousand times . 



Flirt   Sir , trust not to that ; for Women of my profession love Men but as far as their Money goes . 



Sir Nic.   am I deserted by all ? Well , now 't is time to study ●…or use : I will presently find out the Philosopher's Stone ; I had like to have gotten it last year , but that I wanted May-dew , being a dry season . 



Longu.   I hope , Ladies , since you have put your Estates into our hands , you 'll let us dispose of your persons . 



Mir.   You must have time to leave off your old Love , before you put on new . 



Cla●… .  Nothing but time can fit it to you . 



Brace .  You have given us hope , and we must live on that a while ; and sure 't will not be long that we shall live upon that slender D●…et : For , 

If Love can once a Lady's Outworks win , 
It soon will Master all that is within . 


[ Exeunt Epilogue . 

Now you who think y●…are Judges of the Pit , 
Who never , but in finding faults , show wit ; 
Who to your dear dull s●…lveses are kind alone , 
And ne'er reflect on follies of your own : 
Our Poet can from you no mercy find , 
Who savage are to all but your own kind . 
Nay , on the Stage if some of those appear , 
Though ne'er so like yourselves , you hate 'em there , 
As the whole Herd falls on a wounded Deer . 
But of those Ladies he desp●…irs to day , 
Who love a dull Romantic whining Play ; 
Where poor frail woman 's made a Deity , 
With sens●…ss amoro●…s Idolatry , 
And s●…ivelling Heroes sigh , and pine , and cry . 
Though singly they beaten Armies , and Hu●…s Kings , 
Rant at the Gods , and do impossible things ; 
Though they can laugh at danger , blood and wounds ; 
Yet if the Dame once chides , the milksop Hero swoons . 
These doughty things , nor Manners have , nor Wit ; 
We ne'er saw Hero fit to drink with yet . 
But hold , I hear some say among the rest , 
This Play is not well bred , nor yet well dressed ; 
Such Plays the Woman's Poets can write best : 
They difser from the Mens , you must allow , 
As Woman's Tailors Woman's Poets too . 
But know , good breeding sh●…ws its excellence , 
Not in small trifling forms , but in good sense . 
Yet , Ladies , to Stage-fools some favour show , 
Since off the Stage some Fops you can allow . 
Few of the Sex's happy Favourites yet 
Have been the most remarkable for Wit : 
Sure you must like Copies of such as these , 
If the Original Coxcombs can so please . 
But to the Men of Wit our Poet fly's , 
And ●…akes his Fops to them a Sacrifice : 
You know the pangs , and many labouring throws , 
By which your Brains their perfect births disclose . 
You can the faults and excellencies find ; 
Pass by the one , and be to th' other kind . 
By you he is resolved to stand or fall : 
What e'r's his doom he 'll not repine at all . 
And if this Birth should want its perfect shape , 
And cannot by your care its death escape , 
th' abortive Issue came before its day , 
And th' Poet has miscarried of a Play.  
FINIS . 

