THE SLIGHTED MAID , A COMEDY , Acted with great Applause at the Theatre in Little Lincolns-inn-fields , By His Highness the DUKE of YORK is Servants . 

LONDON , Printed for Thomas Dring , at the George near St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet . 1663.  

To the Illustrious Prince , JAMES Duke of MONMOUTH , etc.  

Knight of the most Noble Order of the GARTER . 

MY LORD , 

TO Your Grace I humbly dedicate this Comedy ; Your Creature ; for it only received from me Matter and Form : But Your Satisfaction , at the Presentment , gave it Life . If it please You in the Reading , my Pen cannot make me Happier , unless I could Vote into myself the Spirit of Plutarch , to enable me to write the History , which Your early Perfections promise to the World. But since Nature has not put me into a Capacity of serving Your Grace as I would , be pleased ( I beseech You ) to accept of what I can , this , and the Zealous Wishes of 

Your Grace's most humble Servant , R. STAPYLTON , 

THE SCENE , NAPLES . 

Names Characters Actors . Salerno . An airy young Prince , who ( being refused by his Love ) is a pretender to Mistresses . Mr. Harris . Iberio . The Prince's Friend , a jealous Lover . Mr. Bettertun . Filomarini . The Prince's Uncle , a prudent and pleasant old Lord  Mr. Metborn . Lugo . Filomarini's son , who will not be governed by his father . Mr. Smith . Arviedo . A name which conceals the poverty of Giulio , the young Heir to the Family , Honour , and Valour of the Great Captain Gonsalvo . Mr. Cadiman . Corbulo . A valiant Lieutenant , constrained by his wants to be Decio's Porter . Mr. Young.  Peralta . A desperate Sea-captain , who ( being pardoned for Piracy ) falls to cheating . Mr. Underhil . Gioseppe . Master of a Ship , a Vigilant Spy upon Menanthe . Mr. Noke the Elder . Vindex . Decio's Slave , who by his faithful Ingenuity merit's his Freedom . Mr. Sanford . Decio . The Slighted Maid , Ericina , who ( to revenge her refusal by Iberio ) assumes the person of her dead Brother , Decio . Mistress Gibbs . Pyramena . A passionate Lady , who ( hating the jealousy of him she love's ) marries one she knows not . Mistress Bettertun . Diacelia . Elder daughter to the Prince of Bulgaria . Mistress Long.  Leandra . Younger daughter to the Prince of Bulgaria . Mistress Williams . Menanthe . An impudent Cheat , a Greek Impostress , who takes upon her to be mother to Leandra . Mr. Noke the younger . Joan.  A fat merry Hostess . Mr. Turner . 

The Instrumental , Vocal , and Recitative Music , was composed by Mr. Banister . 

THE PROLOGUE TO THE KING . 

IF Favours merit Thanks , what then is due 
For Blessings , Sir , derived to Us from You ? 
Such Blessings as no People , ever since 
They prospered into Kingdoms , owed a Prince : 
Three Nations ( by all others disesteemed ) 
To Honour and to Freedom you redeemed . 
Now your Nobility are Lords age'n , 
Your Commonalty Valiant Loyal Mendoza 
th' oil that Anointed you healed our sad wounds , 
Your Laws have fixed us in our old just Bounds . 
When to your Throne you came , Justice returned 
From Heaven , and on the Bench ( o'er which she mourned , ) 
Sits in your Splendour , gives ( not takes ) the Word , 
And with her Balance overrules the Sword , 
Which now protects your poorest Subject's Plea , 
And guards the Labours of your Land and Sea. 
Nor is Toil barred from Pleasure any more , 
For , Public Recreations you restore ; 
Not Roman Theaters , that were designed 
For Sword-play , our Plays recreate the Mind , 
Instruct the judgement , which men's Natures learns , 
And how to manage Low and High Concerns : 
Our whole Globe in this Hemisphere we see 
Enlightened with the Rays of Majesty , 
Where all , but th' Author's doubtful Eye , looks clear , 
But , Sir , he hope's you 'll smile away his fear . 
THE PROLOGUE TO THE HOUSE . 

Your looks are eager , Gentlemen ; new Plays , 
Like our new Beauties , expectation raise 
So high , you promise to yourselves a Feast 
Of Wonders ; alas , Miracles are ceased : 
no working now by Supernatural means , 
Beaumond and Fletcher have written their last Scenes . 
no Johnson's Art , no Shakespear's Wit in Nature : 
For , Men are shrunk in Brain as well as Stature . 
Little pure Wit is stirring , ( I confess ; ) 
And that 's cried down by those that have much lesle ; 
And some by the Fanatics have been taught 
To conclude , All Gentlemen do , is naught . 
When those Grave Critics in their Cradles lay , 
Good Plays grew faster than ill Weeds , than they : 
Now , one would think , that our slow Writers played 
A Spanish Mate at Chess , few Draughts are made , 
Since mere Gambetters kept the Stage in awe , 
For , ( whoever sets the Men ) they give the Law , 
Tyrannically , to our cost we know it , 
For ( right or wrong ) they judge against the Poet. 
From such ( whom Spleen and Prejudice transport ) 
th' Author refers himself to this just Court , 
These Noble Ladies , Lords , and Gentlemen , 
And humbly at your feet he lays his Pen : 
If bad , it shall not write another letter ; 
if 't please , he 'll take it up , and please you better . 
Incourageed Poets heighten their Designs , 
Like Painters , who at first draw ruder Lines . 
THE SLIGHTED MAID . 

Actus Primus . 

Enter Filomarini , Gioseppe , and Peralta . Per.   Come , come ; as sure as I am in my wits , 
My Lord Filomarini , you are mad : 
You would not go to Sea else at your years . 


Fil.   To Sea ? no , if I do , let me be drowned . [ to Gioseppe . 


Per.   Are you so old ,   lived past sense of danger ? 


Fil.   i  lived past th' age of telling him my secrets . 


Per.   Or so poor , that Need makes you trust your life 
To Planks and Billows ? 


Fil.   Is my Wine aboard ? 


Gios.   't is stowed , and all your Goods . 


Per.   All your Discretion , 
that 's stowed too ; your grave Wisdom's under Hatches , 
Princess Diacelia's Guardian wants a Guardian . 


Fil.   Princess Leandra wants a Guardian ; 
This Pirate little thinks she's landed here , 
And that my Voyage ends in her Arrival . 


Per.   Turn Child again ? now , when you have invited 
All Naples to a Feast , you 'll not stay dinner ; 
Pray , do but eat your breakfast with your friends . 


Fil.   But is Leandra grown the greater Beauty ? 
My son's Bride , Diacelia , was the Sweeter . 


Gios.   Your Lordship knew Leandra in her childhood , 
you 'll see her finely built , so tight , so you're ; 
She lacks but you at Helm . 


Fil.   And I can Steer ; 
I shall keep her from falling foul upon 
Lugo Filomarini . Where the Devil 
Did my son Lugo meet her ? 


Gios.   Where the Devil 
Never appeared before so near an Angel , 
At Church , with the Greek Cheat her cursed Mother , 
That passes here for an Illustrious Lady ; 
The Viceroy heard she was a Graecian Princess . 


Per.   Was ever a Vagary so well timed ? 
This morning , when your Son is to reap here 
The Harvest which you sowed in th' Isle of Candy , 
To marry a young Princess ; you are going 
To solace your cold body with the Mermaids . 


Fil.   To Princess Diacelia be a Traitor ? 
On 's Wedding-eve fall in love with Leandra ? 


Gios.   At th' Altar : down he fell upon his knees , 
And would have prayed to Her , but that I whispered , 
Take heed , Sir , how you set up a new Saint , 
He that knelt there is an Inquisitor ; 
This frighted him from Superstition ; 
But than he fell to Witchcraft , with th' Impostress 
Her Mother , the Greek Devil , made a Compact , 
That is , a Bargain , for twelve thousand Pistols , 
And struck a Match . 


Fil.   Hey boy ! how sits the Wind ? 


Gios.   Foreright , and a brisk Gale.  


Per.   there 's such a wind 
In your head , my good Lord , you hear not me . 


Fil.   Why did they not marry upon the place ? 


Gios.   Because the Greek Leech holds it proper first 
To purge your son , and Bleed him in the Purse : 
she 'll first be sure of his twelve thousand Pistols . 


Fil.   Captain Peralta , there 's not such a wind 
In my head , but I hear thee , and know , all 
thou sayst is nothing ; answered in a word 
( The little Word , that governs the great World ) 
Interest ; advantage calls me , I 'm concerned 
To leave my Son on 's Wedding-day , no lesle 
Than he to compliment his Guests , or kiss 
His Bride , and I will do 't as heartily . 


Enter Lugo . Per.   Answer your Son so , he 's here ( I have pressed 
Your father's Stay , to make him go his Voyage , [ to Lugo 
he 'll sail , near fear 't ) break my Lord Lugoes heart ? 


Fil.   Hold up thy head , boy ; I may come again , 
But if it be my Destiny to sink , 
I leave thee ' a Fortune to buoy up thy heart , 
I leave thee ' a Bride to multiply my Honor.  


Lug.   there 's two good Fortunes . 


Fil.   And the third's not ill , 
I leave thee ' a Friend , my old Comrade in Candy ; 
This Spanish Captain to draw his Sword for thee ; 
Embrace him , he 's experienced , take his counsel ; 
Take heed he cheat not ; if a Spaniard got him in his Ear.  
'T was on a Gipsy , for he life's by Pillage , 
The Trade that set him up was Piracy ; 
Had the Rogue been a Neapolitan , 
( he 's stout and subtle ) he 'd have made a rare Bandit . 


Lug.   You would make a rare Galleyslave , [ aside . 
For you can Look one way and Row another . 
The Captain may be needful , when I quarrel . 


Fil.   Use him , but trust thyself . So , farewell Naples . 
no further , son , my Blessing : I have blessed 
th' Excellent Princess Diacelia , 
Thy Bride , be worthy of her ; and remember , 
Remember , Sirrah , that her Ancestors 
Were Sovereign Princes ; and ( although I am 
Her Guardian , yet ) that I imposed not thee 
Upon her , but thou art her own free choice ; 
Remember how thou wert obliged , when she 
Refused my Nephew , the Prince of Salerno . 


Per.   you 'll give me leave to wait you to the Port ? 


Fil.   To cut thee off , I draw a line , this River 
Of Rubicon no Soldier is to pass . [ Exeunt Fil. & Gios.  


Lug.   no talking to th' old man ; is he not drunk ? 


Per.   He may be so , he took care for his Wine . 


Lug.   more than he did for me ; I 'd rather be 
My Father's Sack or Claret , than his Son , 
he 's better at choosing of Wines than Brides . 


Per.   He choose , for you , a Princess . 


Lug.   But 't was I 
That should have chosen for myself . OH Captain ! 
I would have taken Leandra in her Smock , 
Rather than married Princess Diacelia 
With all Bulgaria ' , had she'd in possession . 
My Father shows his judgement . 


Per.   He was thought 
( E'er he ran Sea-mad ) wise . 


Lug.   Yes , for himself ; 
Like an unnatural Moor , he would take money 
Even for the chaming of his son to th' oar : 
But , Captain , thou hast promised to redeem me 
From the worst of all Slaveries , a loathed Marriage . 


Per.   I use not to redeem , but to sell Slaves . 
Would I could make a Bargain for his Lordship . [ aside . 
My Lord , I hope to serve you [ such a trick 
As yet you never saw ] but the contrivance 
Must be considered in a place more private . 
Enter Salerno and Iberio . See , the Prince of Salerno and his Friend 
My Lord Iberio , who commands the Forces 
Designed for Candy . 


Lug.   By their whispering , 
It seems , they would be private too ; leave them 
The house , we 'll take a turn or two i' th' Garden , 
My Bride is not yet dressed , there 's time enough . Exeunt Lugo & Peralta . 


Iber.   She is the most — 


Sal.   Inconstant , you would say : 
Speak softlier . 


Iber.   Why not louder ? 't is a truth . 


Sal.   But , friend , all truths are not to be proclaimed . 
Prithee , my Lord Iberio , do not vex 
Thyself , because a Woman proves a Woman : 
Be thou a Man , laugh , as I do . 


Iber.   You may 
Have cause to laugh ? 


Sal.   thou hast almost as much , 
For , our two Cases differ , like two Clocks , 
About some half an hour : thy Mistress comes 
From the Church married , mine 's going to be married , 
I give her . 


Iber.   Pish , you cannot , if you loved her . 


Sal.   Special Considerations moving us , 
I loved her for her Person , she was handsome ; 
I loved her for her Fortune , she was rich ; 
I loved her for her Title , though the Turk 
Usurps her Country of Bulgaria , 
Still she 's a Princess : Princess of Salerno 
I wished her , but my cousin Lugo had 
The Preference ; and since I must not be 
Her Husband , I 'll e'en be her Reverend Father , 
And give her . What think'st thou of my Resolve ? 


Iber.   I think , there 's never a Prince in Italy 
Better than you are , at digesting Willow . 


Sal.   Willow feeds me fat , I 'm a kind of Kid , 
I feel myself so gamesome after it , 
So wanton : now am I for Mistresses , 
Mistresses in abundance . 


Iber.   One's too much . 


Sal.   The Enemy to my Bulgarian Love , 
He that unthroned her Crowned Progenitors , 
The Great Turk , keeps not Mistresses enough : 
A Mistress , Sir , may be your fairest play , 
For it is possible , she may be your Mistress , 
That would not be your Wife . 


Iber.   Impossible , 
I 'll never see her more . 


Sal.   What will you lay ? 
Enter Arviedo . Your Cousin can resolve us , he has made it 
His business to inquire . where 's Pyramena ? 


Aru.   she 's in the House . 


Iber.   In this House , Arviedo ? 


Aru.   Her husband told me , she was going hither : 
And when his Highness lighted from his Coach , 
Her Chair was carried in . 


Sal.   A Plot ! she married 
So early , to meet thee , and make Proposals : 
But she will lose her Time , and I my Sport , 
If the Bride be not hastened . Exit Salerno . 


Iber.   I would make 
The Prince no sport , but that I have engaged 
To dine here . 


Aru.   Better you would dine at home , 
For , Pyramena's husband , Decio , 
Armed with Gold , that puts Confidence in Cow'rds , 
Offers to every wanting hand a Bribe 
To poison you . 


Iber.   Decio poison me ? 
Thy kind fear thinks ( now he has married her , 
I should have had ) that he must with my life 
Secure his Purchase . 


Aru.   He attempted me . 


Iber.   Do not I know , he love's to droll with thee ? 


Aru.   He would scarce droll away the Sum he offered . 


Iber.   To thee ? my kinsman , one that I bred up ? 


Aru.   He urged my Obligation and Relation 
As the best Blinds ; told me , that I might act 
In his Revenge , and make myself a Fortune , 
Like a destructive Mountebank , that thrives 
By Poison , first takes Money , then takes Lives . 


Iber.   In Rhyme ? but he 's an Illustrissimo 
Of Venice and Parnassus , a rich Poet : 
Would thou hadst taken his Money . 


Aru.   And given you 
The Poison ? sure I sooner should have drunk it . 


Sal.   I dare be sworn thou wouldst . 


Aru.   And can you wish 
Such Faith corrupted ? 


Sal.   no , my noble Cousin , 
't is to prevent a Rogue that might be hired , 
That I wish thee employed . 


Aru.   On that account , 
I 'll take his Gold , and undertake your Murder ; 
To serve your Lordship I 'll be any thing , 
Your Poisoner to preserve you . 


Sal.   Were he bold , 
I might suspect , that Decio would revenge 
His sister Ericina . 


Aru.   She that died 
For love of you . 


Sal.   But from so soft a spirit 
I apprehend no danger , howe'er sound him . Exit Arviedo . 


Enter Salerno , Diacelia , Pyramena , and Attendants . Sal.   Well , Princess Diacelia , my first Love , 
Although you make your unseen Guest , my Heart , 
A Mourner at your Wedding ; yet those Joys 
From which you banish me , I wish to you . 


Dia.   In the Prince of Salerno's Arms I wish 
A better Wife . 


Sal.   Bar curses ; no Wife , Madam , 
Mistresses what you please . 


Dia.   Fie , fie , Sir , leave 
This Raillery . 


Sal.   Leave you your frowning then ; Pyram . smiles on Iberio . 
Learn of your Signior Bride there , how to smile 
On a condemned Prisoner of Love. He frowns ? 
Abominable ! frown when his Mistress smiles ? 
Pardon my zeal , Madam , I hope my Friend 
May have a Mistress ? 


Dia.   Not of Pyramena ; 
she 's Virtuous , take 't upon my word . 


Sal.   Nay , now 
That I have the word of a Princess for 
Her Virtue , I 'll engage my Friend to try it . 
He Sings . Thy Love is chaste , they tell theeso ; 
But how , young Soldier , shalt thou know ? 
Do by her 
As by thy Sword , 
Take no Friend's word , 
But try her : 
'T will raise her Honour one step higher . 
Fame has her Trial at Love's Bar , 
Deified Venus from a Star 
Shoots her Lustre : 
She had never been Goddessed , 
If Mars had been modest : 
Try and trust her . 


Dia.   What a strange wild-brained husband have I scaped ! 


Iber.   You think , I take this for a current smile , 
I know 't is sergeant , gilt brass , your Face 
Puts mirth on , when your Conscience is tormented . 


Py.   My conscience ? 


Iber.   Have you none ? or is't asleep ? 
It shall be waked , I 'll thunder . 


Py.   If Heaven thundered 
I should not tremble , for I am not guilty . 


Iber.   then you ' are not married ? 


Py.   I am Wife to Decio , 
no Lord , but equal to a Lord of Naples ; 
A Gentleman of Venice . When   thunder ? 
I see no Lightning yet . 


Iber.   The Clap comes now , 
( Avoid it , if you can ) did you not swear 
You would be my Wife ? 


Py.   Did not you swear first , 
That you would not be jealous ? were ye not ? 
fell you not out with me , for visiting 
My Kindred ? then I married : where 's my crime ? 
't is you that should fear Thunder , you are perjured , 
You broke th' Oath upon which my Oath was built , 
And Superstructures always fall to ground , 
When their Foundation sinks . Can you deny it ? 


Iber.   Mine was not Jealousy , but Tenderness 
Of your Repute : 't is a censorious Clime 
We live in ; from the Liberty you took , 
I feared a popular Scandal on your Honor.  


Py.   It seems so , by th' Insolence of your Language ; 
Did you not tell me , that the world would say , 
Iberio was a fool to venture her 
To common Courtship , that was Vowed to him — 


Sal.   This makes for me , if Vow have passed between them ; 
May not Iberio court his own Wife , Madam ? [ too Dia.  


Iber.   And would you leave me for a hasty word ? 


Py.   Yes , he that would control me when my Servant , 
Would tyrannize when he should be my Husband . 
I have one that Vow's he never will commit 
Your Jealous Sin against my Innocence ▪ 
But I forgive you ; something too I 'll give you , 
Myself I cannot , you have forfeited 
Your Right in me : but I 'll create a Title 
For you , next Husband , you shall be my Friend . 


Sal.   Did not I tell thee ? [ to Iberio . 


Enter Gioseppe disguised , he gives a Letter to Diacelia . Py.   If your Lordship please 
To taste the First-fruits of our Bridal Board 


Sal.   And Bed. Ah Rogue , wrapped in thy Mother's Smock . 


Py.   You shall be the Bride's guest . 


Iber.   I won't . 


Sal.   Out Clown . 


Dia.   Honest old friend Gioseppe , I dare say , 
My Guardian , my Lord Filomarini , 
Is misinformed ; for grant that his son Lugo 
Had no Love for me , yet for his own Honour , 
Now we are going to Church to be married , 
he 'd not fly off . 


Gio.   But when you see the proof ; 
Your Highness ( as your Guardian directs ) 
Will be pleased to put on the Spanish Veil , 
And go with me . 


Dia.   He writes , that , by your means , 
He has preferred himself and me for Servants 
To the Greek Cheat , your Mistress . I 'll obey him . 


Gio.   Pray send for me , I 'll wait at your Back-stairs . [ Exit Gioseppe . 


Py.   My Husband is a Stranger , a Venetian , 
( For when I found you jealous , I resolved 
Never to have a Neapolitan , ) 
But he so love's your Town , he 'll dwell with you : 
And sure you cannot but love him again , 
The goodest man , nothing but innocent mirth , 
His whole delight is to make Songs and Masks ; 
I hope you 'll come ? 


Iber.   If I do , I 'll tell Decio 
What an inviting Wife he has . 


Py.   Your Servant . 


Enter Lugo and Peralta . Lug.   Sir , my dear Love , my good Lord , noble Lady , 
Please to excuse me , that I have thus long 
Deferred the Ceremony of the Day , 
I stayed for this slow Friend : let 's now to Church . 


Per.   no haste : I was your Friend more than mine own , 
Or else I would not have engaged with you 
( For such a vast sum ) to the jews . 


Iber.   Engage ? 
Pirates engage ? will jews trust Freebooters ? 


Per.   My Bill's protested , and my Credit lost , 
By your neglect of payment at your Day , 
And I come not to give your Lordship Joy , 
But to renounce the name of Friend to one 
That has so publicly renounced his Honor.  


Lug.   Good angry Captain , Soldier's should not be 
Judges of Lovers : if you come to th' Honour 
Of being a Bridegroom , you will never think 
Of transitory things . When I am married , 
I 'll satisfy the jews . 


Per.   Satisfy me , 
In point of Reputation . [ You are out , [ aside . 
y' are out : seem moved ; answer , Is that the business ? ] 


Lug.   Is that the business ? You have reason , Captain : 
Before the Priest join our hands , I 'll dispatch thee . 
My dear , once more excuse me , if you pardon 
Th'adjournment of our Marriage , my Friends will ; 
Indeed they would not pardon me , if I 
Preferred the Law of Hospitality 
Before the Rule of Honor. follow , Captain . [ Exeunt Lugo & Peralta . 


Sal.   Your colour changes , Madam ? use my service . 


Dia.   Pardon me , that I decline company , 
Till my Lord comes back . 


Sal.   Your obedient Servant . [ aside . 


Dia.   Now I perceive my guardian 's a great Prophet . 


Exit Diacelia . Py.   This is the second time that I 'm enforced 
To give you over , for th' Infirmity 
You sucked from Nature , Jealousy ; yet once 
You had some colour , but now no pretence , 
For , you ate Jealous of another's Wife . [ Exit Pyramena . 


Sal.   Deny another's Wife ? art thou a Man ? 


Iber.   Not such a man as the Prince of Salerno ; 
You are for serving Mistresses , but I 
Serve Christendom against th' Encroaching Turk , 
And so , our cross-designes must sever us . 


Sal.   A cross-grained Dunce thou art , and so I leave thee . 


Enter Arviedo . Iber.   Stay , hear my Cousin Arviedo's news , 
Though there be not a Mistress in the case ; 
Did thou or I guests right ? 


Aru.   Your Lordship did ; 
For Decio vow's , that when he courted me 
To poison you , he meant you no more hurt 
Than I , when I accepted the employment . 


Iber.   What a Droll's this ? 


Aru.   I have a Drolling message , 
But more ridiculous . 


Sal.   Better still , what is 't ? 


Aru.   An Offer , such as man yet never made , 
He callest a Kindness : Decio prays your Lordship , 
To think his House and all within it , yours ; 
Though all without it be not so much worth 
As one within it , and that is , his Wife . 


Sal.   I vow a kindness . 


Aru.   He acknowledges , 
She wronged you in her marriage , and that you , 
For her offence , might justly make yourself 
A stranger to his Wife , but if you do , 
'T will grieve her , and her grief will break his heart . 


Sal.   By his kind heart , who would not swear this fool 
Marked for this Cuckold ; wert thou not resolved 
Never to see his Wife ? 


Iber.   Who told you so ? 


Sal.   thou . 


Iber.   True , I did , but that was in my rage , 
When my hot fit was on me , now 't is off , 
I 'll dine with Decio . 


Aru.   Will you ? 


Iber.   Will I live ? 
I 'm the Bride's guest . 


Aru.   Your Highness is his friend , 
Pray , Sir , dissuade him , interpose your power . 


Sal.   What , now there is a Mistress in the case ? 


Aru.   But there 's a Man too , and a spleenful Man , 
Decio's an Enemy . 


Sal.   Decio's an Ass.  


Aru.   Although he has a pretty innocent face , 
Decio is not the Fool you take him for ; 
But would a Fool invite Him to his Wife , 
And mean lesle than a Murder ? 


Sal.   I 'll secure 
All Avenues , he shall not be surprised . 


Aru.   You forget whose death Decio would revenge , 
Think of his Sister . [ to Iberio . 


Iber.   I think of his Wife . 


Aru.   You ought to think of her as of a Siren , 
That sings but to entice you to a Rock . 


Iber.   In those soft Rocks there is no danger , Cousin . 


Aru.   I only fear the danger of their Honours . [ aside . 


Sal.   Danger ? now there 's a Mistress in the Case ? 
Mark the word Mistress , does it not sound well ? 


Iber.   Sweeter ( by far ) than Arviedo's Lute . 


Sal.   Or Trills of Nightingales . 


Iber.   Or Canary-birds , 
Whistling the Flajolet . 


Sal.   Now , as friends should be , 
We are of one mind , and I will not leave thee ; 
Never may be Pled more , that leaves his place 
At Bar , when there 's a Mistress in the case . [ Exeunt . 


Actus Secundus . 

Enter Vindex with a Paquet of Letters in his hand . Vin.   This Wedding-day , this Dancing , and this Fiddling , 
Puts all my Master Decio's business by : 
Porter at Gate , speak to the Paquet-boat , 
These are for Venice , hast thou any Letters ? 


Enter Corbulo . Cor.   None . 


Vin.   Hast thou any Wine ? the slave 's a-dry . 


Cor.   None neither . 


Vin.   Corbulo , then farewell and be — 


Cor.   Hanged thou meanest , Rogue , that stop deserves a Bottle , Corbulo embraces Vindex . 
And in my Lodge I have a bouncing Bottle , 
Good-fellows too , come in , we 'll take a Touch ; 
But first , sing o'er the Roll , and name our Healths . 
They Sing . Drink to me , Boy ; 
here 's to thee , Boy ; 
A Health to our Master , 
A Nobler never obeyed I ; 
Couple him with my Lady , 
Never Man had a Chaster ; 
Match the Viceroy , as even , 
With his Royal Creator , knocking at Gate . 
To the King : bless him Heaven , 
And a Pox take the Traitor . 


Cor.   Hey ! what rapping ? Vindex , turn the Key . 


Vin.   thou thinkst that thou art a Lieutenant still , 
And tak'st me for thy Corporal ? look thou 
To the Gate , I dare not , lest I be knocked , 
Their fingers are so furious . 


Cor.   If the Lodge 
Be thus unquiet , such an Iron-mill , 
I 'll turn our fine young Master , Decio , 
Out of my service ; hold , and let me see 
Who 't is , that knocks so like a Gentleman . 
Enter Salerno , Iberio , and Arviedo . Cry mercy , Sir ; though I thought 't was no Beggar , 
I looked not for a Prince . 


Sal.   Iberio , go , [ Exit Iberio . 
Mind thou thy Mistress ; Fear is the best Spy , 
thou , Arviedo , make discoveries . 


Aru.   I have made one , Sir , Is not this the Soldier , 
That , when our men fell basely from th' Assault , 
Rallied them , beaten the French , entered the Breach , 
And set upon the Bulwark the King's Colours ? 


Sal.   He serve a private man ? 


Aru.   Knowest thou the Prince ? 


Cor.   He has forgot me . 


Aru.   Sure I have seen thy face ? 


Cor.   And this hand , Arviedo , better armed . 


Sal.   Lieutenant Corbulo ? why , fellow-soldier , 
Prithee , how comes thy Partisan thus changed 
Into a Porter's Staff ? 


Cor.   The times are changed , Sir , 
War into Peace , and Soldiers into Beggars , 
And , Sir , you know , Beggars must be no Choosers ; 
If I might choose my Office , I would be 
( Not Porter , but ) Lieutenant Corbulo , 
And in my hand I 'd flourish Steel , not Silver . 


Sal.   I cannot blame thee , for Steel masters Gold , 
there 's some for thee , drink my Mistrise's Health . gives him gold 


Cor.   I must drink to your Inclinations . 
Health upon Health ; we hear , Sir , you are raising . 
A Regiment of Mistresses ; how full 
Your Companies , how many do you Muster ? 


Sal.   I beaten my Drums yet . 


Cor.   March a thousand strong , 
I am for your first Mistress , a pitched Battle , 
A fair Campania ; War , Sir , glorious War 
Will dignify your Title , raise your Fame . 


Sal.   True , Corbulo , and ruin my Estate , 
Have we not Precedent for that ? what Fortune 
Has famed Gonsalvo , the great Captain , left 
To his Posterity ? is not the young Heir 
Of that brave general 's Family , Giulio , 
So poor , he dares not show his face in Naples ? 


Cor.   But you know Generals Heirs who are great Lords . 


Sal.   Why dost not thou fight to advance thyself ? 
Now the Pope raises here a Regiment 
Commanded by my Lord Iberio . 
Go with my Friend to Candy and get Honour ; 
Kill Turks , man , and the Signory of Venice 
Will make thee ' a Knight of th' order of St. Marc.  


Cor.   Though i  got only wounds in the King's Service , 
I will not fight but by the King's command , 
And in a place of Honour and of Profit : 
But , Sir , your Highness needs no Salary . 


Sal.   I may , like th' Emperor Maximilian , 
Trail my Pike under an Invincible King.  


Cor.   Serve ours again , fight for the Crown of Spain , 
And I 'll no longer serve a Foreiner . 


Sal.   Wilt serve me , in thy Neapolitan Mistress ? 


Cor.   no ; I keep her for my Venetian Master . 


Sal.   It seems , thou hast a Charge of Chastity . 


Cor.   One of the Warders in the Brazen Tower.  


Sal.   That keep thy Danäe safe from midnight Visits . 


Cor.   I 'll help your Highness to a handsomer — 


Sal.   Handsomer than thy Lady ? 


Cor.   Than all Ladies , 
Th'incomparable Beauty , Continence : 
Make short sleeps ; lie and fare ( as I do ) hard , 
You shall have Continence , an 't please your Highness . 


Sal.   hang her , She pleases neither High nor Low : 
But I am pleased to see thy care , Lieutenant . 


Cor.   True to my trust . 


Sal.   For which ( hold ) there 's more Gold.  


Cor.   more Counsel I will give you for this Fee , 
Mary , and make me your Porter . 


Sal.   here 's my hand — 


Cor.   It is a liberal one , I kiss your Bounty . [ Exit . 


Sal.   I dare not trust this Soldier , there may be 
more of the Crew , he may command a Party : 
Let 's seek Iberio out , and fetch him off . [ Exeunt Salerno & Arviedo . 


Enter Iberio and Pyramena . Py.   You may praise my good Nature , you 'll scarce match it 
In Naples ; show another of my Sex , 
That scorned like me , will slight the Injury , 
And welcome the Affronter ; but you're welcome 
To Decio's House , my Heart , and your old Love.  


Iber.   But will you love me , may I ask , and hope ? 


Py.   I promise you any thing in my power . 


Iber.   Will you then , do — 


Py.   Do what ? 


Iber.   It will not out ; 
Do me the favour to show me the House , 
Which seems to be , like you , a Paradise . 


Py.   The Building is much handsomer than I , 
But both are ( equally ) at your dispose : 
The Rooms of State your Lordship may see now , 
But 't will be dinnertime ere I can show you 
The private Lodgings . 


Iber.   On , sweet Madam , on . 


Enter Salerno . Sal.   Iberio ? stay . 


Iber.   You will not offer it , 
Now she invites me ? 


Sal.   To this ruin , fool : 
The Porter is Lieutenant Corbulo , 
The boldest Officer of all our Foot , 
thou knowest him , he confesses , he takes Pay 
Of Decio for securing his fair Wife . 


Enter Arviedo hastily . Aru.   Stand on your Guard , Decio has lined his House 
With Mariners out of the Turky-ship , 
Which came from the Levant into the Harbour 
This morning . 


Iber.   See the fruit of Mistresses . 


Aru.   How much more noble would your death have been 
Had your blood smeered a Bashaws Scimitar ? 
then you had died upon the Bed of Honor.  


Py.   He cannot have a Plot to murder you . 


Aru.   Two hours since he had one to poison him ; 
I heard the Word given now , it is , Fall on . 


Py.   Your Forlorn I will be . 


Iber.   Sayest thou me so ? 
I shall love Mistresses better for thy sake . [ Within . ] Salerno , Iberio , and Arviedo draw their Swords . 


Dec.   Fall on . 


Sal.   Do , Rogues , we 'll sell our — how ? a Dance ? Sailors and their Wife's Dance . 


Enter Decio and Vindex . Vin.   What will you do ? 


Dec.   Villain , how dar'st thou ask ? 
Justice I 'll do , teach men how to slight Maids . 
Princes , the Turky-ship thus speaks your welcome 
To my Wife's House , for I have neither House , 
Nor Land , nor Body , nor Soul , all 's my Wife's , 
And ( mark Poetic Prophecy ) she 'll be yours . 


Iber.   My Wife ? 


Dec.   Your Wife . 


Sal.   When , Decio ? 


Dec.   Let me see ? 
All the men of my Race died ( punctually ) 
At two and twenty , so that three years hence 
she 's yours , if   a stomach to her then , 
As ready as the Wedding-dinner now 
On my Wife's Table , your Wife that shall be 
Three years hence . 


Py.   Have but patience till we have dined , 
After the Banquet . [ Exeunt Decio & Pyramena . 


Sal.   thou shalt see and taste 
The Fruit of Mistresses and my Endeavours . 
Look you serve me ( another time ) as well . 


Iber.   Better , I 'll work thee a new Mine of Beauty . [ Exeunt . 


Enter Filomatini , Diacelia , and Gioseppe , in their Disguises as Spaniards . Gios.   Quick , fellow-servants , set the Chairs , Gioseppe : 
My lady 's little Dog has fouled the Carpet , 
Perfume here , Princess Diacelia . 


Dia.   Princess Diacelia ? 


Fil.   I should say , Fritilla , 
For , to serve Diacelia and Leandra 
( As by a guardian 's duty bound ) I have 
Unlorded myself and Unprincessed thee , 
Granchild Fritilla , Daughter to my Son 
that 's at Madrid , Mace-bearer to the King ; 
But I defy the City of Madrid 
To match this Spanish Beauty . 


Dia.   You are pleasant ; 
But Guardian , I should say , Grandfather Draco , 
Why are we Spaniards ? if you had still been 
My Lord Filomarini , your son Lugo 
Had married me without dispute . 


Fil.   no , Grandchild , 
He had too great a passion for Leandra . 


Dia.   Methinks , in your own shape you might have awed him . 


Fil.   I should have shamed him into Impudence 
If I had made a public Business of it . 


Gio.   Twelve thousand Pistols you had saved your son . 


Fil.   What e'er he loses , she shall not lose him , 
Nor shall my Nephew , the Prince of Salerno , 
that 's mad for Mistresses , now want a Wife : 
I 'll bring them about , Master , as the Wind 
Carries thy Sails , without appearing in 't . 
Enter Leandra . Look where Leandra comes , your Bridegrooms Love.  


Dia.   Let me embrace my Rival . Leandra lays her hand on Diacelia's breast . 


Lean.   we 'll not quarrel ; 
Here sticks Love's Arrow with the golden head , 
My sullen heart is wounded with dull Lead . 


Fil.   By why alone , young Mistress ? where 's our Lady , 
th' old Hag , your Mother ? 


Lean.   Talking with a Captain 
Scent from your Son.  


Fil.   The Fool employs the Pirate . 


Lean.   Yes , to lay me aboard ; I hope you 'll fight him ? 


Fil.   My Nephew shall ; for , the Prince of Salerno 
( If you can like him ) must love you , I 'll charm him 
With this Leandra ' in little , this thy Picture 
Given me by a Witch ( I mean , thy Mother ) 
Shall melt him , ( Liver , Lungs , Brain , Heart , and all ) 
As if 't were his own Picture , made in Wax , 
And stuck with Needles . 


Lean.   When I see your Nephew , 
I 'll tell you how I like him : 't is the Man , 
And not the Prince , that I shall look upon . 


Fil.   I see , thy humble humour is quite spent . 


Lean.   I found my spirits when I found my friends , 
( Thanks to this Pilot , my good Guide Gioseppe ) 
But to your Lordship's Orders I submit . 


Fil.   Yet a while seem obedient to th' old Woman ; 
Enter Menanthe and Peralta . She comes , the Pirate after her . 


Me.   Wait here , to Peralta , ( who in his hand has a small Coronet and knot of Diamonds . ) 
Till I dispatch these to their several duties . 
Hosepe , we are pleased with these new Servants 
Of thy commending , once again you 're welcome . they bow to her . 
Draco , do what you undertaken to do , 
Show the young Prince , ( who cries up Mistresses ) 
Leandra's Picture , try how much he 'll offer , 
Lugoes twelve thousand Pistols must not buy her . [ Filomarini bows , and goes off . 
Hosepe , take you , from the captain 's man , 
Those Turky-vests sent us by my Lord Lugo . [ Gioseppe bows , and departs . 
Fritilla , choose you out the richest Vest , 
And fit it to Leandra : Mignion , look 
That you obey my Maid in point of Dress ; [ Diacelia and Leandra make low Curtsies . 
And hark you ? trifle not your time away , 
Your Lord will come strait : do ye hear ? put on Patches . [ Leandra still makes Curtsies down to the ground . [ Exeunt Leandra & Diacelia . 
Twelve thousand Pistols in Gold I expected , [ to Per.  
But , Friend , if you engage that , bonafide , 
The Jewels are worth so much , I 'll accept ' 'em . 


Per.   Two thousand Pistols my Lord Lugo will 
Bring from the Mint , these are well worth ten thousand . 


Me.   These you deliver upon Reputation ? 


Per.   First , Madam , give me leave to satisfy 
My curiosity ; do you , Greek Ladies , 
Keep Turkish State ? 


Me.   It is both State and Wisdom , 
Servants and Children to their Mistresses 
And Mothers should be Mutes , bow , not presume 
To ta k.  


Per.   But may a Stranger use his tongue ? 
Will you not be offended if I speak ? 


Me.   What would you say ? 


Per.   Protest , I know not what : 
For though we that are bred up in the Wars , 
Are seldom out of countenance in Peace , 
Your presence daunts me . 


Me.   We are Great , not Proud.  


Per.   I am not ignorant , what a high Esteem 
The Court has for you , what respect the Lords ; 
May then a poor plain Captain ask a question ? 


Me.   It shall be answered , if 't be in our Sphere . 


Per.   't is in the Sphere of your Activity ; 
Live you not by your Wits ? 


Me.   Alas , poor Captain ; 
Are you come to your Wits ? fear 's a short Frenzy ▪ 
Speak again . 


Per.   Live you by your Wits ? 


Me.   Again . 


Per.   Are you a Cheat ? 


Me.   In Hell's name , what art thou , 
That askest me this damned question ? 


Per.   A Sea-captain . 


Me.   Or ( as some Copies tender it ) a Pirate . 


Per.   I was a Pirate , Sovereign of the Sea , 
Fired Billows , to make way for Robbery , 
Kept a Prize-office at Algiers , of Goods 
Stolen from my Prince , the mighty King of Spain , 
( For which I have his Pardon in my poquet ) 
And do you think a Pirate , an old Thief , 
Can want eyes to discern his fellow-thief ? 


Me.   It were a vanity for me to halt 
Before a Cripple ; I employ the Talon 
Nature gave me to live by , This young Lord 
I mean to cheat ; Leandra shall be sold 
Over and over . But ( bold Captain ) you 
That were the Sovereign of the Sea ( and so forth ) 
Kept a Prize-office at Algiers , of Goods 
Stolen from your Prince , the mighty King of Spain , 
You will not scruple ( sure ) to join in cheating 
Any of the King's Subjects , though your Friend ? 


Per.   Join ? we 'll join Issue , for I 'll marry thee . 


Me.   Two words to such a bargain , worthy Captain . 
Discharge your Trust , deliver me the Jewels , 
And on my Honour , I 'll not be unthankful . 


Per.   Three words to such a bargain , noble Lady . 
These Gems are held in Mort-main , locked as fast 
As in a dead man's hands , I will take nothing , 
I 'll give myself and these ; accept of both , 
Or neither . 


Me.   What if neither ? 


Per.   Why then , Madam , 
Graciously you may please to hang yourself , 
And save the Law a labour . Does Menanthe 
Because grown gallanter , ( Leandra taller ) 
Think I forget thee and thy theft in Candy ? 
Refuse me , and to all Thiefs ( that dare live 
Under the Noses of the men they robbed ) 
I 'll make thee an Example ; marry me , 
This Hand , this Sword protects thee . 


Me.   Nay , if you 
Have had a Passion for me so long since , 
And never yet , from your undaunted heart , 
could blot out my Remembrance ; 't is a Match . 


Per.   Lugo shall pay thy Portion . 


Me.   One half , Captain , 
The Prince shall pay the other Moiety . [ Exeunt ▪ 


Enter Salerno , and Filomarini with a Book of Pictures in little . Sal.   From th' universal Monarch ? 


Fil.   that 's his Style . 


Sal.   Tell me ( ere I inquire into thy Message ) 
How long is 't since his Holiness conferred 
That Title on the King ? 


Fil.   What King ? 


Sal.   Our King , 
The King of Spain ; comest thou not from the King ? 


Fil.   I come from one to whom the king 's a Subject . 


Sal.   thou speakest not like a Subject ; what 's thy name ? 


Fil.   My name is Draco . 


Sal.   Of the Athenian Draco's ? 


Fil.   no , of the English Drakes , great Captain Drake 
( That sailed the World round ) left in Spain a By-blow , 
Of whom I come . 


Sal.   From whence comest thou to me ? 
What Prince's Agent art thou ? 


Fil.   Love's , Love's Envoy ; 
I am a Messenger from Cupid , sent 
To help you to a Venus . 


Sal.   But one Venus ? 


Fil.   To one , two , three , four hundred Venuses : 
Build a Seraglio , I can furnish it 
With Rarities , Provided , you will have 
The Patience of a Prince , to see , and hear . 


Sal.   Reverend Pimp , thou shalt have Audience . 


Fil.   Illustrious Potentate , Love's Envoy shows 
Letters of Credence ; there 's a Mistress for you . [ Fil. shows a Picture , Sal. looks on 't and throws it away . 


Sal.   There she 's for thee again , the Pox to boot , 
To wish it her , the curse would come too late ; 
Why , one eye 's perished . 


Fil.   Sir , I Articled 
For patience ; what great Lapidary ever 
Showed his best Diamond first ? here 's one will fit you . 


Sal.   Fourscore years hence , for she 's at least a hundred . 


Fil.   you 're very curious ; this is young enough . 


Sal.   Ugly enough too in all conscience ; 
Pretty ' Owl , how 't stairs ? and deep in the Green-sickness : 
Go , go ; she that I take the pains to cure , 
Shall be a Paragon . 


Fil.   A Paragon 
This is , or my eyes fail me ; by degrees 
Examine her , the Morning is not younger — 


Sal.   Nor blush's sweeter ; what a Skin ? the alps 
Were never whiter : Lips which eager Birds 
Would peck at , for Ripe Cherries ; Caesar's Eyes , 
That Conquer Nations they but look upon . 


Fil.   Have I performed like a Discoverer ? 


Sal.   Had the great Drake ( whose Issue thou art ) put 
As many Girdles round about the Earth , 
As ever the Sun ▪ did about the Heavens , 
A Lovelier he could not have discovered . 
But , Sirrah , will you justify this Piece ? 
Shall not I ( as a mighty Prince did ) curse 
The Picture-drawer , when I see the Maid ? 


Fil.   Sir , if her Character were to be written : 
The sweetness of her Disposition , 
Her Mildness , Innocence , Humility , 
Obedience , if these were to be described , 
Your Highness might curse th' Orator and Poet , 
But you will bless me and the Picture-drawer , 
When you shall see Leandra . 


Sal.   ha , Leandra ? 
I have heard of her Mother , the Greek Lady , 
My service , honest Draco , soon at night 
I 'll visit her . 


Fil.   no , than you 'll come too late ; 
Your Cousin Lugo will be married to her : 
His Duel was a trick , Sir , to change Brides . 


Sal.   That must not be ; then I 'll go with thee , Draco . 


Fil.   no , than you 'll come too early ; let me try 
My little wit first to break off the Treaty . 
If you 'll be at your Palace , when 't is time 
I 'll call you . [ A Banquet set forth . 


Sal.   What if Lugo should debauch her ? 


Fil.   I 'll watch for you , like Danae's old Father . 


Sal.   I 'll pay thee better than young jupiter 
Paid his Procurer , when the wanton God 
Coined himself into Gold. Let none corrupt ▪ 
Enter Iberio . Her Virtues but myself . Iberio , see , 
Wonder , and shake hands , I am going to her . 


Iber.   You shall stay , and rid me of Decio first . 


Enter Pyramena . Py.   I cannot get my Husband to the Banquet , 
he 's so pleased with your Cousin Arviedo , 
( His Brother-lutenist ) he has carried him 
To see his new Scenes , for this hour they 're safe . 
Sir , will you please to sit ? 


Sal.   To wait of you . 


Iber.   O , pray be gone ; he 's full of business , Madam ; 
You loose your time . 


Sal.   then i  my liberty . 


Iber.   I 'll throw Marc Antony's old Shoe after you , 
His Slippers will serve me , I 'm going to bed . [ Exit . Sal.  
Now , Madam , we are ( to our wish ) alone . they sit to the Banq.  


Py.   The fewer though better fare ; you freelier may 
Taste any thing you love here . 


Iber.   I love you . 


Py.   You cannot , better than I love your Lordship . 


Iber.   that 's Music to our Banquet . Let 's embrace 
The Opportunity , and one another . 


Py.   I hope I understand not , what do ye mean ? 


Iber.   To claim your promise . 


Py.   What was 't ? 


Iber.   Any thing 
In your power . 


Py.   Such a promise I did make . 


Iber.   Perform it ; your Injoyment's in your power . 


Py.   I have heard Casuists say , that 's only in 
Our power which justly and safely we may do . 


Iber.   then do what 's in your Power , perform your Promise , 
that 's just ; and be my Love , and you are safe . 


Py.   In Honour ? 


Iber.   Honour ? 


Py.   I love you , my Lord , 
Above all men , ( my Husband not excepted ) 
But I love Virtue more than I love you . 


Iber.   If you love Virtue so much , when you knew 
My application vicious , why did you 
Encourage me to hope ? tell me the truth ? 


Py.   The truth is , I have fooled you . 


Iber.   Cruelly . 


Py.   I have indeed , cruelly fooled your Lordship . He rises and shuts the door . 
Do ye lock the door ? you will not ravish me ? 


Iber.   O no ; my fair inviting Cruelty , 
You will be found the Ravisher : no Law 
Adjudges him a Murderer , that kills 
One that provoked him . th' Anch'rite , who has lived 
An Age in 's Grave , remembers not his Mistress 
With greater horror , than I thought of you , 
Until you courted me , and blew the sparks 
Of my old Love into a flame of Lust , 
Which shall ( as your due Punishment ) consume you , 
In your own Instrument of Tyranny , 
Like the Designer of the Brazen Bull.  


Py.   Your Brazen bull 's an Ass ; th'inventer of it 
A Novice in my Art of Tyranny , 
He tortured but the Body , I the Soul , 
Which I know nothing more torments , than Hope 
Raised high , and levelled . 


Iber.   Do you smile ? 


Py.   I laugh , 
To see so great a Soldier fool himself 
With a belief , that th' Enemy ( the Traitor , 
As you were graciously pleased to call me ) 
Would yield without a Summons : true it is , 
To work your Hope up to a Confidence , 
My white Flag I hung out , courted a Treaty , 
As if I held a Fort untenable , 
you 'll find it Maned , the Woman so well Maned , 
That you may sooner take Constantinople . 


Iber.   Yet valiant Madam , notwithstanding all 
Your scornful Ranting in our Terms of War , 
You are impolitic in your cruelty , 
That to torment me sacrifice your Honour . She catches a Knife from the Table . 


Py.   See what protects my Honour ; if you stir , 
I 'll show you , what poor Lucrece should have done , 
My Honour shall not die before myself . 


Iber.   But if you kill yourself , the Prince ( who knows 
You sought this meeting ) what will he report ? 


Py.   Report can neither do me good nor hurt , [ She lays her hand on her heart . 
here 's that will justify me after death . 
And know , that since Iberio declared 
For Jealousy against Love , I scorned life : 
Nor had my Soul endured her Glog so long , 
But to convince you of Apostasy : 
This made me marry a Pool , and then invite 
You to this Parley , that your Eyes might give 
Your Heart the Lie , when you beheld me stand 
The Flatteries and Threats of him I love , 
Yet not dishonour him that I love not ; 
And now , farewell to both . 


Iber.   Hold , more than Woman , 
Heroic Lady , show one Bravery more , 
Forgive me ; next ill thoughts I have of you , 
I 'll pluck my heart out , 't is no heart for me , 
That thinks you lesle than Saint . 


Py.   Now we are friends . [ She flings down the Knife . 


Iber.   And friend , I 'll tell ye a secret , kept from you , 
When I was but your Servant ; I command 
These men raised by his Holiness to serve 
The State of Venice against the Grand Signior ; 
They are Embarked , this night I go aboard , 
Therefore my Love , ( still you 're my Virtuous Love ) 
Though it grieves me to speak — 


By   And me to hear — 


Iber.   Yet the sad word must be pronounced , Farewell . 


Py.   You shall not Farewell yet , I 'll call for Cards 
And hold you one hour longer . 


Iber.   What you please ; 
I am your Soldier , you command in Chief . 


Py.   then play a little , to beguile our grief . [ Exeunt . 


Actus Tertius . 

Enter Decio and Arviedo . By a Laurel-tree is set a Shepherd's Hook , a Pipe , and a Wreath of Laurel . Dec.   The breath of Music ( Brother Lutenist ) 
Is Sound , which into points of Time Art breaks : 
But Poetry's the Language Music speaks . 
Poetry's that Divinity of Numbers , 
By which Pythagoras transformed himself 
Into the several Shape's of Men and Gods ; 
And thou , or I may do 't , as well as Herald  


Aru.   I think we may . 


Dec.   Behold th' Experiment , 
I 'm Decio now ; but now that I take up 
This Shepherd's Hook , Pipe , and Poetic Laurel , 
I am Apollo , Shepherd to Admetus , 
Not Herdsman : I have left his Royal Droves 
In Thessaly , to keep his Flocks in Naples . 
Will Arviedo be my Favourite , 
My Hyacinthus ? 


Aru.   What must transform me ? 


Dec.   Poetry ; a new Ode , which i  composed ; 
Sat down and hear it , 't is Apollo's Song . 
Here I Pipe , here I keep 
King Admetus' Sheep , 
Here I gather Laurel for my Wreath : 
But Apollo , where 
Dost thou live ? O not here , 
Absent Lovers live not where they breath . 
But my Spirit is 
In a Place of Bliss , 
Wheresoever that Blessed Place may lie , 
In a Garden , or a Grove , 
In a Grott , or an Alcove ; 
Ever where my Love is , there am I 
Uncircumscribed thus acts the Mind , 
Why should the Body be confined ? 
Swift as Thought can move , 
Little God of Love 
Carry me , upon thy nimble Wings , 
To the top of yonder Tower , 
Where precisely at this hour 
Hyacinthus strikes his Lute and sings . 
We are met , sweet Boy , 
What I now enjoy 
Not a God , besides myself , shall know : 
Cupid , thou hast leave to play , 
To thy Mother fly , and say , 
That Apollo has a Heaven below . 


Aru.   You have feasted mine Ear.  


Dec.   I 'll treat thy Eye ; 
The sweetest Prospect Naples has , I 'll show thee , 
The Pasture where Apollo feeds his Flocks . 
The Scene is discovered , over which in Capital Letters is written CAMPI ELYSII . Decio describes it thus . th' Elysian Fields my Hyacinthus sees , 
Those Walks are Jessamine and Orange-trees , 
Beneath , a Crystal River cuts the Plain , 
Wherein you see those fair Trees o'er again , 
Close by the Flowery Bank , a Flock of Sheep 
Feeds in a Mead ; the Shepherds fast asleep ; 
The Shepherdesses lying arm in arm . 


Aru.   Is 't Life ? or Art ? 


Dec.   Art Magic , hear the Charm.  
Rise , dull Sleepers , fie , how coldly 
You move ! Shepherds , come on boldly ; 
no Wol shall your Flocks endanger ; 
Dance and welcome this young stranger . [ The Shepherds dance , and go off . 


Aru.   I take this as a high Civility , 
For which I 'll thank you with a Friend's Advice ; 
Go to your Wife ; loose her not the first day : 
If she think you neglect her , she will hate you . 


Dec.   She cannot think it a Neglect in me 
To leave her with Iberio and the Prince : 
Can she have better company than they ? 


Aru.   She may have safer ; the Prince fly's at all : 
You know , my Lord Iberio was your Rival . 


Dec.   True ; he and Pyramena were contracted 
Upon Conditions ( mutually agreed to ) 
And pray thee , Arviedo , tell me truly , 
Which of our Titles dost thou think the best ? 


Aru.   I am no competent Judge ; but ( questionless ) 
You would resolved , before you married her ; 
It must not now be questioned , 


Dec.   Not in public ; 
But in a Court of Conscience , thou may'st be 
Judge or Assistant ? 


Aru.   How do ye mean Assistant ? 


Dec.   I mean , if you conceive the Match unlawful , 
You then may lawfully assist your Kinsman , 
To Cuckolded me . 


Aru.   Keep distance ; we shall meet 
As Friends no more ; I am thy Enemy , 
As much as thou art Enemy to Virtue ; 
Draw , I will fairly vindicate my Honour . 


Dec.   I will not fight . 


Aru.   Draw , or I vow to kill thee . 
Ingrateful Villain , is an Infamy 
All the return thou mak'st for a Friend's counsel , 
Against my Kinsman's Opportunity ? 
I gave it , that thou mightst not be a Wittol , 
He an Adulterer , I a Property . 
I 'll talk no longer — 


Dec.   Hear me , but a word . 


Aru.   Quick ; for my Wrong call , for a swift Revenge . 


Dec.   It needs not any ; know , all I said now , 
And all I did before , when I brought Gold 
To work upon thy Poverty , and make thee 
For thy advantage poison thy great Kinsman , 
Was but to try the gallantry of thy Mind , 
Which I find equal to thy outward Beauty . 


Aru.   no fooling now . 


Dec.   If you believe me not , Decio delivers up his sword . 
Behold , I put my life into your hands . 


Aru.   I must believe th' Innocence of that face ; 
A thousand times better than mine — 


Dec.   Dost like it ? 


Aru.   Better than any face I ever saw . 


Dec.   It seems , thou , and my Lord Iberio 
Are not allied in Judgement ; for , my Sister 
( Whose heart he broke ) was like me . 


Aru.   To preserve 
So sweet a Maid , I rather would have died . 


Dec.   Pray , wear this Ring for Ericina's sake , 
'T was hers . 


Aru.   The Diamond is a rich Stone , 
But Ericina's name doubles the value . 


Dec.   Something from me you must accept ; I know , 
you 're neither Lord of Gold nor Silver-mines . 


Aru.   My Ancestor did service here in Naples , 
Which both the indies could not pay him for : 
It pleased the King to call him into Spain , 
And so his Branches ( at this distance ) withered . 


Dec.   Here , take this Purse . 


Aru.   I take no Purses , Sir , 
I am no Thief , I have more of the Merchant , 
The Money I receive I will return . 


Dec.   I 'll show thee how to pay this Debt , and leave 
Me in Arrier : get Dancers , and this Evening 
Make me a Serenade , 't is only a Round 
Well-danced , and a short Song or two ; let 's see 
Thy Poetry ? 


Aru.   I never studied it , 
Yet naturally I 'm a Ballad-maker , 
I 'll keep your Purse , and lay out the Gold for you . 


Dec.   then i  the noblest Steward in the world . [ Exit Arviedo . 


Enter Corbulo . Cor.   Good e'en ▪ what day 's this ? 


Dec.   St. Gennaro's day , 
Patron of Naples . 


Cor.   And your Wedding-day , 
I take it : here 's the Bridegroom , at his Pastime , 
But where 's the Bride ? what Sport is she at ? Cards ; 
Who plays with her ? 


Dec.   The Prince . 


Cor.   The Prince is gone ; 
My Lord Iberio plays with your Wife . 


Dec.   I like that well — 


Cor   And they 're locked up ; you like 
That well too ? 


Dec.   Do you grumble at it , Slave ? 
Cannot my Wife be private with her Servant , 
But that my Servant must take notice of it ? 


Cor.   Why do I wait ? 


Dec.   What did I hire thee for ? 
To be my Porter , and to guard my Wife . 


Cor.   That she may take her pleasure undisturbed ? 


Dec.   That she may take her pleasure undisturbed . 


Cor.   But must she take it with another man ? 
Cannot you , Sir , contenta Wife ? 


Dec.   Nor you , Sir , 
Nor any man in Europe , with one Body : 
He sooner might content her with one Gown . 


Cor.   The you 'll allow your Lady a Gallant ? 


Dec.   I hold it Husband's Duty , to provide 
An Adjutant . 


Cor.   th' Opinion's new , and strange . 


Dec.   't is strange , that you ( a Soldier ) say 't is new : 
Why ? General's have Adjutants General . 


Cor.   This I pass over ; look I never hear , 
In things of baseness that you use again 
The noble name of Soldier , if I do , 
I 'll lay down your Commission here , my Staff , 
And cut your throat . 


Dec.   thou knowest , Lieutenant , I 
Love Soldiers , and have showed my love to thee , 
Relieved thy wants , because thou wert a Soldier , 
A Sufferer ; trusted thee with the guard 
Of my fair Wife , because thou hast the name 
Of a stout Soldier ; but though I love thee , 
I do not love thy humour , mine is fooling , 
And by a Jeaster's privilege I speak 
Severe things against Women , as if we 
Had no Italian Wives but Messalina's , 
But I know many Portia's , gallant Ladies , 
Whose life , and death depends upon their Husbands . 
And would saint thou have me jealous of my Wife ? 


Cor.   Sir , I would have you jealous of your Honour . 


Dec.   What Honour can be greater , than to see 
The Lady's point at me , and call me , Mirror 
Of Married men , Mirror of Married men ? 


Cor.   they 'll point at you , and call you , what do ye think ? 


Dec.   Not Cuckold ? 


Cor.   no , not Cuckold — 


Dec.   That were shameful . 


Cor.   But this dishonourable , they 'll call you 
The basest kind of Cuckold , Wittol , Sir.  


Dec.   How ? Wittol ? that 's an ugly name indeed , 
( Now thou hast spoken to my capacity ) 
I 'll not endure it — but my Lord Iberio 
May challenge me . 


Cor.   Against the world , I'lbe 
Your Second . 


Dec.   I shall do brave things , I think : 
Led , Soldier ; Devil ? Wittol ? I defy thee . [ Exeunt . 


Enter Filomarini and Gioseppe . Gio.   ha , ha , ha ! 


Fil.   This Laugh promises good news . 


Gio.   if 't be not profitable news , 't is pleasant ; 
Pray wish your old Comrade , Peralta , joy ; 
he 's married to Menanthe . 


Fil.   they 're well matched , 
Pirate and Cheat : the Galleys give 'em joy , 
Is this the pleasant news ? 


Gio.   no , the sport is , 
The two Cheats mean to cozen one another . 


Fil.   Why , sure the Pirate will not cheat his Bride ? 


Gio.   Even of his first night's service , he 's in love 
With his Wife's Maid , his supposed Countrywoman , 
Your Grandchild , she has told it to your Mistress . 


Fil.   But when Thiefs fall out , methinks true men might 
Come by their own . 


Gio.   This is the pleasant news , 
Fritilla hope's to cozen the two Cheats . 


Enter Menanthe and Diacelia , Peralta following aloof . Fil.   See , see , the Pirate — 


Gio.   How he tacks about 
To weather her ? he 's got to Windward of her , 
But the small Pinnace to the Leau-ward , proves 
The better Sailer . 


Fil.   Let us give 'em Sea-room . [ Exeunt Fil. & Gios.  


Me.   Dog , Dog , Piratic Sea-dog — 


Dia.   Patience , Madam , 
I may mistake , believe your eyes , from his 
That Pillar will obscure you . 


Me.   Good , good Girl . Menanthe stands behind the Pillar and peeps . 


Per.   Fritilla ? hist , Fritilla ; is she gone ? 


Dia.   Her business requires haste , and so does mine . 


Per.   One little word with me , before you go . 
Dear Countrywoman , pity a poor Spaniard , 
Or , like a Roman Funeral , I shall burn 
To ashes for thy love . 


Dia.   For love to me ? 
You have a Wife . 


Per.   Foh ! a rich stinking jew , 
Taken into my Body-politick ; 
I married an Expedient , not a Wife ; 
Jewels and Gold I married . 


Me.   A Rope take thee , 
My Garter ( Rogue ) would serve ; Queen joan of Naples 
Hanged up her Husband in her Wedding-garter . 


Per.   I took a rich Jade for her wealth Burden . 


Me.   Cheated directly , all the Booties gone ; 
Body and Goods I 'll venture after it , 
But I 'll revenge me on this Spanish Rogue , 
My Husband - Gusman . 


Per.   Smile some consolation . 


Dia.   Why , Don , think you here 's such a dearth of Spaniards , 
That I must be a Spanish Pirate's Wench ? 
Our Country-fig , a Spanish Fig for Pirates . 


Me.   Would mine had one in 's guts , a Spanish Fig 
Would cure his Itch ; but he shall smart , I 'll scratch him , 
The merry Greek will claw her mangy Don.  


Per.   My Wench ? I scorn it , thou shalt be my Wife . 


Dia.   The Church allows no man two Wives at once . 


Per.   True ; but this Marriage is a Nullity , 
't is within the Degrees prohibited ; 
My Mother was a Graecian , and her Father 
Was ( I can prove it ) Brother to Menanthe , 
Th'old-woman's my Great-aunt . 


Me.   OH lying Rascal ! 


Per.   But say thou wilt be mine , and 't is enough , 
I 'll hire a passage for 's in the Pope's Galley , 
that 's bound for Ostia , and I 'll marry thee 
( In the face of the Church , my Girl ) at Rome . 


Dia.   You see I 'm silent . 


Per.   Silence gives consent . 


Dia.   no Captain . 


Per.   Maids say no , and take it , Jewel ; 
Now I name Jewel , I will give Fritilla 
All Lugoes Jewels . 


Dia.   If you keep one back , 
It is no Match . 


Per.   A match then . 


Dia.   You must get 
My Grandfather's goodwill . here 's your Great-aunt . 


Enter Menanthe . Per.   That we may be kept from committing Incest ; 
The Devil choke her ; hark you , pretty one , 
Lugo must not know we are married , Lamb.  


Me.   I would he knew we were unmarried , Goat . 


Enter Gioseppe and Filomarini . Gio.   Madam , here 's my Lord Lugo . 


Me.   Call Leandra . [ Exit Gioseppe . 


Enter Lugo . Fil.   The Prince is come . 


Me.   Wait him in , honest Draco . [ Exit Fil.  


Lug.   Two thousand Pistols , Madam , I have brought you 
In new-coined Gold.  


Per.   I 'll give 'em to her Maid . [ Peralta takes the bag . 


Me.   Hey , Snap ! she knows for what use they 're designed . 


Per.   And I know for what use your Maid's designed . 


Enter Leandra . Me.   My Lord ,   made a purchase of a Wife . 


Lug.   i  purchased Happiness in so much Beauty ; 
But her sweetness of Obedience 
And Harmony of Nature , all those Worlds 
Of Music which Divine Pythagoras 
Placed in the Planets . where 's the Priest ? 


Enter Salerno and Filomarini . Lean.   here 's one 
That looks more like the Bridegroom than the Priest.  


Fil.   't is the Prince of Salerno . [ to Leandra . 


Lug.   What wind blows 
My cousin of Salerno ? 


Dia.   The Prince , Madam . [ to Leandra . 


Sal.   Directed to the life by this fair Figure . [ He shous her Picture . 


Lug.   Decline his courtship ; slight him . 


Lean.   'Slight a Prince ? 


Me.   Withdraw , I pray thee . 


Lean.   Pray thee ? pray thee peace , 
( I never heard so simple an old Soul ) 
When a Prince makes his first Address , withdraw ? 


Me.   I charge thee — 


Lugier   Do you hear who charges you ? 
Your Mother , never disobeyed . 


Lean.   There is 
A time for all things , for my Mother too 
To be advised better than to enjoin 
Ill manners : leave a Prince that visits me ? 


Lug.   Not when your Mother ( that groaned for you ) bids ? 


Lean.   I 'll ask a question first ; pray , Sir , how got you 
My Picture ? 


Sal.   Madam , by a Miracle . 


Me.   Get ye in . 


Lean.   I 'll stay to hear the Miracle . 


Sal.   Now for a Story to excuse Love's Envoy . [ too Fil.  
'T was news at Court , that the great Virtuoso , 
Virgetio , was come from Rome to Naples , 
And had brought with him a rare Concave-glass , 
Made with Art more than Mathematical , 
So that upon a white Plane 't would cast off 
The Form or Species of the Man or Woman 
Any one wished to see ; to him I went 
( Out of an Airy curiosity ) 
To see my Mistress . 


Lean.   And he showed you this ? 


Sal.   The form by which my Servant drew this Piece . 


Lean.   This ? ( what a Villain was the Virtuoso ! ) 
This Mistress ? Mother , pardon — 


Lug.   Her first fault . 


Me.   Take heed , my Girl , take heed of a Relapse , 
If you forget your duty any more — 


Lean.   then do not you remember such a child . 


Enter Gioseppe . Gio.   The Priest is ready . 


Lug.   We are ready for him . 


Sal.   I must beg of you — 


Lean.   Of me ? 


Lug.   Hear him not . 


Lean.   Not hear a Prince that comes a begging to me ? 
I 'll hear and answer : Sir , what 's your command ? 


Sal.   Madam , my suit is , that you 'll please to sit for 
Your Picture , and I 'll send you a great Master 
Shall limn it ( rarely ) by the life . 


Lean.   He shall . 


Me.   Daughter , he shall not . 


Lean.   Woman , Shall thy Men , 
Those thou imploy'st : the Limner comes to me , 
And I 'll not have him Shalled . 


Me.   Woman ? 


Lean.   Good Woman , 
Meddle with thy own Matters , good Old Woman . 


Me.   th' old Woman's Mother to my fine Young Lady , 
If she be pleased to remember it . 


Sal.   Remember , that you are a Prince's Mistress . 


Lean.   A Prince's Mistress ? though 't was my Resemblance , 
That Mistress could not be Leandra's Spirit ; 
I do remember , that you are my Mother , 
And once again I pray to be forgiven : 
But send your Picture-drawer , Sir , I 'll sit , 
If she were all the Mothers under th' Sun.  


Fil.   Go , leave the Prince to pause on 't . [ to Leandra . 


Lug.   Come , my Love. [ Exeunt Lug. Lean. Menan . & Gios.  


Sal.   She would be my Love too , but not my Mistress ; 
But , Mistress , I may Master you , I may . 


Fil.   You shall ; in my Experience , Sir , confided , 
Youth marches safe that follows an old Guide . [ Exeunt . 


Enter Decio and Corbulo . Cor.   Your Wife comes . 


Dec.   I 'm grown valiant now , Lieutenant , 
I 'll march , but stand thou — 
Enter Pyramena . Centree for my Captain . [ Exit Corb.  


Py.   My heart , I was at such a loss — 


Dec.   At Cards ? 


Py.   no , I won all I played for : but I was 
At such a Loss for want of thee — 


Dec.   To fool ? 
I know my duty , 't is my Family-duty ; 
Tell me true , hadst thou ever married me , 
But for the noble quality of fooling , 
Taking me for a Gifted man ? 


Py.   That gift 
( I must confess ) bribed me . 


Dec.   th' Acknowledgement 
Is most ingenuous ; at another time , 
I 'll be as free with thee , and tell thee why 
I married thee . 


Py.   Will you not tell me now ? 


Dec.   Now you shall tell me , who played at Cards with you ? 


Py.   None but my Lord Iberio and I played . 


Dec.   Who waited ? 


Py.   no body . 


Dec.   no Page ? 


Py.   no Page . 


Dec.   no Groom ? 


Py.   no Groom ; I tell you no body . 


Dec.   What , not your Woman ? 


Py.   Not my Woman : lack , 
How your tongue runs ! 


Dec.   If any man , but I , 
Be private with my Wife , is 't for her Honour ? 


Py.   Is Honour treated of , by your small Poets ? 
Do ye find it among Gods and Goddesses ? 
Pray tell me , what 's our Honour ? or Dishonour ? 


Dec.   what 's th' Honour or Dishonour of a Wife ? 
't is at her death ( when clear unbiased Truth 
Takes th' inventory of her Vice and Virtue ) 
The Total Sum , th' Account which Fame gives of her . 


Py.   How ? this is sense ; these are not Parot's words : 
This Husband is no Engine , but a Man , 
A jealous Man ; I shall love Jealousy , 
If it awake his Soul. I 'll try him further : [ aside . 
But how gets Fame her good and bad Reports ? 


Dec.   Of th'eating and the drinking mouths , our Servants : 
We must be careful of our Credit ( Love ) 
Unless he mean to be our Servants Slaves . 


Py.   Kiss me ; you shall find fault with me no more , 
Henceforth I will be jealous of myself . 


Dec.   How ever you take it , it concerns you most ; 
If you miscarry in your Honour , I 
Shall ( like a Merchant broke by his misfortune ) 
Be pitied ; but my Wife will be despised . 


Py.   What will this Man prove ? what shall I say to him ? 
Iberio never was alone with me , 
But by my Maids I made your Men believe 't , 
To put the sense of Honour into you . 
Now you deserve my Love , kiss me again . 


Dec.   here 's a new Wedding on th' old Wedding-day ; 
Were the Mask ready — 


Enter Corbulo . Cor.   Sir , a kind of Mask 
Is brought you ( these hard words stick in my throat ) 
Enter Arviedo . They call 't a Screnade , here 's the Presenter . 


Dec.   My Arviedo , welcome ; 't is apparent , 
thou wilt not fail thy friend in great Engagements , 
Who art so punctual in a promised trifle . 


Aru.   The man that is not in th' Enemies power , 
Nor fettered by Misfortune , and breaks promise , 
Degrades himself , he never can pretend 
To Honour more . 


Dec.   thou art the Soul of Honour . 
Enter the Evening ( in a Crown of Shadowed Stars , and a Cloudy Vest with some small Stars upon it ) brought in by two Winds.  what 's here ? if th' Evening ( as I fancy it ) 
could take a Visible form , this would be ours , 
A gloomy Evening , suddenly brought in 
By two Winds . 


Aru.   You guests right , 't is so intended . 
Madam , I only beg you 'll pardon me , 
If you will , he must , for 't was his Injunction . [ they sit . Flajolets play a far off . 


Song in Dialogue . Evening .  I am an Evening dark as Night , 
Jack-with-the-lantern bring a Light — 


Jack .  whither , whither , whither ? [ within . 


Evening .  Hither , hither , hither . 


Jack .  thou art some prattling Echo , of my making . 


Evening .  thou art a Foolish Fire , by thy mistaking : 
I am the Evening that creates thee . 


Enter Jack in a black Suit bordered with Glow-worm's , a Coronet of Shaded Beams on his head , over it a Paper Lantern with a Candle in 't . Jack .  My Lantern and my Candle waits thee . 


Evening .  Those Flajolets that we heard play , 
Are Reapers who have lost their way ; 
They Play , they Sing , they Dance around , 
Led them up , here 's Faery-ground . 
Chorus . 

Let the Men beware the Ditches ; 
Maids , look to your Breeches , 
we 'll scratch them with Briars and I histles : 
When the Flajolets cry , 
We are a-dry ; 
Pond-water shall wet their Whistles . [ Exeunt Evening , Winds , & Jack . 


Dec.   Does Pyramena know this Dancing Lantern ? 


Py.   The Ignis Fatuus I suppose ; some call it 
Jack-with-the-lantern , some , Will with the Wisp ; 
't is th' Evening's False Light , which leads stumbling Clowns 
( O'er Moor's and Marshes ) into Bogs and Pits . 
The Violins and Flajolets play . Jack leads in the Reapers , the Men in their Half-shirts and Linen Drawers , the Maids in Straw-hats , they stumble , and their Sickles fall into the Scene . They Dance in Figures . At the end of the first Dance Jack leads them out , and once or twice they thread the doors after him , than they take hands , compass in Jack , Dance a Round , and Sing Buffs a fine Sport , 
And so 's Course o'-park ; 
But both come short 
Of a Dance in the Dark . 
We trip it completely , 
The Pipe sounds so neatly : 
But that which surpasses 
Is the breath of the Lasses , 
OH the pretty Rogues kiss featly . [ Jack runs away , and leaves them to stumble out in the dark . 


Aru.   Now if the Bride and Bride-groom's patience 
Be not tormented with my Poetry — 


Dec.   Profess 't is well , 't is natural , it suits 
This cloudy Evening : in a little time 
thou 'lt make as pretty a Poet as myself . 
I 'll pay my thanks in Coin of the same Stamp , 
You shall see th'practice of my Mask ; I hope , 
Love , you 'll be pleased ? 


Py.   With any thing of yours . 


Dec.   that 's the sweet Close to Arviedo's Music ; 
th' expression of your love unclowds the Evening ; 
What greater blessing can from Heaven descend ? 
Decio is happy in a Wife and Friend . [ Exeunt . 


Actus Quartus . 

Enter Decio and Corbulo . Cor.   Italians are the Prodigies of Malice ; 
no People under Heaven , nor Fiends in Hell , 
Outdo us in the plotting our Revenges ; 
But a Design like yours I never heard of , 
Nor could believe it possible in Nature . 
Yet , for Humanitie's sake , stop your progress . 


Dec.   Dissuade me not , I 'm deaf to intercession . 


Cor.   I know , 't will grieve your soft Soul , when 't is done ; 
then how much better were it , not to do it ? 


Dec.   If the Train I have laid , would spring a Mine 
To blow up Naples , I 'd give fire and perish . 


Cor.   Spare me . 


Dec.   How ? 


Cor.   I desire to be excused , 
Corbulo will not act in 't . 


Dec.   But he shall ; 
thou hast my Secret , and I have thy Oath : 
Dispute not , execute . 


Cor.   Well , than I must . 
But you 'll curse th' instrument . 


Dec.   The hand Divine 
Moves such an Instrument ; the hand of Justice 
Squares Punishment adequate to th' Offence ; 
Despair for Scorn is but due Recompense . 
My Lord Iberio's with his Regiment 
And Arviedo gone aboard , to take 
Leave of his Kinsman , than the youth returns 
To my house , be you sure you let him in . 
My Wife may send Arviedo for Iberio . 
Leave me , when I stamp thus , bring in thy Message . [ Exit Corbulo . 
Enter Pyramena . They danced not ill ? 


Py.   Rarely well . Dear , your promise ; 
Why did you marry me ? 


Dec.   Guess . 


Py.   For my Fortune ? 


Dec.   no , not for Money . Guests again . 


Py.   For Love ? 


Dec.   Not for Love neither ; thou art a base Guesser ; 
But I 'll resolve thee . I did marry thee 
( As th'ill-faced woman's Husband was made Cuckold ) 
For spite . 


Py.   ha , ha — 


Dec.   I 'm glad it makes you merry . 
Why , thou more fool than thou imagin'dst me , 
What Worm trepaned thee , bored quite through thy skull 
Into thy dull brains , to think Decio 
Would feed upon Reversions of a Mistress : 
A Mistress to my mortal Enemy , 
My Sister's Murderer , Iberio ? 


Py.   I doubt — 


Dec.   Dost but doubt ? Bondmaid , know thy Lord 
At our last Conference , I cast off my Cloud , 
My Property , the Droll ; now I appear 
Myself , a stern Venetian , principled 
Out of old Machiavelli — When I married thee , 
I married ( my dear Sister ) thy Revenge . 


Py.   How miserable have I made myself ! 


Dec.   To make me happy ; I have scaped the Wheel 
By marrying thee , I 'd been broke every bone , 
Had I done that I came to Naples for , 
Poisoned Iberio any way but this — 
I triumph in the ruins of his Love , 
His Sovereign is my Slave , my hated Slave . 


Py.   But how have I transgressed ? in punishing 
Me for him , are you just ? 


Dec.   no , I am cruel : 
All high Revenges must dispense with Justice . 
If I had to my End no other way , 
But like a Witch to violate the Grave 
Of my ( now blessed ) Sister Ericina , 
Who for her love to false Iberio died , 
I would break up her hallowed Marble ; tear 
Her Cerecloth ; scatter her sweet Bones ; and cast 
Her dust in 's face to blast him . 


Py.   OH my heart ! 


Dec.   I would not have it broke , till it be bruised ; 
Until , by slow ( but Sensible ) degrees , 
I break the Idol which my Enemy worships . 
I know , your Hearts are like two Lutes racked up 
To the same pitch , and when I touch but one 
The other ( by mysterious Sympathy ) 
Will ( though at distance ) answer Note by Note , 
With the same dying sound ; and that 's the Music 
My heart so longs to hear . [ he stamps ▪ 


Enter Corbulo . Cor.   A Messenger , 
Scent from the Venice Paquet-boat , desires 
That you 'll come to the Port , he says , the Searchers 
Have seized your Trunk . 


Dec.   Think ; like a Soul in Flames , 
Think and torment thyself , till I return , 
And finish my great work . You are all armed ? 


Cor.   Ready , when you say , Strike ; but — yet i  sworn , 
Therefore I 'll do it . 


Enter Arviedo . Dec.   Arviedo's come ; 
I hope , she 'll send him for Iberio . 


Aru.   Madam , look up , you shall not be thus used 
By a base man ( how was I cozened in him ! ) 
i  heard all , I 'll call him to an account . 


Py.   But is my Lord Iberio gone aboard . 


Aru.   An hour since , but the Fleet rides still at Anchor ; 
I 'll take a Boat , and tell him how 't is with you ; 
I know he 'll come . 


Py.   And let me speak with him , 
Before you call Decio to an account : 
But let him bring no Soldiers , lest the Porter 
Shut up the Gates ; Dear Arviedo , go . 


Aru.   Would I could fly . 


Py.   Hast thou not wings concealed ? 
thou look'st like my Good-angel . 


Aru.   I had need 
To borrow both his Vigilance and Speed. [ Exeunt . 


Enter Filomarini and Peralta . Fil.   The greatest honour Draco's Family 
Yet ever had , is , that Captain Peralta 
( The Glory and the Terror of our Nation ) 
Has a mind to my Grandchild . 


Per.   Oh! she 's pretty . 


Fil.   Prettiness itself I wish her , for your sake . 


Per.   she 's all that can be wished ; i  hired a Passage , 
The Master of his Holiness' Galley , 
Will land us in St. Peter's Patrimony , 
we 'll strait to Rome , there I 'll marry Fritilla . 


Fil.   But your old Wife must be left here in Naples . 


Per.   Against the next Siege : for when Ammunition 
Is spent , she may do service ; the old woman 
Will make rare Gunpowder , she 's pure Saltpetre . 


Fil.   I have been i' th' blind Alley , old fat joan 
Melts her grease for you , she has made your bed 
In your old Chamber . 


Per.   Careful Grandfather , 
I shall requite thy pains . 


Fil.   you 'll find me honest : 
I hope you 'll find my Granchild honest too , 
I mean not of her Body , ( as for that , 
You , that must be her Husband , may dispose it ) 
But honest of her Mind your new Bride must be 
By Nature , by my Copy ; I dare swear 
That to redeem me ( if I were in pawn ) 
She would not rob ye of any of the Jewels 
( Which you have promised to intrust her with ) 
Yet if she would she cannot . 


Per.   For i' th' Street 
I march with my sweet Prisoner in my hand , 
And at my Chamber fold her in my arms . 


Fil.   Are you so hot ? she has a Julip for you , 
Your old Wife shall cure your Concupiscence . 


Per.   But to my business , Grandfather , The Prince 
Offers not at this breathing Shrine , Leandra , 
And there 's no waiting for uncertain hopes ; 
Besides I fear my Lord Filomarini 
May come unlooked for ; I 'll pack up my free-boot : 
Remember an hour hence , in the close Walk . Exit Peralta . [ Wax Lights on the Table . 


Enter Salerno , Leandra , Menanthe , Lugo , and Diacelia . Sal.   All friends , all friends ; hang Fears and Jealousies . 
I ( Cousin ) that came to your house this morning , 
To give your other Bride , that was my Mistress , 
I will not stick at giving of Leandra . 


Lean.   Pray hold your hand , my Mother will give me . 


Dia.   What means Leandra ? [ Men. and Lean. whisper . 


Fil.   As you do , to follow 
Her guardian 's advice ; and yet she needs not 
My Precepts , Nature has instructed her : 
Madam , be confident , she 'll demean herself 
As it becomes a Daughter to your Father . 


Me.   Take her , Son ; finely put off the Fool Lugo . 


Lean.   You must not then be angry , if I rant 
As well at you as him . 


Me.   I will not , Child . 


Lean.   then I 'll spare neither . Diacelia now [ too Dia.  
Shall see me do a younger Sister's duty , 
Cashier your Bridegroom . Mother-midnight , take 
Your Son-in-law and marry him yourself ; 
You may as well obey me , as I you : 
I disclaim you for Mother , him for Husband . 


Lug.   Have I with all those thousands purchased this ? 
What reason have you for disowning me ? 


Lean.   What reason had you to disown a Princess ? 


Lug.   Would not you be a Princess ? 


Lean.   If I were , 
This Ancient Gentlewoman ( that presumes 
To call herself my Mother ) should be racked 
So long , till she confessed herself to be 
My stepmother ; for could a Natural Mother 
Betray her Child to one that has no Honour 
But Title ? 


Lug.   Blind Love , thou art off my heart : 
And now with open eyes I see my folly . 
Were your Ambition pleased , were you a Princess , 
Were you an Angel , since the devil 's in you , 
I would not marry you . I 'll find a Wife 
that 's not a wicked Daughter . 


Lean.   Do , go home , 
't is time you ask forgiveness of your Bride . 


Lug.   You , of your Mother ; but I 'll pardon neither , 
Both shall hear from me , th' old Cheat , and young Ranter . [ Exit Lugo . 


Dia.   So , so ; my Game plays well . 


Me.   Now he 's shaked off , 
My Child puts on her old Obedience : 
And on your Highness freely I bestow 
( To be commanded what you please ) my Daughter . 


Lean.   Thy Daughter ? dost thou in good earnest think 
Thyself my Mother ? 


Me.   What think'st thou ? 


Lean.   I know , 
By my own Truth , my Mother was no Liar ; 
I know , by my Integrity , my Mother 
could be no Cheat ; and by my Modesty 
I know my Mother was no Bawd , which you 
Would be to the Prince ; or else ( virtuous Madam ) 
I should not be commanded what he pleases . 


Me.   Wretch , thou wilt break thy aged Mother's heart . 


Lean.   Through her Ear ; hark you , Beldame . 


Me.   Sure the Devil 
Is her Intelligencer ; 't is high time 
To shifted for one , the Rogue will give 's the slip . 
Let 's go , Fritilla ; Murderer of thy Mother , 
Hear my last words , I leave thee to the Prince . [ Exeunt Men. & Dia.  


Sal.   You hear your Mother ? she leaves you to me , 
By her Will Paroll , and that is as good 
To all intents of Law , as 't were in Writing ; 
Besides , you 're left to the wide world , no fortune , 
But that foretold me by the Virtuoso — 


Lean.   That I should be your Mistress ? that 's your Servant , [ She takes up one of the Wax-candles . 


Servant of Pleasure , put me into waiting , 
Pray let me light you to your Bedchamber ? [ Exit Filomarini . 


Sal.   By no means ; I ( your Servant ) will light you . 


Lean.   The Taper better suits my Fortune , Sir ; 
And 't is discretion , ere I do the Fault , 
To practise how the Penance will become me . 


Sal.   You cannot think , you have so base a Servant 
As would see ' his Mistress do a public Penance ; 
Should my Lord-cardinal here , and the whole College 
Of Cardinals at Rome , join to disgrace thee , 
I 'd have a Rendezvouz of all my Friends , 
And meet them in the head of a brave Army ▪ 
To beaten them into more Civility . 
Set down the Taper . 


Lean.   Not till I have found — 


Sal.   You have lost nothing ( to my knowledge ) yet : 
What do you look for ? 


Lean.   A room dark enough 
To cover a Maid's blushes . 


Sal.   As I live , 
The prettiest humoured Mistress i' th' whole world . 
Why , do you look for darkness with a Light ? 
I 'll blow it out — 


Lean.   You may extinguish this ; 
But who can blow out those , the Lights of Heaven ? 
The Stars still see us . 


Sal.   When we see not them ? 
If you mean the great Room , the Sky ; 't is dark , 
Not one Star there . 


Lean.   Nor any Witness here ? 


Sal.   Let 's search the Chamber — 


Lean.   Search the Closet first , 
Your Bosom ; whosoever contracts a guilt , 
Carries a cloud of Witnesses in his bosom . 


Sal.   Her other Fits were Natural , she 's now 
In her Divine Fit. [ aside . 


Lean.   Has he got no feeling ? [ aside . 
no sense of Honour , in a Man of Honour ? 
You grow so dull , I see , you 'd be at rest , 
And you 'll not let me usher you : good-night . 


Sal.   Wilt cross thy Fortune ? 


Lean.   no , your Virtuoso 
Is not so good , as I , at Fortune-telling ; 
I 'm rare at Physiognomy , I see 
My Fortune , wanton Prince , in your proud looks ; 
You think me too unworthy for a Wife , 
And I know , I 'm too worthy for a Mistress . 
Again , Good-night . 


Sal.   Ask any thing but Marriage — 


Lean.   Any thing else I scorn , as you scorn me . 
Good-night for ever . 


Sal.   there 's a Passing-bell — 
no Composition ? 


Lean.   Not your Prince's Crown , 
I 'd rather carry a Milk-pail on my head . [ Exit Lean.  


Sal.   Well , go thy way , no Mean man got that Spirit ; 
if 't be her own air , not an humour put 
Into her by th' old Knave , in hope I 'll marry her , 
And then her grateful hand must feed th' old Beggar 
With my Gold ; i  a Way to find the Plot , 
And if 't be his , I 'll cut off the Projector . 
Enter Filomarini . Draco ? [ Sal. draws his Sword.  


Fil.   Congratulates your Victory , 
Nay , your Sword , Sir , never made such a Conquest . 
Is she not inimaginable Sweetness 
You have enjoyed ? 


Sal.   I made her a fair offer . 


Fil.   She took it ? 


Sal.   Sooner she'd have taken Ratsbane . 


Fil.   You mean not to kill her , for being honest ? 


Sal.   But I mean to kill thee , for being a Knave , 
Old lying Tempter : didst not thou suggest 
The sweetness of her Disposition , 
Her Mildness , Innocence , Obedience ? 


Fil.   Sir , you 're a Prince of Famous Memory , 
Those were my words , and I remember yours , 
Let none corrupt her Virtues but myself : 
You wished her Virtuous , that you only might 
Have the debauching of her , I have done 
What you commanded ; if she disobey you , 
Because she 's virtuous must I lose my life ? 


Sal.   Shall not I sheathe my Sword in that Man's breast , 
Who has into my bosom flung Fire , Wildfire , 
Not to be quenched but either in thy blood , 
Or her fruition ; there 's no third way ? yes , 
I 'll marry her . 


Fil.   ( So cunning ) Kill me first ; 
I would not live , to see your Highness marry 
The Daughter of a Cheat.  


Sal.   Live , Draco , live 
High in our favour , I suspected thee 
To have a plot upon me , had I found 
Thy hand in 't , the whole Earth should not have saved thee : 
I will not lose thee now for the King's Indieses . 


Fil.   And shall you lose th' enjoyment of Leandra ? 
Shall such a Prince lauguish for such a Toy , 
that 's now at my disposal ? to be plain , 
The Cheat , her Mother , and Sea-thief , her Husband , 
Having rooked your poor Lovesick Cousin , Lugo , 
Are fled away , Leandra left to me , 
But i  a Spy upon them , they will lodge 
With the fat Naples-hostess , at old Ioan's : 
Sign me your Warrant , I 'll bring to your Palace 
The Cheats to morrow morning , but this night 
Leandra to your bed . 


Sal.   Come , I 'll dispatch thee , 
And when 't is done , I 'll give thee a thousand Crowns . 


Fil.   And if I do 't not , cut my throat in earnest . [ Exeunt . 


Enter Menanthe , Joan , and Gioseppo , with a Dark-lantern . Me.   joan , hast thou courage to abuse Peralta ? 


joan.   Emboldened with your Sack ( for I have drunk [ to Gios.  
A pottle of your bounty ) I 'll so fool 
The Knave your Husband into honesty , 
That he shall stumble over his young Mistress , 
And fall upon 's old Wife . 


Gio.   thou wilt be famous 
For this night's work . 


joan.   This night , I will recover 
The credit of good women of my bulk : 
Rogues shan't say , all fat Hostesses are Bawds . 


Gio.   Methinks , this merry Monster should cheer you ; 
Why do you cry ? for your ungracious Child ? 


Me.   no truly , ( i  made my best of her ) I cry 
To think that I should marry such a Villain . 


Gio.   You yourself being such an innocent creature ? 


Me.   send us good luck , for the night 's foul and dark . 


Gio.   The fitter for our knavery . They stay long ; 
Enter Filomarini . Here comes the Captain ? no , 't is Captain Drake . 


Fil.   Captain Peralta's at my heels ; stand close . 


Gio.   Hush , and the old Grey Cat shall catch her Mouse . 
That nibbles at a young delicious Maid . 
you 'll have a sweet night , for he 's high and hot . 


Me.   I 'll cool him with a Robbery , though I die for 't . 


Enter Peralta with a Dark-lantern in one hand , leading Diacelia in the other , she wears the Coronet and knot of Diamonds . Dia.   Well , Captain , you are a complying Captain , 
To trust me with these Jewels , nothing else 
could have made me trust myself in your hands : 
But now I 'll follow you by Sea and Land , 
In Peace and War , I 'll fight too . 


Per.   OH brave Girl ! 


Dia.     made me brave , the Master will mistake 
My Coronet for Ariadne's Crown , 
And in this knot of Diamonds find a Pole 
To sail by , this dark night . 


Per.   Here is th' Osteria , 
We are landed at old Iean's : Shipwrecked i'th'harbour ? Filomarini and Gioseppe break their hands and catch up Peralta's Lantern . Gioseppe and Joan put Menanthe's hand into Peralta's : Diacelia laying her cheek to Menanthe's , speaks to Peralta as if he held her by the hand . 
My Lantern gone ? Fritilla ? 


Dia.   Here , Sir , here . 


Per.   'T was happy we were come to this blind Alley , 
The Streets are laid for me , I durst not call 
At any other house . joan , joan , why joan ? 


joan.   Sure I do hear Captain Peralta's voice ? 
Heigh-ho . 


Per.   Why dost thou sigh , and speak so faintly ? 
A Light , joan ? 


joan.   OH good Captain , I beseech you 
Name not a Light. That ever I was born 
To see the Light of Heaven ! 


Per.   Would I could see 't , 
For 't is as dark as Hell.  


joan.   hell 's a sweet place , 
If it be dark . 


Per.   What , is the Devil in thee ? 


joan.   Not in me ; but the devil 's in my Husband , 
he 's run stark staring mad , and plays the Devil 
When he sees any Light , Sir : he struck out 
My elder daughter 's Eyes , because he said 
They sparkled : and my Nose was almost levelled ▪ 
( Pray feel , I wear a Patch ) because 't was tipped , 
Only a little sprinkled with my Bottle , 
And he cried , 't was afire . 


Per.   then   no fire ? 


joan.   Nor Candle , Sir , Glow-worm , nor Rotten wood , 
Nor any thing that shines , besides my Nose , 
( And that 's under a Cloud ) but , Captain , you 
Know th' old way to your Bed.  


Per.   I 'll lead thee , Dear . 


joan.   Is not your Roundlet of Sack well bestowed ? [ to Gioseppe . 


Gio.   Would 't were a Hogshead for thee , old Shee-bully . 


Per.   Why comest not on ? 


Dia.   O softly ; the raw Air 
Has made my Head ache , as 't would fly to pieces , 
And talking makes it worse : sweet Captain , ask 
no Questions , for then I 'm obliged to Answer ; 
But quietly to bed . 


Per.   With all my heart . [ Exeunt Per. & Men. Gio. & Joan.  


Dia.   Grandfather , you must watch the Greek Impostress , 
Or else she 'll carry away the Bag of Gold ; 
I go a Bride-groom-catching ; my old Servant , 
The Prince shall help me . 


Fil.   And the Gold shall meet thee . [ Exeunt . 


Enter Pyramena . Py.   A Woman , sure , has two Souls , the one Noble , 
th' other Base , and i  lost my Noble Soul , 
Or else could Pyramena ( that scorned life 
This morning ) now at night fear , like a Child , 
The Bugbear we call Death ? say he should come , 
Death only comes with terror to the Happy , 
To me he brings a Blessing , begged in vain 
By thousands , which , like me , have need to die ; 
Alas ! Death hears not , when the Wretched cry . 
But i  more need to live , that I may get 
A pardon for a Sin , but little lesle 
Than Perjury , and yet I saw it not 
( Even when it pulled down ruin on my head ) 
So long as Spleen and Selfwill blinded me , 
Till Misery opened my eyes : and now 
I shall not see his face that would forgive me ? 
Enter Iberio in his Gorget , Arviedo following . How I belie my Happiness ! he 's here ; 
Oh! OH Iberio . [ she knelt . 


Iber.   Fie , Pyramena , 
Why do you kneel to me ? 


Py.   I must not rise , 
Till you pronounce my pardon . 


Ibe .  For what fault ? 


Py.   You speak , as if I would outface it still ; 
For the most foul of all faults , breach of Faith , 
For passing to another Man your Right , 
Your Pyramena . 


Ibe .  Rise , I pardon thee . 


Py.   But will Iberio love me ? 


Ibe .  As a Friend . 


Py.   Not as a Wife ? 


Ibe .  You are another's now : 
You know i  forfeited my Right in you . 


Py.   In my own words most justly I am answered . 
Peace of Soul , all Delights that make Life sweet , 
Be with you . 


Ibe .  Stay , there 's something in thy Eyes 
That makes thy wishes ineffectual , 
thou look'st wild . 


Py.   Why should you concern yourself 
How I look ? do you think Aeneas cared 
How Dido looked , when she saw him Embark ? 


Ibe .  The Clay a Lover's made of , will not mould 
A Politician ; I can bend my brow 
no longer . 't is thy Wedding-night , and yet 
Not Bedtime : thou art still untouched ? 


Py.   A Virgin.  


Ibe .  then thou art mine . I will put in my Claim 
At Rome ; the Court , the Rota , must declare 
Us Man and Wife , thither I 'll send the Case 
By the Pope's Galley , which to morrow morning 
Leaves the Fleet , and Tacks off for Ostia , 
To give our Holy Father an account 
Of our Venetian Levies ; till we have 
The Judgement of the Court , we 'll live in Candy . 


Aru.   Talk , when you 're safe out of this dangerous place . 
Madam , I can sit you with a disguise . 


Ibe .  no , Pyramena , boldly show your face , 
For if the Porter question us , I 'll kill him ▪ Iberio draws , as he leads off Pyramena , Corbulo and Vindex enter with Firelocks in their hands . 


Cor.   The Porter stands as fair to shoot your Lordship , 
Unless you yield ( and presently ) to mercy ; 
We give no quarter . 


Ibe .  Villain , shoot . 


Py.   Hold , Soldier ; 
Since I see , my perfidious Crime against 
This Lord , must have Expiatory blood , 
Kill me . 


Cor.   You shalt be talked withal anon : 
Will you lay down your sword ? 't is your last Summons ▪ 


Ibe .  My Sword was made for no base hand . I 'll die 
Thus , like a Soldier : die thou , like a Murderer , 
broke on the Wheel . 


Py.   Hold , O hold ! By these Tears , 
By your recovered first-love ! conjure you , 
Yield to your cruel Fortune , not to Them : 
Yield , or they shoot me . She runs to Iberio , stands before him , and exposes her breast for his . 


Ibe .  thou art safe . There , Slaves , [ he flings down his sword . 
't is she that has disarmed me . 


Enter Decio . Dec.   Now , a man 
May bid my Lord welcome , ( without a Dance ) 
To 's own , not his Wife's House ; and loving Wife 
( Whether you are his Wife , or mine ) you shall 
Embrace no more ; bind both their arms , and bear 'em [ Cor. and Vindex bind the three Prisoners . 
To th' place of Execution . 


Ibe .  What death ? 


Dec.   Such notice as thou gav'st my murdered Sister 
Of that base Robbery , when thou stolest thyself 
From her at Venice , I mean to give thee 
Of the Intrigue of her Revenge . But know , 
Before she died , I promised Ericina 
To kill thee in the Joys of thy new Love ; 
Therefore when you and Pyramena quareled , 
I held my hand , forbore to poison you , 
And from her Hatred to your Jealous Nature , 
Wone her to marry me or my Free humour ; 
then gave you way to reconcile yourselves , 
That so I might get you into my power . 
Go thou , and marry her in the other world . 
Bear 'em to death . 


Vin.   Let him ; I will not stir , 
unless 't be to unbind them . 


Dec.   dar'st thou talk ? 


Vin.   Freelier yet ; set them at Liberty , 
Or I 'll unriddle You : did not these hands 
Bury the Body of — 


Cor.   Braved by a Slave ? Corbulo disarms Vindex , and offers to knock out his brains . 


Dec.   Hold thy hand , Corbulo : Vindex , hear thy doom , 
Die ; or be honest , and live rich and free . 


Vin.   Life's sweet , when handsomely accommodated ; 
Give me my Tools again , and let 's to work . 


Ibe .  Comets , that rise and shine a while like Stars , 
Will down again and stink . Slaves will be Slaves . 


Dec.   See their last Draught prepared , as I directed . 


Py.   Spit out thy Poison now for both of us . 


Dec.   I 'll satisfy your longing . 


Ibe .  Arviedo , 
Discover thyself to him ; when he hears 
Thy name , 't will shake the bloody Butcher's Knife 
Out of his hand . 


Aru.   no , my Lord , I will never 
Own my life to your Murderer ; 't is my glory 
I die with you , whose bounteous hand has kept me 
Thus long alive . 


Ibe .  thou hast the old Man's Soul , 
Had I his Sword — 


Dec.   It should save none of you ; 
Yet i  a private kindness for the Youth , 
I 'll bring him to a Priest before he dies ; 
But no Sword shall redeem him from these arms . 
My long-mocked Fury , like an Army's rage 
That storms a Town , shall spare no Sex , nor Age.  [ Exeunt . 


Actus Quintus . 

Enter Peralta in his Nightgown . Per.   Bless me ! ( that 's more than I have said this sev'n years ) 
Come out old Hag , was 't you that cast the Mist 
Before my eyes ? 


Enter Menanthe , a Sword in her right hand , in her left the Bag of Gold.  Me.   Yes , Captain-coxcomb , I ; 
I , brave Sea-captain , I removed the Lights 
Out of your Admiral : I raised the Fog 
Wherein my Man of War was lost , and all 
The Gold aboard him shipwrecked , I left nothing 
To keep possession for him , not a Cat 
To spit Fire : but couldst thou not see the Beacons ? [ She points to her eyes . 


Per.   Fire will take those eyes , Witch , when thou art burned , 
they 're now as dark as these rooms yesternight . 
Well , Nightmare , you have had your pleasure of me , 
You do not mean to rob me ? 


Me.   Keep off , Captain , 
And do not you fore-speak me ; for I mean 
To rob thee of this Gold , and pay myself , 
Like Wenches that have wit , for my Night's lodging ; 
Once in my life I 'll make prize of a Pirate . 
Advance , and if I kill thee not , hang me . 


Per.   Let me die , if I do ned begin to love 
Thy wit and spirit above all young flesh ; 
thou art an old Virago . 


Me.   I have wit 
And courage enough , Captain , to keep thee 
From any more embraces . 


Per.   Nay , then be 
Incredulous at thy peril , twice that Gold 
Will never purchase such a Bed-fellow . 


Me.   If there were any truth in such a Husband , 
I like thee for a Bed-fellow , but — 


Per.   no but , 
Wilt have me swear ? 


Me.   Hast thou not sworn and broke ? 


Per.   An Oath for Form-sake merely , Matrimony 
Is sworn of course ; but now I 'll marry thee 
The Sea-way , as the Duke of Venice marries 
The Gulf , make all that Gold into a Ring , 
And cast it into thee . 


Me.   Explain yourself . 


Per.   That is , first , as the true Proprietor 
I 'll take the plunder to myself , and then 
Return thee All.  


Me.   Swear . 


Per.   As I hope to scape 
Being trussed up at the Main-yard , I 'll do 't . 


Me.   there 's Gold and Sword ; and now I hope I please thee . 


Per.   And I 'll perform with thee , as the old Romans 
Did with Tarpeia , who betrayed for Gold 
The Capitol : thou shalt have the full Agreement , 
All , Gold and Sword ? 


Me.   You will not ? 


Per.   Pray , or curse , 
For to the Pot thou goest . 


Me.   then you 're a Rogue . 


Per.   Did you doubt that ? thus I resolve thee . 


Me.   Help ! 


Enter Officer's , Filomarini and Gioseppe , the Officers seize Peralta and Menanthe , Gioseppe takes the bag of Gold.  Fil.   Fight with your Wife ? fie , the Prince of Salerno 
Would speak with you ; look to your Prisoner , 
He catches at your Bills ; I tell thee , Captain , 
The Prince will only speak , not fight with thee . 


Per.   Nay , if I must not fight , I will not speak , 
The torture shall not get out one word more . 


Fil.   thou hast the Bag ? 


Gio.   Yes , the whole Cheat's recovered . 


Enter Salerno and Lugo . Sal.   then thou art cheered , Cousin ? 


Lug.   Almost ruined , 


Sal.   I would not credit the Report , but now 
That you confirm it , I am satisfied : 
that 's all my business . 


Lug.   You are too Noble 
To send for me to scorn my wants , I hope 
You summon me to better my condition . 


Sal.   On easy terms . 


Lug.   But I have nothing left 
To make terms out of . 


Sal.   Is your Bride lost too ? 


Lug.   Suppose she were not ; think you , I would make 
Terms out of Her ? 


Sal.   Cousin , you do not love her , 
that 's public : were it then ill moved , to wish 
You would resign her to me , your near Kinsman , 
Who loved her first ? 't is to give me your trouble ; 
But if you please , sell me your Title to her ; 
To better your Condition , take my Title 
To the fair House and Lordship ( which you know ) 
Near Foro del Volcane . 


Lugier   I am poor , 
But ere my poverty be wrought upon 
To make a sale of Love , I 'll starve . A Prince — 


Sal.   Stay , I perceive I move on a wrong ground , 
I took 't for granted that you loved her not . 


Lug.   I was so fat from loving ( once to day ) 
That nothing was more odious to my heart 
Than Diacelia . 


Sal.   What has altered you ? 


Lug.   The lovely Face with the deformed Mind , 
Leandra ; her Impiety reflected 
Th'angelical Form of Diacelia's Virtues ; 
Nor is the odds so great between their Beauties , 
Bating the lustre of the Candian Habit , 
Leandra stains not Diacelia . 


Sal.   And now you would enjoy her ? 


Lug.   Rather her 
Than all the Earth . 


Sal.   And , Cousin , you shall have her , 
She plotted this Examination for you ; 
Appear sweet Princess Diacelia . 


Enter Diacelia in her Veil . Lug.   Dear , can you pardon ? 


Dia.   Can you love ? 


Lug.   For ever . [ Sal. Takes off her Veil and discovers the jewels . 


Sal   Behold part of your Fortune . 


Enter Officer's , Prisoners , and Gioseppe , who holds up the Bag , and pulls off his false Beard . Gio.   The rest 's here : 
And here 's an honest Spy , Gioseppe , Master 
Of the Ship , which to Naples brought from Candy 
You , Madam , and my Lord Filomarini , 
By whose command I put to Sea again , 
Pursued the Greek Cheat to Constantinople , 
Gave her intelligence that a Renegado 
Meant to inform against her , for imbezling 
Her Master the Prince of Bulgaria's Jewels , 
Which did by right of Conquest appertain 
To the Great Turk : for this Lie she received me 
Into her Service : working on her Fears 
To Genoa I drew her , ticed her thence 
With Golden Hopes to Naples . What sayest , Cheat , 
To prodigal Neopolitans ? 


Me.   I say , 
The hopes of prodigal Neopolitans 
could never have got me to bring Leandra 
To Naples , but that you in your Disguise 
With your new Spanish name Hosepe ( tricks 
I dreamed not off ) fooled me into belief , 
That you yourself and my Lord Filomarini 
Were out at Sea upon a second Voyage 
To Turkey in pursuit of me , and thus 
You cheated me as well as I did you , 
And being quit , I hope you 'll pardon me . 


Gio.   The Chest of Damask ( which you robbed me of , 
When you fled out of Candy ) I forgive thee ; 
That only was injury to myself , 
But , Cheat , you know , there 's a great injured person — 


Enter Filomarini . Fil.   The party 's come . 


Sal.   The thousand Crowns are thine ; [ Exit Fil.  
Bring her in : bid th'officers leave the room . [ Exeunt Officers and Prisoner . 


Gio.   Clear the room there ; my Lord , you and the Princess 
May tarry , for you 'll find yourselves concerned . 


Enter Filomarini , he gives Leandra to the Prince . Fil.   Leandra's yours . 


Sal.   Had you not better been 
My Mistress of your own accord ? you 're now 
Brought as an Offering to my Bed , 't is ready . 


Lean.   Is your Priest ready too ? 


Sal.   For what , I pray ? 


Lean.   To make your Princely Bed a Lawful Bed , 
Into Unlawful Sheets I 'll never come . 


Sal.   Rogue - Draco , hast not thou engaged thy throat ? [ Fil. discovers himself . 


Fil.   Here , cut it . 


Sal.   Uncle ? is this your Sea ? 
What meant you ? 


Fil.   To reclaim you and my son ; 
He is reformed ; but , Mistris-monger , you 
Scarce pleased with three , four hundred Venuses , 
Will not this one serve your turn ? 


Sal.   Very well . 


Fil.   But here 's the spite on 't , she 'll not be a Mistress . 


Sal.   Faith , Uncle , wert not for some few respects I 'd marry her . 


Fil.   I have done my endeavours 
To join you , and Leandra likes you well , 
What is 't obstructs the Match ? 


Sal.   Nothing , if you 
( From being an old Pimp ) in an instant can 
Become a Saint , work Miracles : make her 
Good-natured , and the Cheat her Mother honest . 


Fil.   Bring in the Prisoners . Enter Officer's and Prisoners . 
Look me in the face , 
thou knowest me , and my wrongs ; confess the truth 
And live ; or — [ Menanthe knelt . 


Me.   I confess , When the Venetian 
Fought with the Turk in Candy ; my old Master 
Prince of Bulgaria , so valiantly 
Charged the Mahometans who from 's Ancestor 
Had taken the Principality , that he fell 
Into an Ambush , and received a hurt 
Of which he died , and by his Will left you 
( His fellow-soldier in the Candian War ) 
Guardian to his two Daughters . 


Sal.   How ? two Daughters ? 


Fil.   What if Leandra now should prove a Princess ? 


Me.   I confess , That the Prince put me , his Landress , 
To wait on 's younger Child , Princess Leandra ; 
But when I saw my hopes to raise myself 
Out of my Master's Treasure , frustrated 
By his entrusting you , my Lord ; the Jewels 
Committed to my charge I took away , 
And stole this lovely Child , upon whose ruins 
I was resolved to build myself a Fortune . 
But sure the Prince was more to blame than I , 
For placing a mean Wretch so near a Princess . 


Fil.   What ? have I made a good Land-voyage , Nephew ? 
am I at home ? may Drake now Moor his Ship ? 
Is she good-natured , and her Mother honest ? 


Sal.   And I most happy in thee , dear Leandra . 


Lean.   I 'll answer , like an Oracle , in Heroics ; 
Most happy in a Wife the Prince may prove , 
Not in Leandra , she 'll have Love for Love.  


Sal.   If you admit of Love upon Love's score , 
then I may challenge you . 


Lean.   And thousands more . 
What share can I expect in such a heart , 
Where every pretty Mistress claims a Part ? 


Sal.   A Passion for all Beauties I must own ; 
But they are all contained in you alone . 
Believe me , for my Word is a Decree . 


Lean.   Did you not pass your word , that You in Me 
Should be Most Happy , which is Most Untrue : 
Because I am as Happy , Sir , in You.  


Sal.   This comes off well . no Sun breaks forth so clear 
As through a Cloud , no Joy as through a Fear : 
Equally Happy ( I confess ) we are . 


Dia. and Lug.   And equally your Happiness we share . 


Fil.   Captain , if you have any thing to say — 


Per.   i  made a resolution to say nothing . 


Fil.   then I 'll speak for thee ; Lugo , did not I 
Tell thee at first Peralta was a Knave , 
A Cheater ? to the cozening of thyself 
thou art an Accessary , therefore we 
Must either Punish both , or Pardon both . 
So , Captain , ( for that sometimes thou hast been 
My Comrade ) I discharge thy'imprisonment : 
But I discharge my Friendship too ; be gone , 
Nay , take your Baggage with you , worthy Captain ▪ 
But let this be ( as Pardons that are got 
In years of Jubilee ) no Encouragement 
To Vice , though you scape Justice . 


Per.   Not so clearly ; 
For we are still condemned to one another . [ Exeunt Per. & Me.  


Fil.   The thousand Crowns you owe me , pay Gioseppe , 
To make up his Reward . 


Sal.   Uncle , I william  


Fil.   And now that you and my Son have got Ladies , 
't is time to carry them to Decio's Mask . 


Sal.   Aloon then , Scenes of Mirth we may expect . [ Exeunt . 


Enter Decio and Corbulo . Dec.   Rare Poison ! how suddenly it dispatched them ? 
't is done , and bravely done . 


Cor.   'T was bravely suffered . 


Dec.   And yet his Lordship stooped to make a suit . 


Cor.   But how ? when Pyramena did resolve 
To drink first , than Iberio entreated 
The same Cup might be filled again for him : 
In that request to you , he courted her . 


Dec.   I must confess , Man never showed more courage . 


Cor.   Nor Woman greater sense of Love , and lesle 
Of Death ; her last words I shall never forget . 


Dec.   Nor shall the World forget them , for I 'll be 
At charge of setting up their Monument : 
First , in the Marble shall be graved this Title , 
The Poisoned Lovers , than this Epitaph , 
Perhaps the Title moves thee not , but hear 
The Lady's last words , and thou 'lt drop a Tear. 
When fairest Pyramena had drunk up 
The Poison , and her Lover took the Cup , 
She said , Not This i  drunk , but That thou art 
To pledge me , That ( Iberio ) breaks my heart . 
Does it not strike thee ? 


Cor.   Sadly . 


Dec.   Ha-ha-ha . 
What if I had their Figures cast in Brass , 
As they are lying on my Bed , embracing ? 
th' object has made me dull , I 'll have some mirth , 
Make ready for the Mask : but first release 
Arviedo , and to show that he 's no Prisoner , 
Give him his Sword : i' th' Gallery I 'll meet him . [ Exit Corbulo . 
My spleen abates , i  followed it too far . 
who 's there ? 


Enter Vindex with a Sword in his hand . Vin.   ay , Vindex . 


Dec.   Ha! who sent for thee ? 
How dar'st thou press upon our privacy ? 
What wouldst thou have ? 


Vin.   Impossibilities , 
A Line to bond an Infinite , your Rage : 
There is too much of Tiger's blood in you , 
I come to let it out — 


Dec.   To murder me ? 
Help , murder ! 


Vin.   Peace , or this shall silence you : [ Vin. draws . 
Yet , if you let me alone , I do not come 
To kill you . 


Dec.   what 's th' intention of thy coming ? 


Vin.   To keep you from committing of more murders ; 
You have sent Corbulo for Arviedo , 
Already I am witness to two proofs 
Of your strange fury , I 'll prevent a third . 


Dec.   thou wilt not keep me prisoner ? 


Vin.   At your peril ; 
You shall not rob the world of a young Worthy . 


Dec.   Knowest thou Arviedo ? 


Vin   no ; all 's one for that , 
I hear the gentleman 's a Child of Honour : 
I pity him . 


Dec.   I love him . 


Vin.   Who I believe you ? 


Enter Arviedo and draws his Sword.  Aru.   Prodigious ! a Slave drawn upon his Lord ? 
Thy Sword ? 


Vin.   you 'll not take from me your Defence ? 


Aru.   Villain , defend thyself . 


Vin.   I am too honest , [ Vin. delivers his Arms.  
Hear me , or you 'll be lost , Sir.  


Dec.   Let him live , 
Though he surprised me rudely , he meant well : 
Sirrah , about your business : Arviedo , [ Exit Vindex . 
This was more noble — 


Aru.   Than you can imagine . 
I would not have you fall by your Slave's hand . 


Dec.   My life to Arviedo is a debt . 


Aru.   Pay it , for Decio has lived too long . 
It had been happy for thee , hadst thou died 
Before thy rage ( in poisoning Pyramena 
And my brave Kinsman ) made thee a Wild-beast , 
Which I must rid the world of . 


Dec.   In your breast 
there 's more of Honour , than to murder one 
That is ( you see ) defenceless . 


Aru.   where 's thy Sword ? 


Dec.   i' th' Gallery , the place where Corbulo 
Appointed you to meet : lead , Sir , from me 
You shall have satisfaction ; and the like . 
I shall require from you . 


Aru.   I 'll do you right . 
Ask any thing with your Sword in your hand : 
I shall be glad to find you so much Man  


Dec.   How much of Man is in me , you shall try : 
I 'll make you mine , or by your hand I 'll die . [ Exeunt . 


Enter Corbulo and a Servant , with one-eyed Vizards in their hands . Seru.   Why one Eye in the forehead of my Vizard ? 


Cor.   Great Puppy , should a Cyclops have two Eyes ? 
On with your Cyclops face , the Masks beginning ; Enter Salerno , Leandra , Lugo , Diacelia . 
The Prince ? These Chairs are for you and your Friends , Sir.  


Sal.   where 's Decio ? 


Cor.   he 'll wait upon your Highness . 


The Scene Vulcan's Court , over it is written , Foro del Volcane . Soft Music . Enter Aurora in a black Veil below . Song in Dialogue 

Aur.   Phoebus' ? 


Phoeb.   Who calls the World's great Light ? 


Aur.   Aurora , that abhors the Night . 


Phoeb.   Why does Aurora from her Cloud 
To drowsy Phoebus cry so loud ? 


Aur.   Put on thy ●●eamss ; rise , ( no regard 
To a young Goddess , that lies hard 
In th' old Man's bosom ? ) rise for shame , 
And shine my Cloud into a Flame . 


Phoeb.   Oblige me not beyond my power , 
I must not rise before my hour . 


Aur.   Before thy hour ? look down , and see , 
In vain the Persian knelt to thee , 
And I ( mocked by the glim'ring Shade ) 
A sad mistake in Naples made ; 
Like Pliny , I had lost my life , 
If I had been a Mortal Wife . 


Phoeb.   thou cam'st too near the Burning Mount 
Vesuvio ? 


Aur.   Upon thy account , 
For I took Clouds of Smoke and Fire , 
( Which here from Vulcan's Court expire ) 
For Morning-streaks , Blue , White , and red , 
That Rouse me from cold Tithon's Bed.  


Phoebus enters with his Beams on . Phoeb.   Charge not upon me for a Crime , 
That I stayed th' utmost point of time , 
Before I would put off my Bays , 
And on Naples shed my Rays , 
Where such a mischief they have done , 
As will make Venus hate the Sun , 
Discovering to Vulcan's eye 
Where She and Mars embracing lie . 


Aur.   I 'm sorry Mars and Venus had 
Such privacy : but I am glad 
That Phoebus does at last appear 
To shine away Aurora's Fear . 


Phoeb.   What frighted thee ? 


Aurelia   I know not what ; 
But thou knowest all ; what noise is that ? Within Vulcan roars out , no work , Rogues ? 


Phoeb.   't is Vulcan , in a greater Heat 
Than th'irons by his Cyclops beaten : 
He makes the horror of that noise , 
Teaching and Knocking his great Boys , 
( From hamm'ring out Jove's Thunder ) set 
To File and Polish Vulcan's Net , 
Which he 'll catch Mars and Venus in . 


Aur.   What now ? [ Laughing within . 


Phoeb.   To laugh the Smiths begin : 
At furious Vulcan ( halting off 
To measure his Wife's Bed ) they scoff . 


Aur.   I 'll leave the place ; I can no more 
Endure the Laughter than the Roar. [ Tuning within . 


Phoeb.   Hark , they record , they 'll sing anon ; 
't is time for Phoebus to be gone : 
For when such Lyric Asses bray , 
The God of Music cannot stay . [ Exeunt Phoebus and Aurora . 
The Cyclops Song ( within . ) 

Cry our Ware , ( Sooty Fellows 
Of the Forge and the Bellowss ) 
Has jove any Okes to rend ? 
Has Ceres' Sickles to mend ? 
Wants Neptune a Water-fork ? 
All these are the Cyclops work : 
But to Wiredraw Iron-rods , 
To File Nets to catch the Gods , 
What can make our fingers so fine ? 
Drink , drink , Wine , Lippari-wine . 
Chorus . 

Smoak , Smoak breeds the Tysick , 
Wine , wine 's the best Physic , 
For every Cyclops a full Can ; 
Our Terms runs thus , 
Some Wine for Us , 
Or no Net for our Master Vulcan . 


Enter Vulcan with Iron Links in his hand , and a Horse-shoe reversed on his head , he drives before him the four Cyclops drunk , wearing half-vizards with one Eye in the Forehead . Vul.   Drink Fire , you Lazy Monsters ; Lippari-wine ? 
no Liquor down with you , but mine ? 


1 Cycl .  We made a shift . 


Vul.   It seems so , for you reel : 
Is this my Cobweb woven in Steel ? 
How horridly it looks — 


2 Cycl .  But not so horrid [ He points with two fingers at Vul.  
As Vulcan does , who Shoes his forehead . 


Vul.   With gaping loopholes , and wrought all awry : 
My Wife's Pox put out thy one Eye . 


3 Cycl .  He means her Smallpox , and that seldom misses 
The Eye , for 't is a small Ulysses . 


4 Cycl .  I 'll dance my Eye out . 


Vul.   Let who dare advance 
A step ; no , Rogues , you shall not dance ; 
I 'll lay your legs fast , your heels you may shake 
In th'iron Stocks , those you can make . 


Enter two Cupids , ( a White and a Black ) with Bows and Forked Arrows , with which they point at Vulcan . 1 Cycl   Not Dance ? Cow'rds ? here come Cocks that are no 
Two Cupids ? You've a charge of Bastards . [ dastards ; 


2 Cycl .  One foe the White Men.  


3 Cycl .  For the Black another . 


4 Cycl .  Your wife 's a very fruitful Mother : 
These Cupids shoot in Crossbows sure , for they 
Have forked Arrows ? 


1 Cycl .  Sa , sa , sa ; 
We have our Forks too , and though drunk , yet hearty , 
we 'll join with the Malignant Party . 


Exeunt Cyclops , and after Vulcan and the Cupids have begun the Dance , the Cyclops return with Khans in their hands , they dance and drink . When the Anticks done , all cry , Wave Horns , and then run away , only the White Cupid stays . Vul.   My Hammer ? Dogs , your legs have saved your brains , 
Still the European Brat remains 
Upon the place : Venus' only joy 
Come hither , my Wife's fine White Boy : 
You must change Colours , Sirrah , get a robe 
As black as Midnight makes the Globe , 
Mourn at thy . Mother's Funeral , if thou stayest , 
thine shall be first — 


Cup.   Hold , I 'm in haste . [ Exit White Cupid . 


Vul.   I am so too : my Net I cannot make , 
't is now Venus' time to wake : Vul. pulls out a steel Watch 
Time Vulcan measures by exacter trial 
Than Phoebus does on his Sundial : 
A Master in my Art I 'm known to be , 
Though not in th' Art of Poetry ; 
My Verse halts like myself : but ( day and night ) 
My Workmanship , this Watch , goes right . 


Lean.   Why does he look upon his Watch ? 


Sal.   It seems 
There is a Critical Minute Mars and Venus 
Must wake in . What ? my Lord Iberio Iberio and Pyramena discovered lying on a Bed , at the Bed's feet sits Cupid weeping . 
Is Mars ? 


Lug.   And is not Pyramena Venus ? 


Dia.   't is Pyramena ; how durst Decio 
Trust her old Servant ? 


Sal.   Cupid Watch's them . 


Lean.   Are they not dead ? for they look deadly pale . 


Enter Decio in a Nightgown , a Sword in his hand ; He looks upon Vulcan's Watch.  Dec.   Vanish , Impostor ; room for the true Vulcan ; 
The minute 's come ; wake , Lovers , wake , I say . [ Iberio and Pyramena start . 


Ibe .  Wake ? did we sleep ? did we not both drink poison ? 


Dec.   Credit the working , 't was an Opiate , 
Only to make you sleep , till your Friends came 
( Stir not , my Lord , nor call for help , in vain ) 
I sent for your Patron , the Prince , with hope 
That in his presence you will be ashamed 
To die , the second time , so sensually 
Embracing my Wife . 


Ibe .  Death shall not part us . 


Py.   This knot 's a Gordian , never to be loosed . Decio draws his Sword.  


Dec.   It may be cut , the Macedonian way . 


Sal.   thou dar'st not offer at their Lives ? [ Sal. and Lugo draw . 


Dec.   And yours , [ Decio stamps , the Cyclops enter with Arms.  
If you protect them ; show your Swords the way 
Into their Scabbards ; mine should be unsheathed , 
But I will put it up , and draw my Tongue 
Before these Judges : will you hear ? 


Sal.   Speak freely . 


Dec.   Sir , I invited you , not to assist 
The Malefactors , but to sit and judge 
The Equity of my Revenge : and Ladies , 
Be not affrighted , whatsoever I suffer , 
no Affront shall be offered to your Sex. 
The Prisoners may ( if they except against 
The Prince and Lugo ) make appeal to you . 


Dia.   Speaks he not well ? 


Lean.   He looks exceeding well , 
As if his Cause were good . 


Dec.   First , I charge you , 
My Lord Iberio , with my Sisters' death . 


Ibe .  Falsely , I am not guilty . 


Dec.   How ? not guilty ? 
Did not my Sister ( upon your Engagement ) 
send for me ( than in Candy ) but ere I 
could come to Venice , you were got to Naples , 
And had disowned her , which perfidiousness 
Soon after broke her heart . 


Ibe .  You do me wrong , 
To charge her Death upon my breach of promise ; 
Indeed my Father promised , I should marry 
Your Sister Ericina ; and if I 
( Who loved this Lady ) had declared myself , 
I had been disinherited . My Father 
Dying of the Pestilence that reigned in Venice , 
I went to settle my Affairs in Naples , 
And from thence written your Sister a Discharge . 


Dec.   Of Life . For who could live to be so scorned 
As Ericina was ? all Naples called her 
The Slighted Maid : in short , it cost her life ; 
And to revenge her death I came to Naples , 
Here I passed for an insignificant Poet , 
A Raillier , invited to all Tables , 
Where I but watched an Opportunity 
To poison you : until ( as luck would have it ) 
You being fooled out with your Mistress , she 
Fools in with me ; but now that she 's my Wife , 
( Faces about ) you are in love again , 
And make no scruple of Cuckolding poor Decio . 


Ibe .  thou liest , for Pyramena is as far 
From any loose , as thou from noble thoughts . 


Dec.   I 'll but examine you to that point , than 
'T will appear , who 's the liar : were not you 
Contracted to my Wife ? 


Ibe .  I was . 


Dec.   Conclude ; 
What the pretention of a Precontract ? 
Were you not preingaged to Cuckolded me ? 
Pray , what am I ? 


Py.   Our Executioner ; 
Therefore 't is to no purpose to dissemble 
For us that are to die : I do renounce you , 
I 'll die Iberio's Wife . Decio gives a sign to the Cyclops , they unbind Iberio and Pyramena . 


Dec.   no , I forbid 
The Banes of Death : you shall live Man and Wife , 
Your scorn is now sufficiently revenged : 
Behold the Slighted Maid . Decio puts off his Nightgown , & discovers himself to be a Woman . 


Ibe .  Life's Ericina ? 


Sal.   What a strange Mother of the Maid is Venice , 
That breeds such Furies ? 


Dec.   But my Brother Decio , 
( The very night he came to Venice ) died 
Of that Mortality which took away 
My noble Friend , your Father . I concealed 
My Brother's sudden death , and gave it out 
( Easily believed ) that your neglect killed me ; 
My Brother Decio's Funeral passed for mine ; 
In his shape ( putting off my Love and Sex ) 
I followed you , my Lord , as far as Naples ; 
Here I tried several Keys of Death and Fortune , 
To open me a door to my Revenge ; 
But still compassion stepped in to your rescue : 
Till Hatred springing from your Scorn , was buried 
In Love returned by one of your own blood , Enter Arviedo . 
The noblest and the sweetest Person living , 
Who will not slight me , if you like the Match . 


Ibe .  So well , that Ericina now shall know 
Which of my Kinsmen she makes choice of ; this 
Is Giulio , Heir to the Family 
Of Great Gonsalvo ; for his poverty 
Concealed , under the name of Arviedo ; 
I bred him , and resolved the frowning World 
Should never know him till he had a Fortune ; 
A noble one fair Ericina brings . 


Aru.   With it I 'll serve my Love , next to my Prince . 


Sal.   Nay , the King's service will go roundly on ; 
I warrant , she 'll bring a whole Nursery 
Of Generals , she 'll stock thee with young Gonsalvoes . 


Dec.   I 'll promise only Possibilities ; 
Though I deserve not the Great captain 's Heir , 
I hope to make him ( what has been accepted 
By Kings themselves ) a Gentleman of Venice . 
Judges , can you pardon a Woman's weakness , 
That will revenge her blushes ? 


Py.   I forgive 
The cruelty of Ericina's Spleen , 
Which cured Iberio's Jealousy . 


Sal.   all 's pleased 
With such a fortunate Close . send for our Coaches , 
Mean time , let 's have a Dance , as your Grand Mask . [ They Dance . 
So , now at the next Chapel we 'll be married , 
then at my House I 'll treat you , where th' Inviter 
Shall be Leandra's Guest . But still there wants 
A just Reward for this deserving Soldier , 
That boldly , at his lowest ebb of Fortune , 
durst check a Prince in his career to Vice.  


Dec.   Who taking me for ( what I seemed ) a Man 
That would have given my Wife a wanton freedom , 
Advised me to be jealous of my Honour ; 
And when he ( swearing to do my commands ) 
knew me to be a Woman , for his oath 's sake , 
Against his Nature , he made you my Prisoner . [ too Iber.  


Ibe .  I 'll do myself the honour to advance him . 


Sal.   then make him your Lieutenant-colonel . 


Ibe .  I can't , but I 'll give him my Regiment , 
And get the Viceroy to Sign his Commission . 


Dec.   And from a Slave , poor Vindex , thou shalt be 
( As I have promised ) made both Rich and Free.  


Ibe .  Corbulo , manage thou our Candian Arms , 
The Battle I must fight in , is , at home . 


Cor.   i  not a courtier 's tongue to speak my thanks , 
But to the Turk I 'll sell my blood so dear , 
I hope the Christian Cause will thank my Raiser 
For sending me to Candy . My grief is , 
i  but one Life to lose for the King's Honour . 


Sal.   no , Cor'nel , ( doubtless ) the king 's better Stars 
Will guard thy life , to serve him nearer Spain . 
Let 's all now joy this Military Bridegroom . 
Patience ( thou seest ) may lend blind Fortune Eyes 
To find out Men , and make low Suff'rers rise . [ Exeunt . 


THE EPILOGUE Spoken by The SLIGHTED MAID . 

Slighted , you know , I was ; but , Gentlemen , 
Resembling you in Shape and Courage , than 
I looked upon it with an angry brow : 
'T would grieve me , if I should be slighted now . 
But though our Sex the proud Italians scorn , 
th' English are Civil , you are Courtiers born , 
And she 's cursed in her Cradle , that promotes 
Her Suit to you , and is denied your Votes . 
Behold , your Candidate before you stands : 
Your Semele sees Thunder in your hands , 
Let 's hear it : Claps that would make some afraid , 
Will make the Slighted the Exalted Maid . 
EPILOGUE TO THE KING . 

i  spoken before your Majesty , but yet 
I never kneeled in such a shaking Fit ; 
For , Sir , the Author bids me kneel and pray 
Against your justice : all that he can say 
In his defence , is , that you would condemn 
His faults , if strictly you examined them . 
He hope's you will not ; and why should he fear ? 
Your Majesty was never yet severe 
To any thing well-meant , though ill-exprest ; 
And he presumes , you think , he did his best 
To please you : therefore would be hard , if he 
In making for your mirth a Comedy , 
Should writes own Tragedy , yet that 's his Case , 
If your Impartial justice should take place ; 
But if your Gracious Favour intervene , 
The Epilogue is clearly his best Scene . 
FINIS . 

