A TRUE ACCOUNT Of the whole proceedings Betwixt his Grace JAMES Duke of ORMOND , And the Right Honor. ARTHUR Earl of ANGLESEY LATE Lord PRIVYSEAL , Before the KING and COUNCIL , and the said Earls Letter of the second of August to His Majesty on that Occasion . 

WITH A Letter of the now Lord Bishop of Winchester 's to the said Earl , of the means to keep out Popery , and the only effectual expedient to hinder the growth thereof , and to secure both the Church of England and the Presbiterian party . 

London , Printed for Thomas Fox at the Angel and Star in Westminster-hall . 1682.  

TO THE READER . 

That there hath been a Controversy between the Duke of Ormond and the Earl of Anglsey ( the immediate consequence of which hath been the removal of the Earl from a Place of great Honour and Trust under his Majesty , for which he was in every respect extraordinarily well qualified perhaps no man questions . And many may be likely to say , that the more fatal such quarrels amongst great Personages are to either side , the more instructive they commonly prove to the rest of Mankind , who are thereby let into a Prospect of those things which were thought too sacred for the view of the profane Vulgar . 

As every inferior Soldier may learn Skill & Address , by seeing two Generals engage in the sight of their Armies , so certainly this Paper Battle between these Great ones may be of use to all sorts of men that have the jest Grain of that commendable Ambition , to propound to themselves the greatest Examples . wherefore I conceive no man , of which side soever Fortune or Choice hath placed him , can blame me for procuring and exposing to public view authentic transcripts of what hath passed in this Affair . 

The bare curiosity to know how such men write , were almost enough to tempt any one to peruse these papers , but then when they relate to the History of unmovable Affairs , of which eitherof the parties may say , Quorum pars magna fui . â€” 



And when they were so great men in themselves , & their Parts in the History so great that they may be compared to Caesar writing the Commentaries of his own Enterprises ; I should think him very dull that need be courted to be a Reader 

But these Papers carry in them what I hope will further recommend and endear them to the greater part of this Nation ; most of them being in defence of the poor English protestants in Ireland , to some of which the Earl of Anglesey hath most generously asserted the glory of their Martyrdom , and to others , the unblemished honour of preventing the utter ruin & extirpation of the rest . 

The Earl of Castlehaven , who had been too too fortunate an Head to the Romancatholick Rebels in Ireland , had not only in Print justified his own engagement with that bloody Party , butwould make that chiefly a Defensive War , w changed was certainly the effect of an universal conspiracy amongst the Papists there . Nor is it to be doubted but there were Encouragers in England . This engaged the Earl of Anglesey , amid his many avocations , to ward off the second blow against them who had suffered almost beyond all Example before : and his interposition extracted from the Earl of Castlehaven a Confession , that he himself acted as a Rebel , and that all the Water in the Sea cannot wash that Rebellion off that Nation , which was begun most bloodily on the English in that Kingdom in a time of a settled Peace , without the least occasion given . 

I must confess there are several passages in the Letter to the Earl of Castlehaven , wherein the Duke of Ormond seems concerned to vindicate his own actions . How far the Charge or the Defence is made good , it is not for me to judge : nor shall I in the least enter into the merits of it . 

I am sure the Earl of Anglesey made a most noble Declaration , fit to be written in Letters of Gold ; Truth , says he , being the greatest and best Friend , I had rather one or several persons and Families should lie under the consequence of its impartiality , than that the English Nation and Protestant Religion should suffer by a timorous unworthy concealing or withholding any part of it . 

This being the said Earlsavowed Principle , methinks he ought to be importunedby a public Address , that what he hath meditated and hath been preparing from Records and authentic unquestionable Relations and Transactions of that bloody Tragedy and matchless defection from the Crown and very Nation of English men , may soon see the light . 

To the king 's Most Excellent Majesty . 

The Duke of Ormond , Your Majesty's Lieutenant of Ireland , and Steward of Your Majesty's Household , most humbly represents : 

That the Earl of Anglesey Lord Privy-seal , in the Year 1681. caused a Book to be Printed ( whereof he hath acknowledged himself to be the Author ) entitled A Letter from a Person of Honour in the Country , written to the Earl of Castlehaven , being Observations and Reflections upon his Lordship's Memoirs concerning the Wars of Ireland . 

That in the said Book there are diverse passages and expressions which are not only untrue , but reflecting in a high degree upon His Late Majesty's Government , and particularly in Relation to the Rebellion and War in Ireland , and to the several Cessations and Peace's made by His , and Your Majesty's Authority and Command . 

That in the said Book the Lord Privy-seal hath Maliciously endeavoured to Calumniate and Asperse the Duke of Ormond , by calling in question his Faithfulness and Loyalty to His Late Majesty , the Sincerity of his Profession in point of Religion , and insinuating that the Cessations and Peace's ( destructive as he says to the English and protestants ) were advised and procured by him the said Duke , out of his Affection to the Irish Popish Rebels , because he was Allied to many of them in Blood and by Marriages . 

That the Lord Privy-seal in the course of above Twenty Years free and friendly Acquaintance and Correspondence with the Duke of Ormond , never thought fit to give him any intimation of his Lordship's Intention to write a History of the Wars of Ireland , and other transactions there , wherein both the Duke and his Lordship ( though of opposite Parties ) had a great part , but choose rather to seek for information from the Earl of Castlehaven , and to publish his Observations on the Earl of Castlehaven ' s Memoirs , in a Conjuncture when his Reflections in his Book and his Letter of the Seventh of December , 1681. to the Duke of Ormond , might not only do most mischief to him , but to the Government . The Duke of Ormond humbly conceives that at least , while the Lord Privy-seal and he have the honour to be of your Majesty's Privy Council , and in the stations they are , it will not be fit for him to publish such an Answer to the Lord Privy-seal's Book and Letter , as might otherwise be necessary in Vindication of Truth , His Late Majesty's Justice and Honour , and his own Integrity . 

It is therefore most humbly proposed , That Your Majesty would be pleased to appoint a Committee of your Privy-council to look over the Lord Privy-seal's Book , and to call his Lordship and the Duke of Ormond before them , and if upon Report from them , it shall appear to your Majesty that the Earl of Anglesey has fallen into the Mistakes and Errors herein laid to his Charge , That then Your Majesty would be pleased to Consider of the best and most Authentic means how Reparation may be made to all that are injured by the Earl of Anglesey's Book and Letter , and to prevent the Credit his great Place , supposed Knowledge ( especially in the Affairs of Ireland ) and his pretended Candour and Impartiality may give to his writings , in these and future times . 

ORMOND . 

A True Copy . 

John Nicholas . 



At the Court at Hampton-court , June , 17. 1682.  

By the king 's Most Excellent Majesty , AND The Lords of His Majesty's most Honourable Privy-council . 

THE annexed Representation of his Grace the Duke of Ormond , Lord Lieutenant of Ireland , etc. being this day presented and read to His Majesty in Council . His Majesty taking the contents thereof into His Royal Consideration as a matter of very great Importance , was pleased to Declare That he would hear the matter thereof in Council . And did order That a Copy of the said Representation be delivered to the Earl of Anglesey Lord Privy-seal , And that his Lordship do attend His Majesty in Council on Friday next , at Three of the Clock in the Afternoon at White-hall , when His Majesty hath appointed to take that Business into further Consideration . 

John Nicholas . 

The Earl of Anglesey Lord Privy-seal , being by the said Order of His Majesty in Council , of June 17. appointed to be at Council at white-hall , June 23. being not able to stand by reason of the Gout , yet got out of his Bed , and was carried thither ; where when the King came , he spoke to His Majesty ( as I am well informed ) to this effect . 

SIR , 

I am in the first place to beg Your Majesty's Pardon for my Obedience to Your Order for appearing here this day , being in no condition of health to have left my Bed , and altogether unfit for the presence of the King.  

And indeed I expected that the Duke of Ormond would rather have Complained and Printed against the Earl of Castlehaven his Memoirs ; which Aspersed and Scandalised Your Royal Father's Government , and represented the protestants of Ireland as Rebels , and the Confederate Irish Papists as Loyal Subjects , then against me , who had Vindicated His Majesty's Government , and his Protestant Faithful Subjects so Effectually in my Letter to the said Earl , That his Lordship in an Epistle to the Reader which he after added to his Memoirs , confessed himself and the Irish Confederates the Rebels : And that all the Water in the Sea would not wash that Rebellion off that Nation . 

This is the first quarrel I ever had with any man , and Your Majesty sees how it is brought upon me , and cannot but believe it very unwelcome to me from one who hath so many Years professed Friendship to me . But that which trouble's me in it is , That it is pretended to be upon account of my failing in Duty to His Late Majesty and Yourself , whereas if I can pretend to Merit in any thing , it is for Exemplary and Considerable Faithfulness and Service to You both . 

SIR , That I may not trouble You with much Discourse , I have reduced the Vindication of my Innocence to Writing , which I present for my Answer to the Duke of Ormond ' s Accusation , and to which I shall add no more but my desire , That though the Duke of Ormond hath thought fit to Attaque me thus causelessly , all the Contention hereafter between him and me may be who shall serve Your Majesty best , and cost You least . 

In the next place all the Papers Written and Printed , that had passed between the Duke and the Lord Privy-seal , were read as they lay in order , and both the Lords discoursed and bandied the matter fully , which the King heard with great Patience : The Duke of Ormond notwithstanding doing that right to the Lord Privy-seal , as to Acknowledge that none had been more Active and Instrumental in his Majesty's Happy Restauration , or carried it on with more Success in great Dangers and Difficulties , than his Lordship . In conclusion the Duke was Ordered to charge the Lord Privy-seal by particulars in Writing , that he might know what to Answer , generals not being sufficient , and so that business was left at that time . 

Now follows the Lord Privy-seal's Answer to the Duke of Ormonds' Representation or Complaint against him . 

To the king 's most Excellent Majesty . 

The Earl of Anglesey Keeper of your Majesty's Privy-seal , ( mistead by an ill Precedent admitted ) most humbly represents . 

That having this Eighteenth day of June , received in Bed , where he had continued for above a Month last passed , very much afflicted with the Gout , and deprived of the use of Hands and Legs , and by reason of Pains and Sicknesses getting little rest , which he hath reason to believe was well known to the Duke of Ormond ; your Majesty's Order in Council of the Seventeenth , with a Copy of the Representation of the said Duke annexed , and Command to attend your Majesty in Council on Friday next , at Three of the Clock in the Afternoon at White-hall , which he resolves by God's Blessing to do if he shall be in a Capacity of Health and Strength to be carried thither , without Peril of his Life ; which he doth not believe that the Duke himself thinks , after a year and halfs concerning himself in this Controversy , is to be adventured to gratify a hasty proposal , upon his changing his way of proceeding . 

In the mean time , That your Majesty may not be under the least prepossession by what the Duke hath represented with heat , and sharpnels against the said Earl , he doth humbly offer to Consideration , That though the Duke appear before your Majesty , as a Representer , the said Earl cannot but look upon him as a Petitioner , the Title by which all Subjects that complain , Address to your Majesty , and for want of which he hath observed many Suitors rejected with their Requests . 

And therefore your Majesty is desired to be informed in the first place by a deduction of all that hath passed between the Duke and the Earl in this Affair , which is as followeth . 

The Book complained of was written about two years ago by mere Accident of the Earl of Castlehaven's sending his Printed Memoirs , to the Earl then at Blethington in Oxfordshire , where having read the same , and conceiving the English , and protestants to be unjustly dealt with therein , and the Irish foul Cause professedly justified , though the most Execrable Rebellion that ever was in the World ; the Earl could not digest the same , but upon a bare Old Memory without help of writings or Notes , immediately put pen to paper and the Eighth of July wrote a Letter to the said Earl of Castlehaven , which he believes his Lordship hath yet to show , though when it appeared afterwards in print , about October , 1680. one was sent to his Lordship taking Notice thereof , and ask him what he had done with the said Letter , who then Confessed he had lent it to a Friend , but he would recover it again . The Letter being thus Printed , the Duke of Ormond had soon sight of it , for in his Letter to the Earl of Anglesey of November the 12th . 1681. he takes Notice that he had seen it a Year before , and writes his Pleasure of it so Satirically , that the said Earl returned his Answer of the 7th . of October following , which the said Duke takes Notice of in his said Representation , though he never before acknowledged the Receipt thereof , nor was pleased to make any Reply to it , though it gave him sufficient occasion : thus ( when the said Earl expected a Reply ) things stood till the said Complaint made to your Majesty , which he humbly submits whether it be fit to be received or proceeded upon in Council , after so open a litigation thereof in Print , wherein the said Duke had appealed to the People , and accused the Earl with as much Acrimony as it was possible for the duke 's sharp Pen to do , it being as the said Earl conceives , below the dignity of Your Majesty and the Board , after the Duke has proceeded so far in a private Quarrel of his own making , without Success , ( and that those the Duke had appealed to seemed generally satisfied that the Earl had fully Vindicated himself from the Aspersions laid upon him by the duke 's said Letter ) for your Majesty to be Addressed to so late , and in a Cause so concluded ; wherein the Earl had justified himself in the method the Duke himself lead him , and is ready to proceed further so to do , if the Duke shall please to Reply in maintenance of his Printed Charge . 

However the Earl not knowing what course in this Affair will be pursued , or directed , saith that he doth not disown the Book mentioned in the Duke's Representation , so far as he hath acknowledged the same in a Letter written by him to the said Duke . 

But denies that in the said Book or Letter , there are diverse , or any passages and expressions which are not only untrue , but reflecting in a lugh degree upon his Late Majesty's Government , and particularly in Relation to the Rebellion and War in Ireland , and to the several Cessations and Peace's made by his , and your Majesty's Authority and Command , which the said Earl hath formerly intimated in writing to the said Duke in Answer to a Letter of his insinuating the same thing , and urging for particulars which the said Earl could never yet obtain . 

The said Earl is no further charged with maliciously calumniating and aspersing the said Duke , and insinuating several particulars to that purpose , but the passages in the said Books of that import are still reserved , and not thought fit by the said Duke , to be expressed so as the Earl may know what , or how to Answer . 

And the said Duke is not ignorant that malicious Calumny or Scandal against so great a Person as the Duke of Ormond , is severely punishable by Law.  

What to say more herein the said Earl knows not , till the Duke gives more clear and particular occasion . 

Whosever shall take Notice of what the Duke Asserts of his and the Earls free Converse and Friendship for above twenty years , and which the Earl adds ( and the Duke cannot forget ) the real and adventurous friendship with the Earl , hath engaged in with and for the Duke , he cannot but wonder as others do , that they are so easily cancelled and turned into rancour and ill returns , without demonstrating a change in the Earl , which may satisfy enquiring men the Duke hath a Cause . 

For else it seems wonderful and past belief to intelligent men , that the Earl who professeth that he bears Malice to no Person living , nor ever had quarrel with any man , that count's it his great misfortune in his Old Age , when he was preparing to go to his Grave in Peace and in perfect Charity with all men , he should be Attacked by one who hath professed friendship to him above these twenty years , and as he finds by Letters and otherwise was intimatly a friend to his Father : As it is miraculous to the same degree , that the Earl in his circumstances should willingly be drawn into controversy with so great and fortunate a man , and so ancient a friend as the Duke of Ormond . 

But since it hath been the Duke's pleasure or humour so violently , and so many ways to assault the Earl , he must not take it ill that he cannot bear wounds patiently , and without just resentment . 

The Duke complains further , that in the course of above twenty years free and friendly acquaintance and correspondence with him , the Earl never thought fit to give him any intimation of his intent to write a History of the Wars of Ireland , and other Transactions there . 

The said Earl cannot recollect with certainty whether he did or no , but he very well remembreth that many years ago he acquainted Sir George Lane then the Duke's Secretary , and now Viscount of Lanesborrow ( and who told him he had the custody of all the Duke's Papers and writings of public Affairs ) with his intended History of Ireland , who promised him the assistance of them , but he could never yet obtain any from him : Nor from the Duke himself since he made a free offer and promise of them by his Letter of the 12th . of November , threatening to appeal from the Earl as a partially engaged , and unfaithful Historian if he accepted them not , he being as he wrote , more desirous to prevent than rectify Errors and mistakes . The Earl having this noble encouragement from so great a person , ( and who was to make so great a part of it ) to proceed in his History by his Letter of the Seventh of October , acknowledged and accepted the Duke's favour , expecting the performance thereof , but never heard since from the Duke till by his Representation to your Majesty , wherein he seems to forget or retract all that had passed , though the Earl had given him all the Assurance a man of honour could do , that he would be exactly faithful and impartial in the History , and now shows that he is unwilling any History should be written by the Earl , whose candour and impartiality he will yet allow to be but pretended , and therefore proposeth that your Majesty will prevent the Credit which they , his great place , and supposed knowledge ( especially in the Affair of Ireland ) may give to his writings in these and future times , never considering that himself hath greater Places . Yet the Earl doth not apprehend their giving Credit to any thing the Duke hath or shall write against the Truth , which the Earl is resolved to tie himself strictly and authentically to , if he be suffered to go on , and not discouraged in his Design with which he intended to close his Labours in this Life , for the good of England , and the Safety of that poor Kingdom of Ireland , harrassed by Rebellions and Massacres , and which must expect and undergo more ( still preparing ) unless prevented by wise Councils here , upon the warnings that a true Account of former times and failing may give us . 

And since the Earl hath been versed above forty years in public Affairs , without blemish or dishonour , and intends by your Majesty's permission , to dedicate his History to yourself , which sure he would not be so weak as to offer , if any thing were to be in it of the nature the Duke presageth , the Earl therefore hope's the Duke may at least trust your Majesty's wisdom with the publishing of what you shall have the perusal of if you shall judge it worth your reading before it go to the Press , being intended both for the Honour of the Late King and of your Majesty , and not to gratisie any private humour or party , or to disguise or cover the Errors or Miscarriages of any Subject whatsoever . 

As to the Duke's Reflection , that the Earl choose rather to seek for Information from the Earl of Castlehaven than from him , the contrary doth appear ever since the Earl had any hopes given him of the Duke's Assistance , with such Authentic instruments and writings as may contribute to the History , which the Earl cannot but yet expect and he never desired other informations from the said Earl of Castlehaven , than in the Military Actions wherein the Duke employed him as a General , and never thought of making other use of them than as they concurred with , cleared and confirmed the true Account the Earl was possessed of in those Affairs before . 

As to the Duke's insinuating ( where he mentions the War of Ireland and other Transactions there , wherein they had both a great part ) that they were of opposite Parties , since he accounts it serviceable to his design of aggravating to the utmost against the Earl , the occasion is willingly embraced to give your Majesty a brief and true Information of the part the Earl had both in Ireland and England , in the late unhappy Time.  

The Earl was ( under the Authority his Late Majesty had entrusted both Houses of Parliament with for Ordering and Governing the Affairs in Ireland , after the horrid Rebellion begun ) instrumental there to preserve the British and Protestant Interest , Countries and Garrisons , from being swallowed up by Owen Oneill's Barbarous Army , or falling into the Bloody Irish Hands . He also held Correspondence with , and offered Assistance to the then Marquis of Ormond , to Preserve the English and save the City of Dublin , and other English Garrisons and Quarters from the Treacherous Irish , who broke all Faith with the Marquis . 

He likewise sent to the Marquis the Late King's Majesties positive Prohibition in Writing , against making any Peace , or having at all further dealing with the Irish , and used his most earnest persuasions herein , foreseeing it would be destructive to the English , and mischievous to the Late King ; and still offered Assistance to the Marquis to encourage him in vigorous opposing the Irish , and to enable him to disappoint their Treachery , and the Consequence of their Faith-breaking . 

The said Earl after the Peace notwithstanding made with the Irish Confederate Rebels , and their Shameful and Treacherous Breach of it , with design and endeavour to Surprise the Marquis and all the English Garrisons in Lemster , and after they had so handled their business as to get the Commissioners of Parliament , ( which were Arrived at Dublin by the Marquis' invitation , to receive the City of Dublin , and all other Garrisons and Strengths under his Command , and secure them against the Irish , for which end they had brought Forces , Shipping , Provisions , and Ammunition of all sorts with them ) to be rejected and sent away by the Marquis . 

He upon a second Invitation of the Marquis to the Parliament , ( upon the Irish Rebels continued Breaches and Treacheries ) went again for Ireland , after he had used all his Interest to persuade them to send again , though they were very unwilling , and it was much opposed by reason of the former unexpected disappointment . 

And was the chief employed in Commission from the Parliament with an Army of Horse and Foot , furnished with all things necessary to deliver the Marquis and English from the Irish Treacheries and Designs , and to receive the City of Dublin and other Garrisons , into the Parliaments Custody , who were trusted , and able to preserve the same for the Crown , if we could agree upon Articles for that purpose , which by the Blessing of God the Earl did to the Marquis and the late Lord Chancellor Eustace , ( whom the Marquis chiefly Trusted therein ) to their great Satisfaction , as well as his own and the English and protestants ; and after He and the rest of the Commissioners had received the City of Dublin and other Garrisons , and Conveyed the Marquis with the Honour due to his Quality , to the Sea side to take Shipping for England , as the Articles gave Leave ; and had spent some time to lay the Foundations which after happily succeeded , for the total Reduction of the Irish , and breaking their Cursed Confederacy and Power for Treachery , and Final Subduing them to the Crown of England , with the Forfeiture of all their Estates , for the Satisfaction of Adventurers and Soldiers , and the vast Increase of the Revenue of the Crown . 

The Earl returned for England as he had Leave to do , before he went , where by his Interest in Parliament he secured to the Marquis the Thirteen Thousand Pounds , etc.  Agreed by the Articles for the Surrender of Dublin , etc. to be paid to him , though much endeavour was used by the Lady Vicountess Moor and others ; upon legal pretences to deprive him of it ; So that he lost not one Penny of it , and then the said Marquis thought , and held the said Earl his Real Friend , and a punctual Performer of Public Faith.  

In England the Earl's part was as followeth : 

To preserve the Church in its Legal Establishment to the last , to descend the King and the Laws , against Usurpation and Arbitrary Government , to adventure his Estate and Life to save His from Execrable Murder , and never to sit still till he and his Friends , His Late Majesties and Your Faithful Subjects , had compassed Your Majesty's Happy Restauration , with the apparent and imminent hazard of their Lives , whereof the said Duke had vast benefits without danger . 

Now if the Duke will give the Earl information of his part , as an opposite Party in the said Transactions , he promises they shall not want their due place and regard in History , when all done by both shall be truly and exactly Recorded . 

The Earl doth not know what the Duke means by saying , That at least while the Lord Privy-seal and he have the Honour to be of your Majesty's Privy-council , and in the Stations they are , it will not be fit for him to publish such an Answer to the Lord Privy-seal's Book and Letter , as might otherwise be necessary in Vindication of Truth : unless he would insinuate it fit for the Earl to be displaced to make room for that long threatened Answer , that so he might have the more home and fuller stroke at the Earl before your Majesty , when he hath endeavoured but cannot hurt him before your People . 

And it appears that it is but a New Fancy and Consideration taken up by the Duke , for when he was pleased not only to write but , Print his Virulent Letter of the Twelfth of November , against the Earl , it had not it seems affected his Thoughts as of any import , and this also shows , That it is too late and dishonourable an appeal to be made to your Majesty , after the Duke hath done it , without Success in Print to the People , and would never in probability have been attempted , but that he thinks he hath arrived in a more happy conjuncture , or hath entertained some groundless hopes of Favour by the Earls depression , which he will never in the least apprehend from a just Master that he hath faithfully served so long . 

And therefore the Earl conceiving that the Duke hath already in Print charged him with all he hath to say , and more than he can make good ; and there being an Obligation of Honour lying upon him to publish any answer to the Lord Privy Seals Book which ( without difference or respect to him ) would be necessary in Vindication of Truth , and the said Earl no ways apprehending the dint of such an Answer ; humbly beseecheth your Majesty that the Duke may be at liberty and encouraged in his worthy design for vindication of Truth by his Answer without regard to the Earl , who is ready and willing to be trampled upon for the Truth's sake , and dreads much more what the Duke may with vain hopes whisper or insinuate to your Majesty , than any thing he can or shall think sit to publish for that End.  

The Earl though he acknowledgeth your Majesty's Favour in the Office he enjoys , it being a Testimony of your Gracious Acceptance of his long Faithful and Unblemished Service ; Yet for the Duke ( who hath partaken more deeply of your Royal Bounty and Favour , than any other Subject ( to say no more ) to go out of his way after he had deciphered the Earl sufficiently by his Title of Honour and Name of Office , to mention his great Place seems to be rather in undervaluing than with intention to allow your Majesty's poor Officer what his Predecessors , though some of them were of inferior quality to his , have enjoyed without Envy or Scorn , from the greatest Subjects . 

And I can truly say , that I have not paid my Debts incurred in your Majesty's Service , nor preferred my many Children , nor grown Rich by my Service and great Place , though my Ancestors and I have received Titles of Honour , and Marks of Favour from your Majesty and Predecessors , for diverse Generations . 

As to the Duke's proposal , That your Majesty will be pleased to Appoint a Committee of your Privy-council , to look over the Lord Privy-seal's Book , and to call the said Earl , and Duke of Ormond , before them , and to Report to your Majesty how reparation may be made to all that are injured by the Earl's Mistakes and Errors , in his said Book and Letter . 

The Earl saith , That the Duke seems to conceive that your Majesty and Council have more Leisure than the Earl dares presume , and the Earl hope's the Duke may content himself by your Majesty's Favour to Govern one Kingdom under you , without involving this in his Concerns , or offering to impose his Dictates upon your Majesty and Council of England , who have Wisdom to appoint Committees , or take other course for business ( properly before them ) without the direction of the Parties concerned , which most men in modesty forbear to give . 

And though the Duke seems in great haste to have Mistakes and Errors fixed upon the Earl , he on the contrary ( and though time will show that all that are , will appear to be on the Duke's part ) presumes not to give your Majesty trouble herein , or to pursue the Duke for what is common to mankind . 

And he conceives it an Employment below your Majesty and Council , to be set upon an Essay to find matter to justify what the Duke hath injuriously published against the Earl , which course being his first choice , he may freely pursue if he please . 

As to the Duke's Objection , That the Earl saith the Cessations and Peace's were destructive to the English and protestants , he believes the Duke will not say the Earl was the first that said so by above thirty years , for it hath been Printed long ago , and the Truth of History and public acts will evince it , must the Earl only be restrained from saying what he thinks , and the Duke knows he thought near Forty years ago , and endeavoured to prevent as much as he could , and believes he can make good that time , was , when the Duke was much of the same Opinion . 

It was indeed an unhappiness to conclude Cessations and Peace's , that neither the Irish nor English were satisfied with , and my unhappiness is not small to be the only English man Reproached for an Opinion they generally had , and felt by sad and dismal Effects . 

If the Earl hath dealt more plainly with the Duke than his Nature averse to Contention ( and who hath had quarrels with none in the whole course of his Life ) inclines him to , he hope's your Majesty will Consider that to be taxed of Untruth and Reflection on his Late Majesty's Honour and Justice , and branded as a Malicious Calumniator , a close concealed and disguised Enemy to your Majesty , a designer of Mischief to the Duke and the Government , and one who choose the most effectual Conjuncture for those things , with pretence only of Candour and impartiality , are Provocations unusual and not easily born by persons of Honour , and might the better have been forborn , because after all this loud noise and criminal Charge , the Duke himself dwindles it into bare Mistakes and Errors , which who Life's that is not guilty of , and the Earl conceives , is a Task very improper to be laid upon your Majesty to Examine , especially in Cases of Controversy thereupon between your Majesty's Subjects . 

Thus the Earl though he had reason first to complain , if he could have thought it decent to trouble your Majesty with private disputes ( after the Duke had Scandalised him in Print , for which he prays and hope's Reparation ) in obedience to your Majesty's Order hath represented what he conceived expedient upon this occasion wherewith if the Duke be not satisfied . 

It is desired that he would in due form of Law , and by legal and certain Articles charge the said Earl with particulars , to which he may Answer by Advice of Council , and if he Vindicates not himself , let him be exposed to the Censure of this present Age and Posterity , and incur your Majesty's displeasure , lesle than which cannot be aimed at by the Duke , who to satisfy his unjust and causeless Animosity , makes use of his Power to alienate from the Earl your Majesty's favour , good opinion and confidence , after above three and twenty years faithful and diligent Service , wherein the said Earl hath almost worn out his Strength and Life , without Conviction of any failure or transgression , which surely the said Duke would never do ( after he had privately quarrelled the Earl , and exposed him the worst he could in Print , and this Affair having taking a circuit of almost two years ) unless he conceived he had met with some extraordinary juncture to bear down the Earl , nor trouble your Majesty and Council , when so great Affairs are before them , with such private concerns and complaints , after so long a run , and using other ways unsuccessfully , to Vindicate himself from what was never intended as a Charge against him . 

I conclude Praying ( as I have heartily endeavoured ) for the Glory and Prosperity of your Majesty's Government , to be equal to the greatest of your Royal Predecessors , wishing your Majesty many such Subjects as I have been and am , whom the Duke of Ormond seems so Earnest to rid your Majesty of ; or leave under a black Character , and misrepresentation in your Service which he shall never be able to compass . 

ANGLESEY . 



At the Court at White-hall , this 13th . day of July , 1682.  

By the king 's Most Excellent Majesty , AND The Lords of His Majesty's most Honourable Privy-council . 

Upon Reading this day at the Board , a Paper delivered in by his Grace the Duke of Ormond . His Majesty in Council was pleased to Order , That a Copy of the said Paper be sent to the Right Honourable the Earl of Anglesey , Lord Keeper of the Privy-seal , ( which is accordingly hereunto annexed ) who is to return an Answer thereunto , to His Majesty in Council upon Thursday the 20th , instant , at Hampton Court , at Nine in the Morning . 

Phil. Loyd . 

I THE Cessations and Peace's Dishonourable to the Crown of England . Pag. 27.  

II Of Advantage only to the Irish. ibid.  

III Destructive to the English protestants . ibid.  

iv. That therefore the Lords Justices and Council , were from the beginning averse to them . Pag. 60.  

v. That for the same reasons the chief , and most of the English Nobility in Ireland , and the generality of the English , Scotch and Irish protestants , of all Qualities and Degrees , sooner or later opposed both the Cessations and Peace's . Pag. 65.  

VI That amongst them were found the Earls of Kildare , Thomond , etc. Ibid.  

VII . And that the two first Peace's were against Law , and several Acts of Parliament in both Kingdoms . Pag. 64.  



The Council not sitting the 20th . of July , though the Lord Privy-seal who received the 13th . the particular Charges of the Duke of Ormond against him then delivered in , Answered them the 14th . yet gave not in his Answer till the next Council held at Hampton-court the 27th . of July , which was as followeth : 

July the 14th . 1682.  

The Answer of Arthur Earl of Anglesey , Lord Privy-seal , to the Paper delivered by the Duke of Ormond at Council , July , 13. 1682. as a Charge of particulars against him . 

Saving still the benefit of his former Answer delivered in the 23d . of June , and what was then done at Council , the said Earl further saith : 

That 't is to be considered that all the said particulars were passages in a private Letter to a Friend , not designed for public view . That the Earl of Castlehaven to whom it was written being convinced thereby , as appears by a Second Epistle to the Reader added to his Memoirs , wherein he saith that his acting as a Confederate Catholic was in plain English as a Rebel , That he doth not excuse the Rebellion , for all the Water of the Sea cannot wash it off that Nation , it having been begun most bloodily on the English in that Kingdom , in a time of settled Peace , without the least occasion given . A Noble and Remarkable Confession of one who had been long of the Supreme Council of the Confederate Irish. And which makes it the more wonderful , that the Duke of Ormond should be so severe a Censor on a Letter which had so good an effect on him it was written to . 

In the next place the said Earl saith , That since the Duke of Ormond thought it fit to concern himself in a Letter not written to him , he should have been so impartial as to have taken Notice of this Passage therein , Pag. 61.  Your Lordship having been privy to all the Cabals and Secret Councils against the English and protestants , will I hope if you find any thing written by me , questionable or doubtful in your Opinion , favour me with your severest Reflections thereupon , for , as I design nothing but exact Truth wherever it light , so if by any inadvertancy or want of full information , I should Err or come short in the least , your Lordship shall find me ready to retract or supply , but never to persist in it , whereby it appears , that the Earl of Anglesey had no Intention to Injure any man as he is not Conscious he hath . 

These things premised , the said Earl gives this short Answer or rather Justification to the said particular Charges , 

First , to that Marked No. 1. 2. 3. which are all but one Clause in the letter Page 27 ( viz. ) that the Cessations and Peace's were of advantage only to the Irish , and highly dishonourable to the Crown of England , and destructive to the English and protestants . 

Answer . 

The said Earl passing by the Irish and Papists , being the Chief promoters of them , the English and protestants sent Agents to Oxford , purposely to oppose and divert the Influence thereof , and to hinder agreements with the Irish , which they foresaw would be destructive to the English and protestants , the whole passages of the proceedings herein , were published in 1644. in a Book Entitled , the False and Scandalous Remonstrance of the Inhuman , and Bloody Rebels of Ireland , together with an Answer thereunto on the behalf of the protestants of Ireland ; the perusal whereof will fully Justify the Earl in what he hath written , besides the Two Houses of Parliament , their Declarations and Reasons against both Cessations and Peace's : But to put it past dispute , the Earl Refers to His Majesty's Declaration , and the Act for the Settlement of Ireland in which the Duke of Ormond himself , had a great hand and gave the Royal Assent pa. 10. etc.  

By which his Majesty that now is in full Parliament , Declares , that his Royal Father had been forced to the Cessation and Peace which he had made with the Irish , and that , he was thereby Compelled to give them a full pardon , in the same Act His Majesty also declares , that he himself was necessitated to make the second Peace with the Irish upon difficult Conditions . 

If all this do not prove the Cessations and Peace's dishonourable to the Crown of England , of advantage only to the Irish and destructive to the English and protestants , I submit to Judgement . 

And why else were the Peace's upon hearing all Parties laid aside , and the Irish their Estates divided among the English ? 

2d . Charge . 

That therefore the Lords Justices and Council were from the beginning averse to them page , 60.  

Answer . 

To prove that the Justices and Council were from the beginning averse to the Cessations and Peace's , I Refer to their many Letters , which I have ready to produce , in some whereof the Duke of Ormond , than Earl Joined , by which they Declare the Horridness and Universality of the Rebellion , and the Design of the Irish to Extirpate the English , and to Cast off the English Government , and that there was no way of Recovering that Kingdom to the Crown of England , but by a vigorous and total Reducing them to obedience . 

But when other Councils were taken up , one of the Lords Justices , and diverse of the Chief Officers and Councillors of greatest Experience in that Kingdom , and who best understood how to deal with that People were displaced , and affairs put into other hands ; the grounds and proceedings and success whereof , the Duke of Ormond can better Relate than I  

Charge 3d.  

Concerning the protestants of all degrees sooner or later opposing both the Cessations and Peace's , and the Nobility named that did so pag. 65.  

Answer . 

This is matter of Fact unquestionable , and without which and their subduing the Irish to the Crown of England ( who were sheltered and protected by the Cessations and Peace's ) their Estates could never have been granted to the English and protestants as they are , if there were any mistake in the enumeration of the Nobility , ( which is possible ) the Letter being written by memory and far from Books and Papers , it will not be great or material , and is easily amendable without varying the Case . 

Charge 4th . 

That the two first peaces were against Law , and several Acts of Parliament in both Kingdoms , pag. 64.  

Answer . 

They are not only against the whole Scope of the Laws in Ireland and England , for Establishing the Protestant Religion and Suppression of Poperty , but against these particular Acts of Parliament ( viz. ) 2 Eliz. Cap 1. 2 in Ireland and 28.  H. 8 Cap. 13 etc. And in England the Statutes of the 17 Caroli 1.  Cap. 34. 35. 36. 37. in one of which it is provided , that all pardons granted to any of the Rebels of Ireland , without assent of Parliament shall be void , and yet by the Cessations they were Reprieved , and by both the Peace's fully pardoned . 

And in the same Act , it is also enacted , that whosoever shall make any promise or agreement , to Introduce or bring unto the Realm of Ireland the Authority of the See of Rome in any Case whatsoever , or to defend or maintain the same , shall forfeit all his Lands , Tenements and Hereditaments , Goods and Chattels . 



After some Debate of the said Charges and Answers at Council , the Lords Concerned being withdrawn , this Resolution passed by the Lords on the Lord Privy-seals Letter to the Earl of Castlehaven ( viz. ) that it was a scandalous Libel against His late Majesty , against His now Majesty , and against the Government ; but no particular Clauses were mentioned to ground that Censure upon , and when the parties were Called in again , the Lord Chancellor only told the Lord Privy-seal , that the King Conceived him faulty in the Clause pag. 32. of the said Letter to the Earl of Castlehaven , wherein the Committees of the Parliament of Ireland were mentioned , as having been in at the Intriqus of the Popish Faction at Court , but that the Council had appointed his Lordship to be heard next Council day Aug. 3d. when he was to produce the vouchers Mentioned in his Answer , as appears , by the order following . 

At the Court at Hampton-court , This 27th , day of July 1682.  

By the Kings Most Excellent Majesty , and the Lords of His Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council . 

It was this day ordered by His Majesty in Council , that the Right honourable the Earl of Anglesey Lord Privy-seal , do on Thursday next being the third of August produce to His Majesty in Council , appointed at Hampton-court , at Nine in the Morning the Vouchers mentioned by his Lordship in his Answer this day read at the Board to the Paper delivered in the 13th . Instant by his Grace the Duke of Ormond . 

Phi. Lloyd . 



The Lord Privy-seal Continuing Extreme ill of the Gout , and finding himself prejudged by the Lords the said 27th . day of July , Aug. 2. wrote the following Letter to His Majesty , and sent it enclosed to the Lord Precedent to be presented , which was done Accordingly . 

May it please your Majesty , 

Having Received your Majesty's order in Council of the 27th of July , to produce the third of Aug. next at Hampton-court , to your Majesty in Council , the Vouchers mentioned by me in my Answer to the Paper delivered , in the 13th Instant by the Duke of Ormond , and the increase of my fit of the Gout , occasioned by my last Attendance incapacitating me personally to obey the said Order , I hold it my duty to yield the obedience I am able by this humble address to your Majesty . 

I find by the entry of the last Council days proceedings , that beyond what the Lord Chancellor declared to me , at the board of your Majesty's Judgement of a Clause , in the 32 page of my Letter to the Earl of Castlehaven , which was not so much as mentioned in the Duke of Ormonds said paper ; A Resolve passed by the Council on that Letter , to this effect ; that it was a scandalous Libel against your Majesty's Royal Father , against your Majesty , and against the Government , but I find no Clauses , whereon such Judgement , is grounded , your Majesty may Imagine with what Amazement , as well as trouble this came to my knowledge , I should with lesle Concern , have seen a dagger at my old faithful heart , then to have Received the wound I have from your Royal hand , after Three and Twenty years faithful and diligent service under great Trusts . 

I do not know , by what Right or Authority the Council Table , who are limited by Laws in their Jurisdiction , take upon them the Trial of a Peer for pretended Libelling , though I shall be glad to see their zeal against real Libelling , which is the Dangerous and Countenanced sin of the Age.  

I am supported at present under my misfortune in this , that your Majesty , who hath so often declared to your People , that you will Govern according to Law , will not deny your old Servant a fair and Legal Trial , in some one of your Courts of Justice , upon the points , whereof the Duke of Ormond hath accused me , before they take any Impression on your Majesty to my prejudice , and then , I no ways doubt by a due Administration of the Laws , I shall by Jurors legally Impaneled and untampered with , which is the Right of every Subject , be represented to your Majesty in this affair , under a Character more suitable to that unblemished and honour , with which , I am arrived at old age . But if the Duke of Ormond upon his prosecution of me , before those Judges who have power to hear and determine , shall by supplying his defect of proofs in Council , Convict me for a Libeler , in any one point of his Charge , I shall not only deserve your Majesty's Censure , but the utmost severity of the Law in my punishment , which may Gratify the Ambition of some who promote , and wait for my supplanting . 

The only passage that I yet know of , which your Majesty seems to take offence at , being that in page the 32. of the Irish Committees , being in at the Intrigue of the Popish faction at Court etc. since it was suddenly and unexpectedly urged against me at Council , not being one of the particulars , I was ordered to Answer that day , I could then only Answer what occurred to me on that surprise , without so much as my reading the Clause ( viz. ) that first negatively , by those words was not meant His late Majesty or his Council , but the Popish faction then haunting the Court , like Locusts against the Laws , which prohibit their approach to it , and as many as will be owned then Papists at Court , and were capable of Intriguing , I do not scruple to say , I intended them , and such there were of my Knowledge at that time , who may be justly suspected , to have laid the design of all the Calamities of this Kingdom and Ireland that ensued . 

And as long as any such shall dare to come to Court , and by their Faction spread Libels to the scandal of all legal proceedings , and the exasperating your People daily in affront , of the wise provision the Laws of the Land have made against them , neither your Majesty nor your Kingdoms can be safe , but the seeds of sedition will grow up to Confusion . 

And for your Majesty's further satisfaction , of my harmless intention in that expression , now I have perused it at Leisure , I find that in that Clause , I assert nothing positively , but when with disjunctive particles , I had mentioned diverse particulars , which were in that Juncture the Jealousy and discourse of the times , and even the boast of the Irish themselves . 

I Conclude , that I would not take upon me to determine any thing , but that soon after the said Committees return for Ireland , broke out that Execrable and unparalleled Rebellion of the Papists . 

By this time your Majesty and the Council will I hope , see cause to think , that a Summons for me to produce Vouchers , after they have given so terrible a Judgement against me comes too late , and that if I were in a Condition to attend at the day appointed , it would be no Contempt to decline making of further defence before the Lords , who have prejudged me , and Condemned me as Guilty , before the hearing of the Cause be Concluded , which I hope no other Court will do , and was never that I know done by them till now in my Case , nor do I hear , that the Duke of Ormond is censured for the scandalous Pamphlet , which he owned at Council , to have published against me , whereof I Complained : I must therefore hope , that what I have delivered in Council already , will be better and more impartially considered , without my giving your Majesty further trouble therein . 

And as I have spent the best of my days in your Service without Reproach , so I hope still to stand Justified to all the world , what I Resolve , whilst I live to be 

Your Majesty's Most Obedient and Most Faithful devoted Subject and Servant . Anglesey . London Aug. 2d . 1682.  

The said Letter was Read at Council Aug. 3d. but nothing appears entered to be done thereupon , but the Earl of Castlehaven was called in several times and questioned , about his Printed Memoirs answered by the Earl of Anglesey Lord Privy-seal , which he acknowledged to be his , and in Conclusion his Book was by His Majesty and Council , Judged to be a scandalous Libel against the Government , but no further proceeding , was had against his Lordship . 

But Aug the 9th . 1682. the following Warrant of the King , was brought by Sir Lionel Jenkins Secretary of State , to the Lord Privy-seal in the Evening , being then at his Lordship's House in Drury-lane . 

Charles R.  To our Right Trusty , and Right well beloved Cousin and Councillor , Arthur Earl of Anglesey Keeper of our Privy-seal . 

Our will and pleasure is , that Immediately upon sight hereof you deliver up our Privy-seal , appointed by our Letters Patents , to remain during our pleasure in your Custody , into the hands of our Right Trusty , and well beloved Councillor Sir Lionel Jenkins Knight , our Principal Secretary of State , and for so doing , this shall be your Warrant , given at our Court at Windsor the 8th . day of August 1682. in the 34 year of our Reign , By His Majesty's Command 

Conway . 



What passed between the Lord Privy-seal , & Mr. Secretary appears not , further , than what follows under the laid Secretary's hand and Seal , but it 's said the Lord Privy-seal with his duty to the King , desired the Secretary ( which he promised to let His Majesty know that at the signification of His Majesty's pleasure , he delivered the Seal more joyfully than ever he Received it . 

Anglesey house on Wednesday the 9th . of Aug. 1682.  

In pursuance of His Majesties Warrant bearing Date Yesterday , being the 8th . day of this present Month of Aug. which Warrant was in these words ( viz. ) 

CHARLES R.  

Our will and pleasure is , that Immediately upon sight hereof you deliver up our Privy-seal , appointed by our Letters Patents , to Remain during our Pleasure in your Custody , into the hands of our Right Trusty and wellbeloved Count ellor , Sir Leoline Jenkins Knight , our Principal Secretary of State , and for so doing this shall be your Warrant , given at our Court at Windsor the 8th . day of August , 1682.  In the 34 year of our Reign 

To Our Right Trusty and Right wellbeloved Cousin and Counsellor Arthur Earl of Anglesey Keeper of our Privy-seal . By His Majesty's Command CONWAY 



The Right honourable the said Earl of Anglesey , delivered into my hands His Majesty's Privy-seal , sealed up with his Lordship's Seal at Arms , being put into the Purse , given by His Majesty for Carrying the said Privy-seal , which said Privy-seal , I Received at Eight a Clock in the Evening of the said ninth of August , witness my hand and Seal 

L. Jenkins . 

FINIS . 

Now to show , that Dr. Morley the Learned Bishop of Winchester , is of the same opinion with the Earl of Anglesey , for the keeping out of Popery , now it seems to be flowing in upon us , it hath been thought fit , to fill up this last sheet with the following Letter of the said Bishop , written to the said Earl above ten years ago , when the Papists Warmly set upon their Design to introduce Popery , and many years before their Desperate Plot since Discovered ( for which so many have suffered by the hand of Justice ) was ripe for Execution . 

Which Letter was Received by the said Earl from the said Bishop , July the 9th . 1672. by the hands of the Lord Cornbury , now Earl of Clarendon . 

My Lord , 

Yours by my Lord of Cornbury , I Received this Morning from his own hands , and this is to Return you my humble thanks , for the favourable opinion of me you are pleased to express in it , which as to the Zeal I have for the Protestant Religion , I hope I may without vanity , own to be true , but must acknowledge I want these abilities to defend it , which you seem to think I have , but thanks be to God , our Church wants not those that have , and can , and will Answer all that hath been , or is , or can be objected against her , or any of the Doctrines , which in opposition to the Church of Rome are professed by her ; neither do I know any one Book or any one Argument , ( worth the taking notice of ) written or urged by any Romanist , for them , or against us , in any material point of Difference betwixt us , that hath not been clearly and fully Answered over and over again , by some or other of our own Church of England , to say nothing of those Eminently Learned and Pious Divines of the other Reform Protestant Churches beyond the Seas , so that to Answer every impertinent Pamphlet that comes forth , which hath nothing but what hath been so often Answered before in it , is but Actum agere & stultus labour ineptiarum , and therefore the Wiseman that bids us , for bids us too ; to Answer a Fool in his folly , his meaning is , that after we have Answered him once , we should Answer him no more , especially such Kind of fools , quos non persuadebis etiamsi persuaâ—eris , and such are all those who contend for Interest and not for truth : Demetrius will hold his Conclusion , that Diana is a Goddess , as long as he hath nothing to live by , but the making of Shrines , but is there then nothing to be done will you say to keep out Popery , now it seems to be flowing in upon us ? yes no doubt there is , and I hope there will be , when His Majesty shall see a Convenient time for it , but it will not be done , when it is done by writing , or answering of Books pro and con , of which there will never be an end . But how is it to be done then ? I answer , viderint illi qui ad Clavum sedent , let them look to it , who sit at the helm . I am ready to obey , whatsoever I shall be Commanded to that purpose , as far as my Conscience will permit , and I thank God I have done so both formerly , and in my late visitation of my whole Diocese , which perhaps you may have heard of , little to my Credit if the Pseudo-catholicks have informed you of it , but I care not what they or any other Heretics , or Schismatics do , or can say of me ; as long as I do that and no more than what my Duty to God and the King , and the Place I hold in the Church requires of me . 

You know what I was for in the late Sessions of Parliament , ( I mean not a comprehension , ) but a Coalition or Incorporation of the Presbiterian Party , into the Church as it is by Law Established , and I am still of the same opinion , that it is the one only effectual Expedient , to hinder the growth of Popery , and to secure both parties , and I am very Confident , that there are no Presbiterians in the World ( the Scotch only Excepted ) that would not Conform to all that is Required by our Church , especially in such a Juncture of time as this is , which is all I have to say as to that particular at this distance . 

My Lord the visit your Son made me , I took for a great Honour and favour from him , especially considering how much good I have heard of him , which I hope will Increase every day more and more in him , that the succeeding age may be the better for him . My Lord I am 

Your Lordships very humble Servant Geor Winton . Farnham Castle July 4th 1672.  Directed . For the Right honourable the Earl of Anglesey . 

FINIS . 

The Reader is desired to amend or pass by the Errors of the Press . 





E , Castlehav . Memoirs , p. 12.  Pref. to the Memoirs . P. 51.  P. 33.  