A SERMON PREACHED before the KING , UPON The Seventh of March , 1668 / 9 

BY JOHN Lord Bishop of CHESTER . 

Published By His Majesty's special Command . 

LONDON : Printed by T. Newcomb , for Sa. Gellibrand , at the Golden Ball in St. Paul's Churchyard . 1669.  

A SERMON Preached before the KING Upon the Seventh of this Instant March , 1669.  

PROV . 3. 16 , 17.  

Length of days is in her right hand , and in her left hand riches and HONOUR . 

Her ways are ways of Pleasantness , and all her Paths are Peace . 



The chief Design of the Wise man in this Text , is , to set forth the many great Advantages that belong to Religion ; In order to which , he doth here Enumerate those five Principal things , that must contribute to a Complete state of Happiness in this World , namely , Health , and riches , and Honour , and Pleasure , and Peace ; And asserts concerning them , that they are the proper effects of that wisdom which consist's in being Religious . 

This he expresses by way of Allegory , representing Wisdom ( as is usual for other Virtues ) in the shape of a Woman , or Queen , with her Arms extended , in the Posture of Directing and Rewarding her Followers ; Holding in her right hand the Blessing of Health , or length of Days , the great Promise of the Law , to which the Precedence of the right hand is therefore given , because it is amongst all Worldly Blessings , the greatest and most desirable ; That , without which , a Man cannot enjoy any thing else , nor so much as his own self : Length of days is in her right hand . And then , for those other things , which the Generality of Men do so much covet and labour after , Wealth , and Reputation ; these likewise are at her Disposal , and must proceed from her Gift ; And in her left hand riches and Honor. And , as for the Cheerfulness of our Conditions , he affirms , that the truest Pleasure must be found in those ways that are directed by Her ; Her ways are ways of Pleasantness . And because there are several things , which have some present delight in them , seeming to drop as the Honeycomb , and to be smother than Oil ; And yet upon trial , do prove in the issue , bitter as Wormwood , and sharp as a two-edged Sword ; therefore 't is added , that her ways are not only pleasant , but they are likewise Safe and Quiet : All her Paths are Peace . 

That these things are the effects of Religion , is here only affirmed , which , to them who believe the Authority of Scripture , is evidence sufficient : But , it were easy to prove this , concerning each of them , by all other kinds of evidence , of which such matters are capable . 

I purpose at this time to Treat only concerning the Third of them , namely Honour ; as being the most proper Subject for this Presence and Auditory . And that this can only be attained by Religion and Virtue , I doubt not but to prove , with so much strength and perspicuity as shall be sufficient to convince any one , who will but attend and consider . 

In order to this , I shall first endeavour to state the true Nature of Honour , and to show wherein the most proper notion of it doth consist ; 't is an equivocal word , and is capable of various senses . 

First , Sometimes 't is used to denote worthy and creditable Parentage ; the being derived from such Ancestors as have been famous in their Generation for some eminent Virtue or Exploit : Wherein there is this benefit , that a Man hath great Examples in his own Family , and so much the stronger Obligation not to degenerate from them : But it shows rather what such a Man should be , than what he is ; and , to a Person that is not Virtuous , doth prove a Prejudice rather than an advantage . 

Secondly , Sometimes 't is used to signify , Titles of Place and Dignity , according to the various orders and degrees of Nobility in several Nations : But , this kind of Honour depending merely upon the Prince's Favour , must therefore be wholly extrinsical , and consequently can have no more due to it , than a mere External respect . Such persons may challenge from us , that we should give them their due Titles , and demean ourselves towards them with that Observance and Ceremony as becomes their Quality : But then , as to inward esteem and affection , they can demand no greater a share of this , then according as their real worth and virtue shall require . The Royal Stamp upon any kind of Metal , may be sufficient to give it an Extrinsic value , and to determine the Rate at which it is to pass amongst Coins , but it cannot give an Intrinsic value , or make that which is but Brass to be Gold.  

't is true indeed , there are some Callings and Relations of Men , to whom an Inward Veneration is due , though the persons themselves should not be Virtuous ; Namely , Magistrates , and Ministers , and Parents , and Benefactors ; who , having somewhat of a Divine Stamp and Impress upon them , may therefore challenge from us , that we should demean ourselves towards them , both with such an Outward Respect , as may become their Places , and with such an Inward Respect too , as may be suitable to that Image which they bear , our dependence upon them , and Obligation to them . But then , we cannot be Obliged to think such persons Good Men , unless we have some Evidence to believe them to be so , or at least , not to be otherwise ; So that they are beholding to something extrinsical to their persons , namely , to their Callings and Relations , for that Honour which is paid to them . 

Thirdly , The word Honour is sometimes used for that Esteem and Reputation which a Man hath in the World , especially amongst Virtuous persons ; according to which sense 't is defined by Tully to be Consentiens Laus bonorum , the Concurrent Approbation of Good Men ; when those , who are best able to Judge of real worth , shall both think and speak well of others , this is properly Honouring of them . And in this sense ( which is the most proper notion of the words ) it is one of the greatest blessings that this World can afford ; much to be preferrred before riches , or Pleasures , or Life itself . A good Name is rather to be chosen than great riches , and loving kindness , rather than Silver or Gold , prov. 22. 1.  One that is a Generous , Virtuous Man , will choose to die , rather than do any thing , that may expose him to Infamy : St. Paul was of this Mind ; It were better for me to die , than that any should make my Glorying void . There have been some Wise Men , who have neglected and re-refused that other kind of Honour , consisting in Titles of Dignity , as conceiving more of Burden and Temptation in it , than of real Advantage ; But , no Man , in his Wits , did ever despise a good Name , unless such profligate dissolute Wretches , as did either despair of , or resolve against , doing any thing , that might deserve it . 't is not easy to reckon up the many Advantages that belong to this kind of Honour : 't is Power , enabling a Man to do things great and worthy , to be useful to his Friends and his Country : 't is Safety , and doth give a Man such an interest in the esteem and affection of others , as will make them concerned for his Welfare , ready to stand by him and assist him in any kind of Danger ; which are so great Advantages , that whosoever shall wilfully neglect them , must needs be rendered very contemptible . 

Having thus Explained the proper Notion of Honour , I proceed in the next place to Prove , that Religion and Virtue is the only means for the attaining of it : This I shall endeavour to do by Testimony , and by Reason , and by Experience , which are all the kinds of Arguments , that such matters are capable of . 

First , By Testimony . The Scripture doth abound in diverse Assertions and Promises to this purpose : Such as are Religious , are styled the Excellent of the Earth , Psal. 16. 3. and said to be more excellent than their Neighbours , prov. 17. 27.  They are Gods peculiar Treasure . The dearly beloved of his Soul. He sets apart the Man that is Godly for himself . Though such persons may be but low , as to their outward Condition ; being put to wander up and down in Sheepskins and Goatskins , being destitute , afflicted , tormented , seeking for refuge , in Deserts and Mountains , in Dens , and Caves of the Earth ; yet may they , upon the account of Religion , be of such an excellent value , that in the Judgement of the Holy Ghost , The whole World is not worthy of them , Heb. 11. 37 , 38.  

The Wiseman speaking of Religion , saith , that it shall be an ornament of Grace to thy head , and as a chain about thy neck , Exalt her , and she shall promote thee , and bring thee to honour , She shall give to thy head an ornament of grace , and a Crown of glory . God hath engaged himself by Promise to those that are Religious , that he will set them above other Nations ; they shall be made the Head , and not the Tail , Deut. 28. 13.  He hath said , Those that honour me , I will honour , 1 Sam. 2. 30.  And certainly , he , who is the King of Kings , must needs be the Fountain of Honour , and able to dispose of it as he pleases . 

But , because such persons , as are no friends to Religion , may have but a small esteem for the Authority of Scripture ; Therefore to these I would suggest the concurrent Opinion of Wise Men in all former Ages . Though the ancient Philosophers were divided into various Sects , and differed very much from one another in several Opinions ; yet , in this , they have all agreed , that Honour is due only to Virtue , and doth not properly belong to any thing else . It would be tedious to enumerate the several sayings to this purpose , out of Plato , Aristotle , Tully , Seneca , and the other Ancients : And certainly , that Man must needs have a very extravagant conceit of his own Abilities , who dares prefer his private Opinion , before the General Consent of Wise Men in former Ages , such as have been counted the greatest Masters of Reason , and most eminent for their Knowledge and their Wisdom . 

Secondly , I proceed in the next place to confirm this by the Principles of Reason , That Religion and Virtue is the cause of Honor. There may be a twofold cause of things Moral , 
Natural . 


That is said to be the Moral cause , which doth dispose a Man to such a Condition , upon the Account of Fitness and Desert , and in this sense Honour is the Reward of Virtue ; There is an equitable right , a sutableness and congruity , that good Men should be loved and esteemed , and vicious Men exposed to shame : As Snow in Summer , and as Rain in Harvest , so is Honour unsuitable for a Fool , prov. 26. 1.  The intermixing of Winter and Summer , would not cause a greater disorder in the Natural World , than the cross disposal of Honour and contempt , would in the Moral World. And hence is it , that the Laws of all Nations and Governments , have owned it as a point of Policy , to excite their Subjects unto Virtuous and worthy Actions , by this Motive of Honour , and to deter them from Vicious Courses , by the consideration of the shame and contempt which belongs to them . 

That is said to be the Natural cause of a thing , which doth by its own immediate efficacy produce the effect ; and in this sense likewise is Virtue the cause of Honour . The Fire doth not more naturally produce heat , than Goodness doth Love and Esteem ; Which will appear very plain , if we consider , That Inward Honouring is nothing else , but the Believing a Man to be Worthy and Virtuous ; and the Testifying this by our Words and Actions is Outward Honouring . Now , nothing can be more evident , then that the best means for one to be thought good , is to be so . 

A Man may excel in Strength , Beauty , riches , Learning , Wit , which are all commendable things , and will contribute to a Man's esteem ; But , if we apprehend such a one to be notoriously Vicious , This esteem will not be accompanied with Love , but with Fear , Hate , and Envy ; because such a one hath by these things so much the greater advantage of doing Mischief in the World : Whereas on the other side , though a Man should be destitute of all these other advantages , without any Nobility in his Ancestors , but of a small Estate , a low Condition ; yet , if we believe him to be a truly . Virtuous Man , it cannot be , but that we must pay a Veneration to him . 

All things whatsoever have some Natural Standard , whereby the Goodness of them is to be Measured ; namely , their sutableness unto that chief end , for which they are designed . We do not therefore accounted a Ship to be good , because 't is curiously painted and gilded , or carved and inlaid , but because 't is fitted for all the purposes of Navigation , which is , the proper end and use of a Ship : Nor do we therefore accounted a Sword to be good , because it hath a rich Hilt , and an Embroidered Scabbard , but because it is fit for the proper use of a Sword , which is to cut : They are the comparisons of Seneca , speaking of this Subject ; In homine quoque , nihil ad rem pertinet , quantum art , quantum foeneret , a quam multis salutetur , etc. sed quam bonus sit . It should be so likewise in our esteem of Men , who are not so much to be valued by the Grandeur of their Estates or Titles , as by their inward goodness . 

Every Man is endowed with a Natural principle , inclining him to a state of Happiness , and hath in some measure , both an Ability to judge of , and a freedom and liberty for applying himself unto , those Duties , which are the proper means for the promoting of this end : And this being the peculiar difference of the Human Nature , therefore a man is not upon any other account to be justly praised or blamed , but according to the right or wrong use of this natural liberty ; And consequently as a Man doth find , either in himself or others , a constant and firm resolution , to make a right use of this , so should he proportion his esteem accordingly ; Preferring this Inward Greatness , this Rectitude of Mind , whereby a Man is resolved in every condition to do that which shall appear to be his Duty , before any External Greatness whatsoever . 

There are two kind of Virtues amongst all the rest , which are by General consent esteemed Venerable , and such as do advance the Reputation of those who are endowed with them ; namely Wisdom , 
Courage . 


Because they have a more intrinsic rise , and do lesle depend upon External advantages , but seem rather to be rooted in the Inward Frame and Temper of Mind ; and withal , are most beneficial both to ourselves and Others : The former signifying a Man to have those Intellectual Abilities , which are proper to his kind , whereby the Human Nature is to be distinguished from other things : The other , because it argues a Rectitude in the Will , and a Power to subdue the Passion of Fear , which is most natural to our present state of Infirmity ; and withal doth support a Man against Difficulties , and enable for those two Services , of Doing and Suffering as he ought . And , for this Reason , the Vices that are opposite to these , are amongst all others counted the most shameful ; There being no greater Reproach to be cast upon any one , then to be esteemed a Fool , or a Coward . 

Now a Man that is Irreligious cannot justly pretend to either of these Virtues . 

1.  For Wisdom . This is so essential to Religion , that in the Scripturephrase ( especially in the writings of David and Solomon ) they boty go under the same Name , and there is very good reason why it should be so ; because there is such an intimate agreement between the Natures of them : The Philosopher doth define Wisdom to consist in an ability and inclination , to make choice of the right Means in the prosecution of our true End. And nothing can enable a Man for this but Religion , both as to the Subordinate End of Temporal Happiness in this World ; but chiefly with respect to that great and Supreme End of Eternal Happiness in the World to come . 

2.  And then for Courage , 't is not possible for a Man to be truly Valiant , unless he be withal truly Religious : He may be bold and daring , and able ( in a fearless manner ) to rush upon any danger , but then he must stifle his Reason from considering what the Consequences of things may be , what shall become of him hereafter , if he should miscarry . There being no man whatsoever so totally free from the Apprehensions of a future state , but that when he is serious and considerate , he must be startled with Doubts and Fears concerning it : So that there cannot be any rational , sedate , deliberate courage , but only in such , as have some good hopes of a better Estate in the other World ; And , 't is Religion only that can enable a Man for this . 

3.  I proceed to the Third kind of Argument to this purpose , from Experience ; By which , I mean that Practical Knowledge , which every man may attain by his own Observation of the usual course of things in the World : And , by this , it will appear , that no kind of persons have been more highly Reverenced in the Hearts and Consciences of others , than those that have been most eminent for their Virtue and Religion ; which hath been always true , both with respect to Public Communities , and Private persons . 

First , For Nations ; If we consult the Stories of former times , we shall find that saying of Solomon constantly verified , That Righteousness doth exalt a Nation , but Sin doth prove a reproach to it : And more especially the sin of Irreligion and Profaneness ; As this doth increase in any Nation , so must the Honour and Reputation of that Nation decrease . The Roman Empire was then at the highest , as to its Name and Greatness , when it was so as to its Virtue ; when they were most punctual in observing the Rites of their Religion , ( though that were a false way of Worship , ) most Heroical in their Justice , Courage , Fidelity , Gratitude ; than it was that they deserved to Govern the World , and to be had in greatest Honour above all other Nations : And not only Tully and Polybius , two Heathen Writers , who , upon that Account , might be thought more partial ; But St. Austin also and Lactantius , two of the Fathers , do ascribe the flourishing of that Empire , when it was at its height , to the Religion , and Piety , and Virtue of those times ; And , as they did afterwards degenerate from this , so did they decline likewise in their Greatness and Honor.  

2.  Thus also hath it been with particular persons ; amongst the Heathen , What Eulogies do we find in the Honour of Socrates , Aristides , Cato , Epictetus ? The latter of which , though but a poor Slave , had yet such a Veneration paid to his Memory , that his Earthen Lamp by which he was wont to Study , was , after his Death , sold for 3000 Drachms . 

Nor was it otherwise amongst the Christians ; The Apostles were but poor Fishermen , Illiterate Mechanics ; Many of the Martyrs were but of mean condition , much Opposed and Persecuted in the World ; And yet these Men , during the time of their lives , were highly Reverenced amongst those that knew them ; and since their Deaths , what can be more Glorious than that Renown which they have amongst Men , when the greatest Kings and Princes will not mention their Names without Reverence ; when whole Nations are willing to set apart , and to observe Solemn Days and Festivals in Honour of their Memories . 

And , as it hath always been thus formerly , so I appeal to every man's breast , whether it be not so now ; Let them but examine , what their Inclinations are towards such persons , whom they believe to be truly Virtuous : Not only to such amongst them as are their particular Acquaintance and Friends , but likewise to Strangers , nay to very Enemies ; whether they do not esteem , and love them , and will well to them . 

I shall crave leave to speak briefly to two Objections , that may be made , against what I have been Proving . 

I The Scripture saith ( speaking of good Men , That the World shall revile and persecute them , and speak all manner of evil against them : Our Saviour himself was despised and rejected of Men ; And his Apostles were used as the rubbish and offscouring of all things . 

To these two things may be said by way of Answer . 

First , It cannot otherwise be expected , but that when a New Religion is to be set up , men must be highly concerned in their opposing of it , and of those that promote it : And the forecited Texts do particularly relate to this very case ; when Christianity was first introduced into the World , and to be propagated by the Sufferings of those that Professed it ; which being an exempt case , and not according to the usual course of things , therefore these Texts are not equally aplicable to other Times and Places , when and where the True Religion hath obtained , and Kings prove Nursing Fathers to it . 

Secondly , Those that knew our Saviour and his Followers , did highly Honour them : And , as for others that were ignorant of them , and not sufficiently convinced of their goodness , 't is no wonder that they used them accordingly . The most vicious person that is , if he doth either know , or have reason to think another to be Virtuous , must of necessity pay to him an Inward Reverence ; Because 't is not in any man's power , so far to offer violence to his own Faculties , as to believe any thing against his Evidence . 't is true indeed , men have a greater power over their Words and Actions , than they have over their Belief ; and therefore they may call , and use such a one as they please , they may revile , and persecute him ; And , in this sense , Honour est in honorante : But , even in so doing , they seem to pay a Veneration to Religion itself , whilst they are fain to disguise it , under the Names of Hypocrisy , Heresy , Superstition , thereby to justify themselves in their opposing of it . 

II It appears by the Experience of all Ages , that Vicious Men are sometimes had in Honor.  

To this it may be Answered . 

1.  External Honour may be due to them . 

2.  Internal Honour may be given to them , by such as do not know them . The mere Opinion of being Virtuous , must of necessity have the same advantage in this respect , with Real Goodness ; The main difference is , that it is not like to last , because it is almost Morally impossible , for a Man , who doth only dissemble Virtue , to stand always upon so strict a guard , as not to be discovered . If it be said , that men , who are Notoriously Vicious , are sometimes applauded , and Cry'd-up for their Virtue ; It may be Answered , That this cannot be so truly styled Honouring as Flattering ; The proper Notion of which doth consist in giving undue Commendations ; Nor , will any contribute to it , but vile Sycophants , the worst kind of Enemies , and the most Incompetent Judges of real worth : Such only being fit to give true Praise , who are themselves Praiseworthy . 

Now , if this be the true state of the Case I have been speaking to ; That the generality of Wise and Considerate Men , in all former times , have attested to this Truth , if the Reason of the thing require that it must be so ; And , if it appear accordingly from Common Experience to be so ; If the most Material Objections against it , may be so plainly and fully satisfied , then there can be no sufficient Reason to doubt , of the truth of this Proposition ; That Religion and Virtue is the most proper means to promote the Interest of Honour , which is the thing I was to prove . 

I shall crave leave to suggest two things by way of Application , and I have done . 

First , This may convince men of Folly , who seek for Honour by any other Means . The great Instances which are commonly given , of men's being Fools , is , from their Choosing such Means , as are altogether insufficient for the End they Design : As the endeavouring to make a Blackamoor White by washing of him , etc.  But , the using of such Means , as are not only insufficient for , but opposite unto , and Destructive of the End they Propose ; this is a degree above Folly , and may be styled Madness : 't is as if a Man should run into the Water to dry himself , and into the Fire to cool himself ; And yet this is the Case of many Men in the World , who propose to themselves such Courses , for the Promoting of their Honour , as are most Destructive of it ; namely , Profaneness , and Contempt of Religion , Despising that which other Men stand in Awe of ; by which they think to get the Reputation of Wit , and of Courage ; Of Wit , by pretending to penetrate more deeply into the Nature of things , and to understand them better than others do ; not to be so easily imposed upon , as other Credulous People are . Of Courage , by their not being so easily scared at the Apprehension of Danger at a distance . 

But , the Plain Truth is , such persons do hereby prove themselves to be both Fools and Cowards . 

Fools , In mistaking their great Interests , in making choice of such means , as can never promote the End they Design ; There being no kind of Men that are more exposed ( whatsoever they themselves may think of it ) to Public Infamy and Hatred , than those that seek for Credit by despising of Religion . Fools , in venturing their future Estates and their Souls , upon such hazards , as all Mankind would Cry-out-upon for the most Palpable Folly and Madness , if they should do the like , towards their Temporal Estates , or their Bodies . 

Cowards , In being more afraid of little Dangers , because they are present , than of greater , because they are future , and at a distance : As that Soldier , who doth more dread the present danger of Fight , when he is obliged to it , than the future danger of suffering Martial Law for running away , may justly be esteemed a notorious Coward ; So may that Man who is more afraid of a present inconvenience , by incurring the prejudice and displeasure of his loose Companions , to whom he would be acceptable , than of a future Mischief from the Judgement of God.  

no Man will esteem another to be truly Valiant , because he is not afraid to do such vile unworthy things as will expose him to the displeasure and punishment of the Civil Magistrate ; Much lesle should he be so Accounted , for daring to do such things , as will in the issue expose him to Divine Vengeance . 

For Men of no real worth to expect the esteem and affection of others , as it is very unequal on their parts , requiring Brick without Straw ; So neither is it Lawful nor Possible for others to allow it them : Not Lawful , because it is as well a man's duty to contemn a vile Person , as to Honour those that fear the Lord Not Possible , because men must necessarily Judge according to the most prevailing Evidence ; nor can they esteem such a one to be worthy , whom they know to be otherwise , any more than they can believe that to be White and Straight , which they see is Black and Crooked . 

Secondly , If these things be so , it will hence follow , that men who have any Sense of Honour , should , by these considerations , be excited to a Love of that , which is the only Means to it , namely , Religion and Virtue . Those of Slavish Sordid Spirits , may be more easily persuaded by the consideration of Gain ; But , no Motive can be more powerful with Noble and Generous Minds , than that of Honor. That man takes very ill measures of things , who doth not make it one of his principal cares to keep his Name unspotted ; It being no easy matter to recover a Forfeited Reputation . 

Such Profligate Wretches , as are without any sense of Honour or Shame , may justly be esteemed the Public Pests and Mischiefs of Mankind , and such as ought to be Banished from amongst them , as being the Common Enemies to Government and Societies . 

Of all sorts of Men , there lies a peculiar Obligation upon them that are in Public Places , to preserve their Reputations clear and without blemish : A Private Person is not so much concerned to look after Public Fame , as that Man is , who is engaged in Public Employment . He , that can abundantly satisfy himself , with the Conscience of well doing , while he is in a Private Station , if once he be called to any such Employment , where he must be Useful to others by his Authority ; 't is most fitting then , that he should seek the Aid of Opinion , and Public Esteem , because 't is this which Rules the World , and Stamps upon Things the Rates at which they are to pass . 

There is nothing in this World that we can Propose to ourselves of greater benefit , than the Love and Esteem of Good Men ; I have showed before that it is Power , 't is Safety : And besides all the Advantages which we have by it whilst we live , 't is one of those things , that will abide after us , when we are gone out of this World ; And , for that reason a special regard is to be had to it : And , the more Wise any Man is , the more Care will he take to transmit a Grateful Memory of himself to future Times ; And , since he must be Spoken of after his Departure , he will take Care that he be well Spoken of , that his Name may be as a Precious Ointment , leaving a Perfume behind it ; That Men may Rise up at the mention of it , and call him blessed . 

I shall shut up all , with that Affectionate Exhortation of the eloquent Apostle , Phil. 4. 8.  Finally brethren , whatsoever things are Venerable , whatsoever things are Lovely , whatsoever things are of good Report , If there be any Virtue , if there be any Praise , think of these Things . And the Peace of God , which passeth all understanding shall keep your Hearts and Minds through jesus Christ.  

FINIS . 





prov. 5. 4.  Tuscul. Q. 2.  1 Cor. 9 15.  Cap. 12.  ●6 . Deut. 3● . 9  Exod. 19 5.  jerem. 12. 7.  Psal. 4. 3.  prov. 1. 9  Chap. 4. 8. v. 9  john . 12. 26.  Sen. Ep. 76.  prov. 14. 34.  Isa. 53. 3.  Psal. 15. 4.  