England's public faith : or , the poorest creditors , unto the richest debtors : their solicitous appeal , to men of piety , honour , and zeal . 

Every man is obliged to pay his debts by a threefold law : 

1 the law of God , exod. 22. 14.  Prov. 3. 27.  Psa. 37. 21.  Rom. 13. 8.  
2 the law of nations , employed , prov. 22. 27.  prov. 6. 3. matth. 18. 25. 28.  
3 the royal law of equity , matth. 7. 12.  To do as you would be done unto . 
Also having borrowed upon their city or town seal , is obliged to perform and pay their debts by charging the whole body , because all have a common benefit in that corporation . 

Being a republic in their representative , viz. a parliament , is no less obliged to pay their debts borrowed for the benefit of that whole commonwealth . 

The resemblance being congruous , let the honourable representative allow the creditors to be importunate , for from their necessities the law of God requires them so to do ; — ( For when in prison , or in debt , or surety , or in family wants , prov. 6. 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5.  prov. 22. 26 , 27.  Luke , 18. 1. 6. 1 tim. 5. 8.  

the public faith was made by a body politic twelve years past , and another like representative succeeded , and both dissolved without paying ? 

As by law , ( The heirs and executors are as much engaged as the deceased , if there be assets , or estate left , to discharge debts ; so in like manner your petitioners humbly conceive , that your honours are as well obliged for the real public debts , 

1 because you are as their heirs , your lives and estates were involved in that body , embarked in that ship , which if the public faith money had not upheld , had sunk and you with it . 

2 you inherit that power and authority , or the like , by your free elections of the persons , and thereby their successors , and stand in their place , and have the revenues and estates of three nations at your command ( The consent of his highness being included , whose heroic spirit is so propense for all justice , that no doubt his actions will silence many who are filled with evil surmises . ) 

but many public lenders are paid by purchase of lands ; and many others of good estates have nothing due to them ; therefore to pay it by general taxes will not be accepted . 

This bespeaks for the petitioners ( By the royal law ) for if those that are paid , and perhaps with great advantage , were in the petitioners condition , not able to purchase by doubling , but in prison , in debt , or in want , would not they desire their own ? 

And was there not an equal benefit to all the body of the nation ; whether Lent much , or less , or nothing : and therefore equal for all to pay ? 

And if the richest lenders are paid , which perhaps lent most sparingly , their estates considered , shall therefore the best affected that lent most freely , timely , and largely , be still deferred ; or after twelve years staying , to be allotted forest or delinquents lands ( Improper payment for money , plate , and horses which they lent ) for to relieve their present necessities ? 

And for those that lent not , and yet enjoy their proprieties , for them to pay an equal tax , is most reasonable ; if not a double proportion . 

the premises considered , your honours are desired to follow God's command , prov. 3. 27.  Withhold not the good from the owners thereof , though there be power in your hands , say not , go and come again , &c.  

Especially when your petitioners are in such want . 

this being done , the thing will be , first , honestly good , for you shall do justice , and satisfy the needy and empty . 

it will be honourably good , for your own , and the nations renown . 

it will be profitably good , for then in future exigences the persons will lend freely again . 

And the petitioners shall pray unto that wonderful counsellor , isa. 9 6. who true saith , counsel is mine : prov. 8. 14.  To impart so much to his highness and to your honours , as the meeting May bring to these nations that promise , jer. 31. 23.  the Lord shall bless thee , oh habitation of justice , and mountain of holiness . 





a body personal , viz.  a body corporate . a body politic . 1 object . answer . 2 object . answer . 



