A salt tear : or , the weeping onion , at the lamentable funeral of dr. Dorislaus . 

What though lamented ? Cursed ; & the high tree 
Of fifty cubits was just destiny 
( Though a deplored one ) of that agent drew 
The articles against the holy Jew , 
Good Mordicai ; which by quaint-curious art , 
Should have contrived the Queen her share o' th' smart . 
But providence said , no ; and Hester taught , 
Proud Haman to a bloody banquet brought . 
Our upstart Haman's had a feast : who 'll bring 
Them , for digestions fake , to take a swing . 
2.  

Dorislaus ! Art  Lamented ? So was he 
Who was more dives ▪ than the state made thee . 
If thou chance meet with him ; lift up thine eyes , 
And see where Charles in Abraham's bosom lies . 
Oh for a messenger the house to tell 
And all the merry commoners , of hell . 
How Lenthal looks ! How Whitlock pales his face , 
Who caught one seal , and lost that seal of grace ! 
Oh how damned Bradshaw quivers as he comes ! 
And Fairfax groans ! And Crumwell bites his thumbs ! 
3 

Egypt , no doubt , was hide in double black , 
When that last wonder , and grand land-sea wrack 
Was poured on Pharaoh and his host ; when waves 
Revenged the insolence of murderous slaves , 
Pharaoh must drown ; so it doth providence please . 
We have a Moses too , is heir o' th' seas 
Heavens will a party in that element make : 
Your kingsale projects do not always take . 
4 

The wife of Sisera did no doubt bewail , 
Sisera's face ; yet the canonised nail 
And hammer of stout Jael and the song 
Of Deborah showed heaven smiled , and went along . 
A kenite did the fact : it was not Lot 
For perjured English , but a gallant Scot . 
't is a good omen : that , as they pulled down 
The first , they shall set on the second crown 
Let our deluded citizens invite , 
Hug , kiss , and lick the cursed Canaanite : 
What though their chariots be of iron ? we May 
See them lie grovelling , like lost Sisera . 
5 

Now pray observe the pomp , the persons , state 
That did attend this alien reprobate : 
Here , went lieutenant general crocodile , 
and 's cubs , bred of the slime of our rich Nile : 
Who weep before they kill , and whose false tears 
Trickle from bloodshed eyes of murderers . 
Poor island ! they have made a Nile of thee , 
We cannot find thy head , which fain we 'd see . 
6.  

Next March a train of ravenous wolves , whose jaws 
Yet owze with th' blood of slaughtered King and laws : 
These are close mourners ; these the kingdom's gull : 
True wolves , that never howl , till they are full . 
These are the beasts of prey , whose sharp fang tears 
Not cavies now , but th' harmless levellers ; 
By whom they rose unto this greatness : we , 
we are distasted , well as monarchy . 
7.  

Close unto these , in grave deportment March 
The city changelings in thanksgiving starch , 
A sort of whelps , taught by that wolvish kind ; 
Who if one howled , strait the whole kennel whined . 
These , at the whip of cunning oliver , 
Do feast , or else drop a dissembling tear . 
All these attend their agents funeral ; 
This honor 's but a trap , the states fly call , 
To get another throat cut , but in vain ; 
Dorislaw cries from hell ; 
'T will be no gain . 
Printed in the year . 1649 : June 18th . 







