Ορθολατρεία : or , a brief discourse concerning bodily worship : proving it to be God's due ; to be given unto him with acceptation on his part , and not to be denied him without sin , on ours . A thing worthy to be taken into consideration in these days , wherein profaneness and irreverence toward the sacred majesty of God hath so much corrupted our religious assemblies , that men are regardless of their being before God , or of God's being amongst them in his own house . by [ s. g. ] late preacher of the word of God in the cathedral church of Peterburgh . 

psal. 89.7 . 

God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints , and to be had in reverence of all them that are about him . 

95.6 . 

oh come , let us worship and bow down : let us kneel before the Lord our maker . 

99.5 . 

exalt ye the Lord our God , and worship at his footstool ; for he is holy . 

132.7 . 

we will go into his tabernacles , we will worship at his footstool . 

Micah 6.6  

wherewith shall i come before the Lord , and bow myself before the high God . 

matth. 22. 21.  

render unto God the things that are God's . 

London , printed for Gabriel Bedell , m. m. and t. c. and are to be sold at their shop at the Middle-temple gate in Fleetstreet , 1650.  

Preface . 

When a kingdom or persons stand in need of reformation , ( As none ever were in more need than we ) it is undoubtedly a good way to observe the same method that God himself did , in his proceeding to judgement against the house of Judah , ezek. 9.6 , beginning at his sanctuary : the things that are amiss there , let them be rectified and amended , as deserving it in the first place , and then ( Like lines extended from the centre to the circumference ) reformation will the more happily diffuse itself into other places : for , the sanctuary being the fountain whence help and divine protection issue , psal. 20.2 . the treasury , where all blessings are to be obtained by the persons of God , when they make their holy , humble , and devout addresses to him ; cleanse that , and the things there , and then the streams will flow more fairly into such places as want watering . 

For this purpose , here is a besom to sweep away an horrid abuse , wherewith the adversary to God and man , religion and decency , hath much and long corrupted our public assemblies before God in his sanctuary ; and that is , profaneness and irreverence toward the sacred majesty of God , before whom the appearance is , which is after so rude a manner , as if God were equal , nay inferior to the meanest of us . 

Though contrarily , the expulsion of corporal adoration and reverence out of our public assemblies , be now accounted an act of reformation , it is no wonder , when in all corrupt ages and places , evil hath been called good , and good evil : vices have been called virtues , and so embraced ; and virtue's vices , and so detested : piety having been branded with nicknames , and irreligion assuming specious appellations : that hath gotten spital from the mouth ; this , kisses from the lips . 

Now for this poor treatise creeping forth into public view , if it May , to reform what is amiss , and to advance the honour of God in this particular . I am not ignorant , how that in many respects it May receive such a terrifying advertisement , as Moses did from Pharaoh , exod. 10.10 , look to it , for evil is before you . some , because they see not the name of some learned worthy ( Which commonly is a great advantage to a book ) prefixed , May say in scorn , with those in Siracides , what fellow 's this ? some again , apprehending by the title-page the general subject , or galloping the treatise itself over , with an hasty eye , May say , as the Jews did against s. Paul ; this fellow persuadeth men to worship God contrary to the law . a third sort May accuse the work of unseasonableness , that it came not forth into the world ( Like the shunemite-woman into the King's presence ) just when the thing was in the words , when the business was in agitation , but long after the question is ceased ; and the general inclination hath since been to the negative . But , ( As the apostle said in another case ) none of these things move me : let these , and greater evils than these , arise against this poor treatise , i pass not , so i have truth and religion on my side : for which , upon my best ( Though i confess but weak ) examination ) 1 find nothing , why i should decline any ludge whatsoever , whether it be God himself , whose cause this is , and whose mind , in this case , is to be seen in his written word ; or any inferior under him , either ancient or modern , Christian or heathen , the atheist only excepted , and ( Amongst Christians ) him , who hath so firmly betrothed himself to a prejudicate opinion , that he will not be divorced from it . 

And for thee , reader , whoever thou art ; if knowing , and hast concerning this subject greater illuminations in thine heart , than these in thine hand , impart them ; if not , accept of these . If ignorant , ( Thy thoughts having not as yet been conversant in these things ) do not think that i have any design to abuse or deceive thee , as if i would convey a mote into thine eye , by presenting this treatise to the view of it : no ; God is witness , my aim is , to elevate thy devotion to that just height , as that thou Mayst fully and completely acknowledge God , by worshipping him with thy soul and body ; not superstitiously , hypocritically , affectedly , or any other irregular way ; but humbly , and sincerely , according to thy duty in thy appearances before him , when his own eye , and the eyes of his holy angels are upon thee , observing thy behaviour in those approaches ; which if it be not answerable to his divine presence , thou canst have no cause to think , but that God will dislike thee , as Achish did David , when he counterfeited madness before him , letting the spittle fall upon his beard : 

Take heed then , lest thou go out of God's presence guilty of Jacob's oversight ; surely the Lord is in this place , and i was not aware : and so , though thy coming in Might be in hope of a blessing , yet thou goest away without it , having by thy profane rudeness provoked God so , as neither to accept thy person , nor thy prayer , nor any duty which thou hast performed , but , with the rich in the gospel , to send thee empty away : and perhaps , more than so , hast provoked him to wrath , that he should execute positively some vengeance upon thee , making a breach upon thee , as upon Uzzah , , for that thou hast not sought him after the due order , in such an humble and reverent way , as befitteth so great and glorious a majesty . If thou have a desire to prevent these things , and to excite God's henevolence towards thee , beware of rude eruptions into , and dissolute continuance in God's presence . 

I shall say no more , but ( Commending thee to the race of God , and this poor treatise to thy discreet perusal ) bid thee 

Farewell . 

Ὀρθολατρεία . 

matth. 4. 10.  Luke 4. 8.  

thou shalt worship the Lord thy god . 

It appears by the example of Moses and Aaron , that it is not safe for a man to hold his peace , when there is occasion to vindi cate God's honour lying at stake , or called in question : for we read in the twentieth chapter of the book of numbers , how that the Israelites came to the wilderness of Zin , and murmured there , because there was no water , and because Moses and Aaron did not believe the Lord , to sanctify him in the eyes of the children of Israel , by declaring his power and providence , that God both could and would provide things necessary for them ; for this omission God was so angry with them , that he would not suffer them to enter into the promised land , as appears plainly at the twelfth verse of the same chapter : and at the eight and twentieth verse is recorded , how that this sentence was executed upon Aaron ; for God sent him up into mount Hor , and there he died . And in the twenty seventh chapter of the same book of numbers , vers. 12 , 13 , 14 , and likewise deut. 32. 49 , 50 , 51. mention is made of the death of Moses in mount Nebo , for the same fault of not sanctifying the Lord in the midst of the children of Israel . 

We cannot conceive of this , otherwise , then that it was set for a precedent , and an exemplary caveat to the magistracy and priesthood in all succeeding generations to the world's end , that they be careful to vindicate and maintain God's honour , with his divine privileges and prerogatives , in the sight of the persons , lest God stop the passage against them , and deny them entrance into the heavenly Canaan . 

The consideration of which , is necessary for these days of ours , wherein there is great murmuring , that corporal reverence and worship should be given unto God ; and it is not only neglected and opposed , but branded with ignominy , slander , and reproach ; which , whether they be just , or injurious , i shall ( God willing ) according to my ability , endeavour to make appear , in this ensuing discourse upon a portion of scripture which alludeth to that subject : adorabis dominum deum tuum : thou shalt worship the Lord thy god . 

It cannot be objected , with any show of reason , that the spiritual worship of God ( I mean that of the soul only ) should be here precisely understood : the occasion will lead us to the sense , which May be deduced from the verse going before , where we see what a large proffer the devil made unto our saviour , that he would give him all the kingdoms of the world , and the glory of them , if he would fall down , and worship him : and surely , it was corporal worship that the devil would have had . the devil ( Saith mr Perkins ) desired of Christ no more than the prostrating of his body : and the word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , in the devil's proposition , which is for falling down , plainly demonstrates as much , being taken in the common course of scripture for no other than a bodily act . Besides , if our saviour's reply to the devil's temptation should not be taken in the same sense of corporal adoration , as the devil propounded it , than did not our saviour give a pertinent and satisfactory answer to the devil's motion ; which were vile to think . The devil was a subtle sophister ; and if he should have seen our saviour to lie open in that ward , as to intend spiritual worship , when h spoke of corporal , he would soon have replied , worship the Lord thy god with thy spirit , according to thine own meaning ; and worship me with thy body , according to my meaning . Therefore it cannot be , but that our saviour consuted the devil in his own sense of bodily worship by laying the law before him , whereby he showed him , how that all men ( And himself amongst the rest ) were bound to give their worship unto God , and not to alienate it from him , as the devil would have had him done . 

It was the most presumptuous motion that ever the devil made , to have had Christ worship him . Never was such a thing heard of before , that the foul fiend , the cursed angel , should seek to be worshipped of him , whom all the blessed angel's worship and adore . How durst he attempt to rob God of his royal privilege of corporal adoration , and require it even from the son of God ? But we see the devil's pride , and what his aim is , to exalt himself into God's chair of state , and ( If he can ) to deprive him of his incommunicable prerogatives . Nothing will serve his turn , but the things that pertain to God : to despoil God of these , is his desire and glory . 

And this May give us occasion to apprehend a fair probability , that religious bodily worship is God's propriety and due , that the devil was so eager upon it , and for this , bethought himself to assail our saviour with the strongest temptation that possibly he could ; to wit , the wealth , honour , and glory of this world ; thinking , that if any thing would prevail , it must be that . Because with this bait he had taken many great ones in preceding ages of the world , he thought he Might , at this time , take our saviour also . But the great deceiver found himself greatly deceived : and as he was deceived in himself , so i wish he May no longer deceive those that oppose themselves against bodily worship , denying that it should be given to God : for , to this the devil's policy works , that , if he cannot get corporal adoration to himself , amongst Christians ( As he hath of some poor heathenish persons in some places of the world ) than he will do what he can to hinder God , that he shall not have it neither ; nec mei , nec dei , cries the devil then ; let it be neither mine , nor gods : put we have a contrary voice in this scripture ; adorabis , &c.  thou shalt worship the Lord thy god . 

We see then in what sense these words are to be understood ; of outward , not only inward ; of corporal , not only spiritual adoration . Here ( Saith mr Perkins ) we must understand our saviour Christ , to mean outward divine worship ; as if he should say , thou shalt religiously submit , bow , or prostrate thy body unto God , in prayer and thanksgiving . And the word which our saviour useth here , ( And is also commonly used in other places serving to this purpose ) May import as much . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ( Saith Zanchie ) is derived from {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , which signifies a dog , as if man was sent {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} to school to this dumb creature , to observe how he croucheth , and humbleth himself at the foot of his Master , being of all creatures most familiarly docible this way ; that from thence man Might learn to prostrate himself in all humility , before God . Proceed we now to the examination of this business , observing this order : 1.  To examine what is commonly objected against it , on the negative part . 2.  What evidence or authority May be produced , to defend or require it , on the affirmative part ; that , if it shall appear corporal adoration to be God's due , the opposers and detainers of it May be left without excuse , for not giving uno God the things that are God's . 

But i desire ( By the way ) to be rightly understood , and to avoid the misprision of the reader : for i would not , that this treating of outward worship should be any prejudice , or occasion the least damage to the inward , ( As if a man should offer unto God the husk of an outward ceremony , without the concomitancy of the hearts inward affection . ) God forbid , that i should think , or be thought to excuse any such hypocrisy . But this is the thing , whether , in worshipping God with the heart and soul , it be lawful , decent , and expedient , to join the body with it , and so to exercise and employ the whole man , both soul and body together in the worship of God . It is granted on both sides , that God is to be worshipped with the soul : but whether he is to be worshipped with the body also , this is the thing in question . 

and first , on the negative part it is objected , that corporal adoration to God , is idolatry . 

if this be true , then , both it and the practisers deserve to be expelled with rigour out of the church , as our saviour drove the buyers and sellers out of the temple . But this is only a foul scandal , without fair proof : for , what is idolatry ? It is ( Saith Zanchie ) cultus religiosus , quo idolum tanquam numen colitur : a religious worship , whereby an idol is worshipped as the deity . But , when religious worship is given to God , who himself is the true and only deity , is this idolatry ? Idolatry is , when religious worship is taken from the creator , and given to the creature : but , when it is given to the creator , as his right and due , is this idolatry ? Why was not corporal worship accounted idolatry , before , and under the law , as well as now ? That which is idolatry in these days , was so , from the beginning of the world , by a coequal principle . But we are sure , that corporal worship unto God was not accounted idolatry , neither before , or under the law , when Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , David , and many other devout persons practised it ; therefore it cannot be idolatry now . Or , who dare say , that our saviour stopped the devil's mouth with sin , or , gave liberty unto men to be idolaters , when he alleged this place of scripture against the devil ? 

Yet , for further answer , i would they knew and considered , what fear there is of their running themselves against a very dangerous rock , who make this objection ; the sin of blasphemy , and that in a very high degree , in regard , whosoever shall say , that bodily worship unto God is idolatry , will seem in effect to say , that God himself is an idol . The argument May be framed as followeth , to impeach them of it . 

Whosoever shall say , that God is an idol , blasphemeth . 
But he who saith , that bodily worship unto God is idolatry , saith that God is an idol . 
ergo , he who saith that bodily worship unto God is idolatry , blasphemeth . 
If the makers of this objection would weigh this , it Might be hoped they would take heed of blaspheming God in the use of such an objection . 

bodily worship of God is superstition . 

Peter Martyr is against this objection : for * he would not have those gestures of body , which agree with scripture-examples , to be accounted acts of superstition . 

This word superstition is that great scarecrow in religion , so common in most men's mouths , that what religious action soever does not relish upon their palate , they cry out against it , superstition , superstition ; whereby they think to render it so odious , as that it should be abhorred . To whom ( As concerning this duty of corporal adoration to God ) i will not stick to apply that of the apostle , these speak evil of those things which they understand not : for , as another apostle speaks in another case , had they known it , , they would not have crucified the Lord of glory : even so , did these know what reverend adoring god with the body is , they would not persecute it with such opprobrious and scandalous terms . 

But let 's examine the objection : is corporal adoration of God , superstition ? that 's neither true , nor safe to say : for , consider superstition in the abstract , and it will appear that corporal worship is no more superstition , than truth is falsehood . But perhaps their meaning is , that bodily worship is superstitiously performed : men are grown superstitious in the doing of it : and bodily worship being grown to this pass , it is to be abolished , and taken away , as unlawful , and not to be practised any longer . 

I answer again , that , in case bodily worship be performed after a superstitious manner ; yet this is but a weak argument to conclude the abolition of the thing itself . For our proceeding then in this business , i see no reason but it ought to be regulated like those in our other businesses . If a man be sick , must he therefore be knocked o' th' head , rather than be recovered with physic ? If he hath a sore on his thigh , as Hezekiah had , will he rather do by his very flesh , as Hanun did by the garments of David's messengers , cut it away by the buttocks , then apply a bunch of figs , or some other plaster , to heal it ? If he hath a tree in his garden taken with a worm , will he rather dig up the tree by the root , then seek to kill the worm ? If a thief come into a true-man's company , must the trueman suffer with the thief ? Why then cannot the superstition ( With which God's bodily worship is infected and depraved ) be purged , and taken away , without quite taking away the thing itself ? If it were good to conclude the utter abolishing of a thing , from the abuse of it , the whole frame of religion would quickly be dissolved , and nothing left : for , what have we in religion , which by some or other is not abused ? God's house , his day , his word , are abused ; and if they should not therefore be used , we should have neither place , nor time , nor rule for his service . The duties of praying , preaching , and administering the sacraments , are abused ; and God forbid but they should still be used , for all that . If any religious act should be deserted because it is abused by others , then , a Papist , a Jew , a Turk , in case he could not dissuade us from our religion , neither by fair means , nor foul ; it were a ready way , to embrace the same religion with us , for a time , and to stuff it with gross abuses , and so drive us from our religion that way . 

A great care would be had , lest we run from one extreme to another , as fools do ; dum vitant stulti vitia , &c.  Whilst they shun one vice , they run into the other contrary ; and so are as far from the golden mean , as they were before . If whilst we flee from superstition , we suffer ourselves to slide into an irreverent profaneness in God's presence , the remedy is as bad as ( If not worse then ) the disease . 

Not to stand now to vindicate those , who out of a pious sincerity worship God with their bodies , from this slander of superstition , ( Which were a worthy task : ) if ( Concurring with the censorious humour of the objectors ) it be supposed that some men , in worshipping God with their bodies , are superstitious , ( Of which whosoever be guilty , i could wish they would amend it ; ) what if they who refuse to worship God with their bodies , be superstitious also , even in refusing ? For aught i know , they May be so : for , though they refuse out of a fear to displease God , yet , if that fear be causeless , needless , and superfluous , it May ( Not unfitly ) be termed superstitious : which name saint Austin gives it * . 

corporal adoration , or bodily worship , is a ceremony ; and all ceremonies were abolished by the death of Christ : therefore bodily worship , although it was given to God under the law , yet being by Christ taken away , it is not to be given to God under the gospel . 

Admit corporal adoration , or bodily worship to be a ceremony , yet was it never any part of that ceremonial law which was abolished by the death of Christ : it was in use and practice , long before the ceremonial law was given ; * nature itself having imprinted in the hearts of men a secret character of bodily reverence to be given unto God : as May appear by many examples : that of Abraham falling on his face , gen. 17.3 . that of Abraham's servant bowing down his head , and worshipping the Lord for his good success in his journey , gen. 24.26 . and that which was done by the persons of Israel , when they heard the tidings of their deliverance from their heavy bondage in Egypt , exod. 12.27 . with many other of this kind . So that bodily worship was in use and practice , many years before any tittle of the ceremonial law was prescribed . And as it was long before , so likewise ( As longer lived ) is it continue long after : for whereas the ceremonies of the mosaical law were wholly abolished by Christ's death , ( The termination of which May seem to be implied in his consummatum est upon the cross ) corporal adoration is authorised ( As shall and will appear ) by sufficient precept and practice , since our saviour's death , resurrection , and ascension . And the reason of it is satisfying enough to the flexible considerer , that corporal adoration is included , not in the ceremonial , but in the moral law , in the second commandment : and who knows not , that the moral law was not abolished by the death of Christ , but is , and shall be in force to the end of the world ? 

Perhaps some antisomatist May conceive from Job . 4.23 . ( Which place will come by and by to be examined ) that worshipping God with the body was so abolished , as that , to worship him with the heart , soul , and spirit , succeeded in its stead . But this cannot be : for worshipping God with the heart and soul , was in the world long before bodily worship was ( As is conceived ) abolished ; and the inward worship is fully as ancient as the outward : for , did not Abraham , David , and the rest of God's devout servants , worship God in heart , soul and spirit , as well as with their bodies ? Were they not inwardly touched with an awful reverence towards the great majesty of God , and so adored him ? Surely yes : else we Might think they played the hypocrites , in making outward shows , and not doing any thing within , relating unto God and his worship . If then cordial worship was not brought in , corporal worship was not for it done away by the death of Christ . Indeed our saviour did bring in a spiritual worship ; but what that is , shall appear , when i have dispatched another objection . 

corporal adoration , or bodily worship , is offensive , and scandalous ; it gives offence to the weak : therefore they who practise it , aught to forbear it , else they offend ; which they must not as , rom. 14.21 . & i cor. 10.32 . 

That thing should not offend the weak , by which others are made strong . And i could appeal to clouds of witnesses , who , out of an honest care to worship God devoutly with their bodies , have felt themselves much strengthened in their souls . But , if they who are offended at corporal adoration be weak indeed , than the parties offending aught to inform and satisfy the parties offended ; and the parties offended are to seek after information and satisfaction , by their own studies , or consultation with others ; by which means they May receive strength to remove the offence from their apprehension , and then ( Without doubt ) they will , not only approve bodily worship in others , but practise it themselves . But if , pretending weakness , they be obstinate , stubborn , and perverse , ( Which humour , our saviour Christ himself was not so happy , or rather unhappy , as to please ) then corporal adoration ought not to be forborn , in fear to offend such persons : but let the practisers of it go on , * per medias offensiones , through the midst of offences , not having any care to the perverse , who take offence where there is none given . I May ask that question , which our late Solomon hath put into my mouth , * how long will they be weak ? for , if they resolve still to be what they are , God's worshippers must resolve to do what they do . I find a devout man very high in his expression in this case : * let the saints of the world stumble , and fall , and break their necks , rather than the truth of the gospel suffer any detriment in the saints of God . 

scripture is produced to prove that bodily worship is not to be given unto God . ( 't is strange that men should fight against God with the sword of his own spirit ; but this they do . ) The places commonly alleged , are , Prov 23.26 . my son , give me thy heart . God requires the heart , and with it he is to be worshipped , but not with any more , for that is superfluous and unnecessary . 

although worship , or adoration , be not there expressly mentioned in the letter , yet , no doubt but it is implicitly included ; and that God saith to every one , in every religious action , ( And so of worship or adoration in particular ) give me thy heart : for indeed , God requires the heart , and hath respect unto it , principally , first , and before the body : * all our service and worship being neither accepted nor respected with him , if our heart go not along with our body in the performance of it . But it is not said in that place of Solomon , that God requires the heart alone , saying , give me only thy heart : there 's no such exclusive particle adjoined , whereby , lifting up the eyes , holding up the hands , speaking with the mouth , bowing , kneeling , and other devout bodily expressions , should be excluded ; therefore this place of Solomon does not make against bodily worship . 

The words of our saviour are likewise produced , to beat down corporal adoration , Job . 4 23 , 24.  veri adoratores , &c. the true worshippers shall worship the father in spirit and in truth . God is a spirit , and they that worship him , must worship him in spirit and in truth . here it is required that we worship God in spirit ; therefore bodily worship is not to be given unto him . 

For the right understanding of this place of scripture , we must know , that spirit there ( For the strength of the objection lieth in this word ) is not to be understood of the soul , in opposition to the body ; and so outward bodily worship to be done away , and the inward worship of the soul to come in stead of it : but it is to be understood in opposition to the sacrifices and other ceremonies of the mosaical law , where with the Samaritans did then worship God , in that mountain , by themselves , in a temple of their own ; and the Jews by themselves , in their temple at Jerusalem . notanda est antithesis inter spiritum & externas figuras , saith mr Calvin : the opposition is to be noted betwixt spirit and the outward sigures . For we know , that the worship or service which the Samaritans and Jews did then generally use , consisted in external rites , and visible sacrifices of beasts , and other oblations ; which manner of worship being shortly to be abolished , a spiritual or evangelical worship should be introduced into the place of it , wherein no typical nor figurative sacrifices should be offered . And if it be rightly considered , it will appear , that those out ward sacrifices of the law had little or no affinity with that which our saviour intends in this scripture , ( matth. 4.10 . ) and which we call corporal adoration , or bodily worship , which ( In its furthest extent ) is but personal . 

Our saviour , then , in that place of s. John , doth no way thwart the worshipping of God with the body . 

I conceive i have enough for it from Beza , who , in his annotation upon the place , is driven to make his defence against some of the Papists , accusing him , ( In some of their writings , conferences , or other ways ) that , seeking to establish the spiritual worship of God , he should deny that God was to be worshipped with the external worship of the body : but of this he clears himself ; imò utrunque deo semper debitum fuisle , & deberi , absit , ut insiciemur : yes ( Saith he ) both the inward and outward worship have ever been , and shall be due unto God : God forbid that we should deny this . 

Yet , if this be not sufficient , i can raise my authority higher , to the great apostle of the gentiles , who , although he speaks in the very words of our saviour , phil. 3. 3.  We are the circumcision , which worship God in the spirit , &c. yet this did not detain him from worshipping God with his body ; as May appear , act. 20.36 . & 21.5 . Eph. 3.14 . i rehearse not the words , because i would have the reader peruse , and judge . But would it not seem strange , if i should say , that corporal worship unto God , under the gospel , is spiritual ? If i should so affirm , there are ( And those of no mean credit ) that would confirm it . Not to trouble myself with setting down what Aquinas speaks , ( Or others in this case ) i shall content myself with what Zanchie writes . the scripture ( Saith he ) calls external worship , as well as internal , spiritual , because it proceeds from our spirit , renewed by God's spirit , and is done in faith , and tends to the honour and glory of God . And he cites this very place of s. John for it . To which let me add the , &c.  whence we conclude , that , notwithstanding this place of s. John , bodily worship stands firmly due unto God , and is to be performed to wards him , by virtue of the present scripture which we have in hand : adorabis , &c.  thou shalt worship the Lord thy god . 

These are the common objections on the negative part , which buzz into the ears of men , that bodily worship is not to be given unto God : to which , i hope i have given satisfactory answers . 

I come now to examine what evidence May be produced , to defend and require it , on the affirmative part . In pursuance whereof , i shall first produce such arguments , as , from solid grounds , May be drawn to prove it : and afterwards , such testimonies from authentic authors , as May further confirm it . 

The first argument May be drawn from the consideration of our bodies themselves . here are three things to be taken notice of , which Might afford so many several arguments ; but i shall comprise them all in one . 

1.  The creation , 
2.  The redemption , 
3.  The glorification of these our bodies . 
There is no corporeal substance ( What ever it be ) that is so much ennobled and honoured by the bounty , grace , and mercy of the great creator , as these lumps of flesh , our bodies , are : first , in respect of their creation , though not for substance , yet for privilege , above other bodily creatures ; all other creatures being made for the use and sustentation of these bodies : some creatures bring their flesh to feed them ; some , their wool and skins to clothe them : some , their medicinal virtues , to heal them : the sun affords them light and refreshment ; the fire warms them ; the water purifies them ; the air affords them a breathing place ; the earth , accommodations for adwelling place : all the creatures , in their several squadrons , present them with their serviceable respects , from the meanest , even to the highest order of creatures , the holy and blessed angels , who have from God the tutelary charge over these our bodies . And shall these our bodies receive these benefits , and acknowledge no homage nor worship unto God , whose goodness hath vouchsafed them ? Hath God create our bodies for themselves , and no way for himself , but left them at liberty , nay secluded them from this service , that they should not worship , nor bow , nor kneel before the Lord their maker ? if our bodies be not bound to this duty and service , what difference then is there betwixt the bodies of reasonable men , and the bodies of bruit beasts , towards God ? 

Secondly , for the blessing of redemption : in this no bodily substance hath any interest , but the bodies of men alone . Christ sprinkled not his blood upon the sun , nor upon the moon , nor upon the stars , nor upon the heavens , nor upon the terrestrial creatures ; but only upon the bodies of men is the effusion of that inestimable blood : and still must our bodies be ingrateful ? Are we not bought with a price , and must we not therefore glorify God in our bodies , and in our spirits , because they are God's ? 

Look yet further to the third , the glorification of our bodies , which are designed to such glory and immortality in the highest heavens , as that no corporeal creature besides , hath the like happiness prepared for it . And shall our bodies still remain stiff , stubborn , and inflexible ? Let us take heed , lest this benumbing stupidity endanger us not , both souls and bodies . Let us consider , that our souls and bodies are twins , and that God hath united them together , as in one man , so in one participation of his benefits of creation , redemption , and glorification ; and from hence , debate and inquire in ourselves , whether , or no , there be not cause for them to be united , in setting forth the honour and worship of God : for seeing God hath not disjoined them in these his benefits , there can be no colour , that we should disjoin them in his worship . 

A second argument May be drawn from the definition of idolatry . , out of Zanchie , that it is a religious worship , whereby an idol is worshipped as the deity . a religious worship . ] what 's that , but such as religion binds to give unto God himself ? The question than May be asked , whether bodily worship given to an idol , in a religious way , be idolatry , or no ? Surely , it is plain idolatry . And what makes it idolatry , but the giving that bodily worship unto it , which is religious , and belongs only to God ? Do we not see then , in the nature of idolatry , that bodily worship is God's due , and therefore he must have it , and that , if it were not due unto God , it would thence follow , that , to worship an image with the body were no idolatry , because the worship given unto it belongs not unto God ? 

A third argument May be drawn from the second commandment , which in form of words is a negative commandment ; and the rule of the negative commandments , is , that they command the contrary to that which they forbid . As for example : that commandment which says , thou shalt not commit adultery , does , on the contrary , command us to keep ourselves chaste and undefiled . That commandment which says , thou shalt do no murder , does , on the contrary , command us , that we be careful ( As much as in us lies ) of preserving life . That commandment which says , thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy god in vain does , on the contrary , command a holy and reverend usage of God's name : deut. 6. 13.  And shalt swear by his name . in like manner , the second commandment is a strict prohibition against idolatry , and worshipping of images , any creature , or the figure of any thing whatsoever : thou shalt not make to thyself any graved image , nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above , or in the earth beneath , or in the water under the earth : thou shalt not bow down to them , nor worship them , &c.  We see here what way bodily worship must not go ; it must not be given to images , nor to any creature : now , doth this negative precept so restrain bodily worship , that it should go no way at all , but suffer it to be altogether omitted ? Is there none , or nothing that requires it ? Surely , God himself requires and commands it , in that prohibition . Thou shalt not bow down to them , nor worship them , is as much , as if God had said , thou shalt bow down to me , and worship me . if any doubt of this construction of the negative commandments , that they command the contrary to what they restrain from , inquisition into the judgement of divines will settle him , that so it is , and particularly in this second commandment : for which , i will only cite the words of that mirror of piety and learning , Archbishop Usher , and leave it to the * margin to point at more . In his sum and substance of Christian religion , pag. 226. he saith thus : the gestures of religious adorations being here forbidden to be given unto images , are therein commanded to be given unto the god of heaven . * 

But perhaps some will say , these are human constructions , the glosses of men : if they could see it thus in the written word of God , * that would strike a greater stroke in their conviction . Let them take than what is set down , 2 king. 17.35 , 36.  ye shall not fear other gods , nor bow yourselves to them , nor sacrifice to them : but the Lord , who brought you up out of the land of Egypt , with great power , and a stretched out arm , him shall ye fear , and him shall ye worship , and to him shall ye do sacrifice . the negative is in the 35 verse ; and the affirmative answering to it , ( As face to face ) in the 36.  And this sense of the second commandment May further appear , by the words following : for i the Lord thy God am a jealous God . what is God jealous of , but of his glory , of his honour , of his worship , as well corporal as spiritual ? He will not have them taken from him , and given to another . As he will not have them given to another , so he will not have them taken from himself . The assertion then , that bodily worship to God is idolatry , unlawful , & unnecessary , must be brought to this second commandment , as the proper touchstone by which it is to be tried . Bring it hither , and let it be judged , whether bodily worship unto God be not rather confirmed , then condemned ; commanded , then forbidden ; and so the denial of it to be a sin against this commandment . 

a fourth argument May be drawn from the civil worship . A father will look for due honour from his child . and for the child's part , bowing is a duty which he is bound to render to his parents by virtue of the fifth commandment . A Master will expect due obeisance from his servant ; and that as well outward , as inward . Superiors also accept the same , and inferiors discharge it , without contradiction . Why then should not God , our heavenly father and Lord receive from us religious bodily worship , in honour and obeisance , as a good father , and as a great Lord ; and besides , when we profess ourselves his children and servants , and also acknowledge him , not only our superior , but supreme of all ? Why should not religious worship to God extend itself to as large and as ample an act , as the civil worship unto men ? No man dares deny God to be the greater object , and infinitely more deserving than any mortal man can be . If we honour earthly Kings so much with our bodies ; if we bow , and kneel , when come into the places of great and honourable presence , why should we not do the same , ( And more , if it were possible ) unto God ? Certainly , we Christians May blush , and be ashamed , that the very Turks should go beyond us in prising this argument : for hence they conclude , ( And with more reason than we can gainsay ) that , if they give such worship and reverence to their great men , much more ought they to do it unto God . Let him speak , who , living among those unchristened persons ( Yet more respective of the divine majesty than we ) heard them justify their practice of corporal adotion unto God , after this manner : Sicum bassis tibi sermo habendus sit non aliter facias , quam toto corpore ad reverentism composito , quantò aequiùs est idem servare erga deum , omne humanum fastigium tantopore excedentem ? if ( Say they ) thou wert to have speech with the bashaws , thou wouldst not do it otherwise then with thy whole body composed to reverence ; how much more just is it , that the same should be observed towards God , who so infinitely exceedeth all human excellence ? 

quid facere ausoniâ geniti debetis in urbe , 
Cum tangant diros talia facta Getas ? 


If such religious actions , such devout adorations , be found amongst heathenish Turks , what ought to be done amongst us Christians , who say , we are the only church of God ? 

Is it sufficient ( Think we ) to say , the heart is most proper for God , therefore the body May be exempted ? Look then again into the civil worship , and see how the heart and the body are both required even unto it . If a son should honour his father , a servant his Master , an inferior his superior , * in body only , and not in heart , is he not an hypocrite ? Or , if he should say , Sir , i honour and reverence you in my heart , and so show him no outward reverence nor respect , would it be well taken ? offer it now unto thy governor , will he be pleased with thee ? why then should man have more than God ? or , why should the civil bands be longer than the religious , binding us in more obligations towards men , than we are bound in towards God ? If men have both heart and body their way , why should not God have both his way ? 

for mine own part , i shall say with s. Ambrose ; si amico suo aliquis , si parenti , aut proximo deferendum existimat , rectè ego , & deferendum deo , & cum praeferendum omnibus judicavi . though ( I confess ) the words be there spoken indefinitely , yet , i May ( Without prejudice either to them , or their author ) apply them to bodily worship in particular ( It being as true of this , as of any other service ) and explain them thus : if any man think any outward worship is to be exhibited to his friend , father , or neighbour , i account it to be exhibited unto God , and him to be preferred before all . Whoever shall deny God this service of bodily worship , be they fathers , Masters , Kings , or great men ; i wonder with what face they can expect it from their children , servants , and vaslals . And should i go about , on the one side , to absolve inferiors from any dutiful obeisance toward their superiors , be they Masters , fathers , Lords , or Kings ; and on the other side , charge superiors , not to expect nor accept such observance from their inferiors ; what a bold , absurd transgressor against the general way of courtship , civility , and good manners , should i be accounted ? Yet notwithstanding , in so doing , i should do no more than what is right and just , upon this consequence so highly rational , that , if religious corporal worship May not be given to God , no civil worship May be given to men ; but if that be , then much more ought this to be abolished : which nevertheless will not serve our turn , nor be any pleasing satisfaction to God , who ought to have his due , whatever men have . 

This distinction of corporal adoration into religious and civil , with their several proprieties , the one belonging to God , the other to man , was handsomely canvased betwixt two heathen philosophers , Anaxarchus , and Callisthenes , upon occasion of Alexander the great , how far he was to be honoured : Anaxarchus ( Who seemed to comply with Alexander in the vain opinion of his deity ) spoke , as if Alexander was to be honoured after the manner of the gods , with divine honour : but Callisthenes soberly replied ; equidem , Anaxarche , alexandrum nullo plane honore qui quidem homimbus conveniat , indignum esse censco 3 caterùm statutes sunt inter homines divini & humani honoris discrimina , &c.  Truly , Anaxarchus , i do not think Alexander unworthy of any honour that is fit to be given unto men ; but there are amongst men determined differences betwixt divine and human honour . And so , showing how the gods are differenced from men in many particulars , ( Amongst which , this of adoration is one ) Callisthenes concludes ; non est igitar consentaneum hac omuis inter se confundere , neque hominem nimiis honoribus supra humanum modum extollere , & deos adstatum abillorum dignitate alienum redigere at nimirum eodem quo homines cultu colantur : therefore it is not fit to confound these things ; not with too great honours to exalt men above the degree of men , nor to straightened the gods to a state unbeseeming their dignity , that they should be worshipped with the same worship that men are . 

See here the devotion of an heathen , to uphold the reputation of his gods : he would not have men exalted to an equal worship with the gods , nor the gods debased to an equal worship with men , no not with Alexander , as great a King as he was . Surely then , he abhorred to think , that the gods should be made lower than men , in having no worship , no adoration at all exhibited unto them , which ( In a civil way ) men have . Tell me , Christian , did an heathen , who saw less of the true God than thou , see more in religion than thou ? 

But , as the Levite would rather pass on to Glbeah , that was of the children of Israel , then turn aside to Jebus the city of a stranger ; so had i rather , to confirm God's propriety in religious corporal adoration by the civil , consult with a learned Christian , than an heathen . Let me therefore sharpen the point of this argument ( If it be not sharp enough already ) with the testimony of a late learned divine , who was professor of the Hebrew tongue in the university of Salmure . he , discoursing largely of the external practices of several nations in the duty of prayer , upon occasion of the apostles words , 1 cor. 11.4 . concludes religious demeanour towards God to be conformable to the civil practices of nations towards men . The Turks ( Saith he ) pray with their heads covered , because they uncover not their heads to one another , no not to their great men , and monarchs ; only they bow their bodies , &c.  but , coming to speak of us European Christians , he saith thus : occidentales panè omnes europai christiani deum aperto capite , & genu flexe orant , eíque supplicant , quiatum humilitatem & reverentiam nostram erga deum oportet nos testari : itaque id cogestu & habitu fieri debet , & decet , quo in civili consuetudine solemus cultum & reverentiam nostram erga superiores testari , quodsanè jam inter europaos fieri solet , capitis apertione , & genuflexione . almost all the Western European Christians pray unto God with an uncovered head , and a bent knee , because so it behoves us to testify our humility and reverence towards God : therefore is it necessary and comely to be done with the same gesture and habit , with which in the civil custom we are wont to testify our reverence towards superiors , which amongst us European is wont to be done by uncovering the head , and bowing the knee . Thus he . Now although we and the Turks differ in that point of civil worship which concerns the head , ( They uncovering not the head , which we do ) yet we agree in that which concerns the knee , & other reverent gestures of the body ; which is verily the most general and universal custom that is in the world ; there being scarce any nation , where superiors receive not this homage and civility from their inferiors , and upon this ground account their god ( Whatever it be that they account their god ) worthy of such bodily reverence in a religious way . 

But we Christians in the West , are now so far declined from all due reverence and respect towards God's divine majesty , that our bodies must not acknowledge him by kneelings and bowings , gestures of reverence , which ( In the civil way ) we plentifully exhibit unto men our superiors , when we meet with them , or make our addresses to them . Now , if we did but rightly consider God's transcendency above men , and our own obligations to his divine majesty and goodness , above whatever we do or can owe to all the men in the world , we should surely see , that corporal adoration is more due to God , in a religious way , then unto men , in a civil . 

Though perhaps for all this , if the primaevity or fundamental constitution of corporal adoration , civil and religious , be considered , it May seem a disputable question , which of the two is the mother , and which the daughter : whether the civil adoration be derived from the religious , that , because God himself is to have religious adoration , therefore men , our superiors , are to have a civil , as having some analogy and resemblance with God , psal. 86. 2. or , whether the religious adoration be derived from the civil , that , because we worship men with our bodies , therefore we ought also to worship God . Which way soever it be determined , the civil worship to men , will infer and strongly establish religious bodily worship towards God ; which is the scope of the argument . 

A fifth argument May be drawn from the silence of the holy scriptures . if the scriptures be not against it , they are for it : he that is not against us , is on our part . where does the scripture forbid that bodily worship should be given unto God ? or , where is it said , that God condemned any for doing it ? or , that himself refused to be worshipped with the body ? Many devout and humble suppliants have bowed , kneeled , and prostrated themselves unto God ; and , where is it written , that God rejected them , as if he would not have been worshipped after that manner ? This must be plainly shown ; else it cannot be made good , that bodily worship unto God is unlawful . But , sinco the word of God is altogether for it , and hath not one syllable against it , neither in the old testament , nor in the new ; it must needs be , not only lawful , but convenient and necessary . 

Where are then the odious aspersions that are cast upon it , in calling it idolatry , superstition , and i know not by what other scandalous names ? Would the word of God , the lantern , light , and oracle of truth , be silent , or connive at a sin worthy of so heinous appellations , and neither countenance the opposers , nor condemn the practisers of it ? Would that light want a ray to enlighten us in the knowledge of this , which by some is accounted so great an offence ? Who will say that the scripture is imperfect and deficient in a thing of such consequence ? But rather on the contrary ; have we not many , both examples and precepts , in the old testament , and in the new , for giving of bodily worship unto God ? Are not the words of this present scripture , ( First given by Moses , and now ratisied by our saviour ) strong enough to enjoin bodily worship , that they May satisfy any , but the wilfully obstinate ? Sure we are , that these words put the devil to silence : for when our saviour urged them , the devil was forced to yield , having nothing to reply against them : and let not the opposers of God's bodily worship show themselves more stubborn than the devil was , lest even he accuse them before God , for the neglect of that duty , with the truth whereof himself was so clearly convinced by scripture-evidence . 

But i will put the case : suppose one who is an opposer of God's bodily worship , and withal , an hater of idols , should be tempted , as our saviour was , to fall down , and worship the devil , or an idol , which the * scriptures call a devil : our saviour having taught him to be furnished with scripture , whereby to resist temptations , would he not think this place , which our saviour made use of , a fit answer for himself ? and would he not allege it , to put the tempter to silence ? I trow he would allege , either this , or some other equivalent place : and , would he not then be driven upon necessity ( Against former mislikings ) to acknowledge corporal adoration to be God's due , and so even condemn himself , if he does not yield it unto him ? Let him consider this . 

A sixth argument May be drawn from the practice of corporal adoration in heaven , rev. 5.14 . And the four and twenty elders fell down , and worshipped him that liveth for ever and ever . earth ought to conform itself to heaven ; the church militant to the church triumphant , in setting forth the honour and worship of God . Now , if it were unlawful ( Or so great an offence as it is here made ) to worship God with the body , s. John with his illuminated eagles eyes , would scarce have seen such a thing in heaven . 

It it shall be objected , that there were no such bodies in heaven ; when s. John saw this , he only saw it represented in a vision : this is nothing ; for the vision of the thing in heaven , is sufficient to approve the lawfulness , and authorise the practice of it here on earth . And let any gainsayer ask himself : when he comes into heaven bodily , does he think he shall not ( With those four and twenty elders ) fall down before God , & bodily worship him ? If so ; shall it be honour then , and dishonour now ? Shall it be glory there , and shame here ? Shall it be an high happiness in God's heavenly house , and sin in his earthly ? Me thinks reason itself should persuade us , that corporal reverence and worship should be given unto God , here , as a necessary preparation for the doing of it hereafter . 

a seventh argument May be drawn from the majesty of God : if nothing else will prevail , one would think this should . Is not he the almighty God , infinite in power , greatness , majesty , holiness , and glory ? Does not he dwell in that light which no man can approach unto ; the least ray of which light is ten thousand times brighter than the sun ? Are all the Kings in the world half so glorious as he ? or their thrones to be compared to his footstool ? Does not he sit upon a throne of incomprehensible glory , attended upon with thousands of glorious and mighty angels , that stand before him , admiring , worshipping , blessing , praising , and crying continually , holy , holy , holy , Lord God of hosts ? and although he hath his dwelling so high , yet , does he not humble himself to behold the things that are in heaven and earth ? does he not vouchsafe to admit these poor bodies of ours into his presence , and permit them to appear before him , whereas he Might justly debar them of this happiness , by reason of the infinite disparity betwixt himself and them ? Shall these bodies than appear before this presence , without expression of reverence and worship ? be astonished , oh ye heavens , at this . certainly , if any man May be ranked in the number of those whom holy Job taxeth for rebelling against the light , it is he that is persuaded he May rush into ; and be in God's presence , without reverence and worship . I say , against the light : for it need not be doubted , but that even nature , and grace , do both of them project their light this way , teaching bodily reverence and worship unto God . Naaman will bow in the house of Rimmon : so propense is nature itself to present bodily adoration to that deity which the fancy hath conceived . The Muscovites ( Not many years since ) when they entered into one another's houses , they first looked about them , to see what images there were ; which , when once they espied , they worshipped , and then saluted their friends . If we must salute men in the house of God , ( Of which , for my part , i see no necessity , or not so great necessity , as of that which respects God himself ) it were good , if we would take notice of God first . But we can rush into God's house , and there , diligently spend our salutations and obeisances upon this and that body ; and God , because he hath no , ( To appear visibly honourable ) must be accounted no : either he shall have no worship at all , or a very slight one . For a man to come before so glorious a god , to hear , to pray , to sing , and to do it with no more ( Nay perhaps less ) reverence , then if he were coming into some trade's man's shop , what is it to sacrifice a lamb , as if be cut off a dog's neck , if this be not ? 

But what occasion does this administer unto heathenish idolaters , to triumph over us Christians , that they should be ruled by nature , in giving reverence and worship to their gods ( Though false ones ; ) whereas we , who pretend much to grace , will not be taught by it to adore and worship the true God , from whom our grace comes ? Would any idolater in the world , ( Though blind , yet devout in his way ) be so irreverently loose and profane before his devil , as we before the great God of heaven and earth ? Although such idolaters shall themselves be condemned for their idolatry , yet certainly they shall rise up in judgement against us Christians , and condemn us for our profaneness . As God urged the heathens holding them to their gods , jer. 2. 11 , against the levity and inconstancy of his own persons , in changing him : so will he produce their reverence and worship to their gods , against our slackness , in not giving him that bodily worship which is due unto him . Amongst those many sins which threaten the ruin of this our sinful nation , and call on us for amendment , we May justly fear that this is not the least . 

Let us then , in the name of God , consider the majesty of God , before whom we appear ; our own unworthiness to appear before him ; the infinite distance and disproportion that is betwixt him and us ; that his own eyes , and the eyes of his holy angels , are upon us , observing our behaviour in coming into , and abiding in his presence : that we are called upon to yield him due reverence and worship , not only with our souls , but our bodies likewise . And , if our hearts be not obstinately bent to resist the truth , ( Which God forbid ) we shall see what pressing engagements lie upon us to worship the Lord our god . 

These arguments i conceive , both for number , and weight , sufficient to establish this truth . Yet i shall make request in the words of Elihu , Job 36.2 . suffer me a little , and i will show thee , that i have jet to speak on God's behalf . i shall produce two arguments more , and those shall be from the very words themselves ; thou shalt worship the Lord thy god . 

The first of them shall be from the manner of our saviour's alleging these words . our saviour immediately before , saith , scriptumest , it is written . Now we know that bodily worship to be given unto God , is written in many places of the old testament . But what particular place is it , which our saviour May be thought to have had respect unto , that this his allegation May be referred to it , and compared with it ? I think it not amiss to follow the margin in our bibles , which directs us to Dent . 6.13 . and Dent . 10.20 . Examine either of the places , and compare them with our saviour's allegation , and see some difference in the terms . Moses saith , timebis , thou shalt fear ; and our saviour saith , adorabis , thou shalt worship . And what May be the reason of this difference ? I answer : the feat of God May have a twofold consideration . First , to be taken strictly , for an awful dread , terror , or trembling at God : which fear , is properly belonging to that passion or affection that is in the soul : and is , either upon a sad apprehension of God's justice , as was in David , psal. 119.120 . my flesh trembleth for fear of thee ; and i am afraid of thy judgements : or , upon the sense of God's presence , as was in Moses , who exceedingly feared and quaked , at that fearful manifestation of God upon mount Sinai . this fear should be in us all , at all times . Though we see not so much of God as Moses did , yet we are in his presence , and more especially , when we come into his house , there to present ourselves before him . And this fear should beget in us humility , reverence and worship towards so * great and terrible a god : whence ( As piscator observes ) that which is fear in that place of Moses , is rendered worship by our saviour in this place , by a metonymy , the effect being put for the cause , worship for fear . 

They then who deny that bodily worship is to be given unto God , and refuse to yield it unto him , when they come before him , ( Though i will not judge them , yet ) themselves make it manifest by their rude carriage and demeanour , that they have not this fear in them : for , if they had , they would surely come into God's presence , worshipping in the lowliest manner that possibly they could . 

or secondly , fear May be taken generally , for the whole duty and service that man oweth unto God : fear God , and keep his commandments ; for this is the whole duty of man , eccles. 12.13 . Now * fear being as the tree , comprehending ( As branches ) all the several duties that we owe unto God ; bodily worship ( Urged at this time by our saviour ) May be comprehended in Moses his fear , as the species in the genus , a particular in the general . So that they who deny God's bodily worship , deny likewise his fear , in its general latitude and capacity , depriving the genus of a species , the tree of a main branch , the fear of God , of its bodily morship belonging unto it , as included in it . 

The other argument shall be from these words , the Lord thy god . because he is so , therefore thou shalt worship him . 

This is a glorious and fearful name , deut. 28.58 . Mercy and majesty , goodness and greatness meet together in it . The due consideration of it , May affect a man with high admiration , that a god of such majesty and greatness , should not be ashamed to be called , the god of his persons ; their god , and , in them , thy god : every particular person in the number of those that serve him , having this interest & propriety in God , as well as the general , that he May say with David , psal. 63.1 . oh God , thou art my god . and , oh Christian , whoever thou art , if thou wilt say that God is thy god , dost thou not mean thy whole self , that he is the god of thy body , as well as of thy soul ; and that thy body challengeth an interest in God , with thy soul ? If so , art not thou bound to worship him with the one as well as with the other ? This argument is framed , psal 45.11 . He is thy Lord , áud worship thou him : and more fully , psal. 95.6 . Oh come , let us worship and how down , let us kneel before the Lord our maker : the reason whereof follows in the next verse ; for be is our god . our relation to him , our propriety in him , should make us , the persons of God , resolve to worship him . Suppose then , that a congregation of persons , in the presence of God , be divided in their practice , some worshipping god with their bodies , others not : if the refrainers shall ask the other why they bow , or kneel . &c. the other have a ready answer ; he is the Lord our God , therefore we do and will worship him : so long as we bear these our bodies about with us , they shall acknowledge an homage and reverence to our God . And if these retort the question upon the other , and ask , wherefore do not you bow , nor kneel ? What answer will these refusers of corporal adoration , return , that May relate to this scripture ? Will they say , we will not worship , nor how down , nor kneel , negatively in the duty , and yet hold the affirmative in the rest ; for he is ear God ? this cannot hang together : they rather disclaim God , and deny him to be their God , in refusing to give him his due worship . I think they would be loath to have this laid to their charge ; yet they will have an hard task to discharge themselves : for , if they deny the duty , they go very far in denying the ground upon which the duty is founded . 

Thus i end the arguments for God's bodily worship , and pass to the second way of proving it to be God's due , which shall be by testimony . 

Although i Might say of bodily worship , approved and urged by our saviour in this scripture , the same that the highpriest said , when the Jews accused him of blasphemy ; what need we any further witness ? for , there needs not any to avouch that which Christ himself hath so clearly ratified : yet i shall add some few testimonies , which ( Though they can add nothing to Christ's authority ) May give further satisfaction and light , concerning the thing in question . 

And first , i shall produce angelical testimony , or mandate rather , ( Which is more : ) for it does not only testify , but commands , as necessary . It is , rev. 19.10 . and 22.9 . where we read , that twice s. John fell down at the feet of the angel to worship him ; but the angel forbade him , see thou do it not ; giving a reason of his prohibition ; i am , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} thy fellow-servant ; therefore s. John should not have proffered the angel such worship , neither would the angel accept it , being tendered unto him ; but he charged s. John thus ; adora deum , worship God . now who can think , that one of the blessed angels , who are ever studious to advance the honour of their great Creaton , would persuade s. John to the practice of an unlawful and unnecessary service , in bidding him to give that worship unto God , which he would have given unto him ? This were to cast a foul aspersion upon those glorious spirits , and to accuse them of error . If that very same angel should appear to one of us , after the same manner , and should have the same occasion now , which he had then , i doubt not , but he would give the same word of command , adorare Doum , to worship God . 

but we need not , with Samsons parents , make request for the angel to come again unto us , that he Might settle us in this truth : for , in speaking to s. John , he hath spoken likewise to us ; and one would think , we should sooner adhere and give credence to the testimony of an incorrupt , unerring angel , then to the testimony of ten thousand gainsayers , men , who are always sinful , and commonly rash , unconstant , and partial in their judgements . And who among the sons of men dares make himself wiser than that angel , by giving contrary counsel ? As if angels and men derived not their wisdom from one and the same fountain . non aliunde sapiens angelus , aliunde home , aliunde ille verax , aliunde homo , sed ab unà incommutabili sapientia , & veritate . the angel deriveth not his wisdom from one fountain , and man from another ; nor is he true one way , and man another , but from one unchangeable wisdom and truth ; saith s. Austin in this case of adoration . Now , if that angel in the apocalypse did wisely and truly in telling s. John he must worship God ; whosoever is wise will concur with him ; elso he is not wise . Now for human testimony . the altar at Athens , which had written on it this inscription , to the unknown God , ( If we May give credit to Martinus Polonus ) was erected presently upon the time of our saviour's suffering : for those great Athenian philosophers seeing the great darkness that then was , and not knowing the true cause , they fell upon this ; quia deus nature patitur ; the darkness is , because the god of nature now suffereth : and the Athenians said , let us build an altar to him . So they set up the altar , and wrote thereon , to the unknown God : and when they would have offered sacrifices , the philosphers said , God hath no need of your goods , sed facietis genuflexiones ante ipsius aram : but ye shall make bowings and adorations before his altar . I have nothing to do here with the altar , therefore let none hence catch at any thing for an accusation against me concerning that : my purpose is only to demonstrate , how that men , who saw by no other light then that of nature , improved by human industry , acknowledged corporal adoration to be due unto that unknown God , whoever he was , and accordingly advised the Athenians to yield it unto him . This , among many thousands of heathen testimonies , shall suffice . In producing Christian testimonies , i shall endeavour a resemblance with that good housolder , which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and old , by citing the testimonies both of ancient and modern divines ; which i shall do but sparingly , lest i should be endless . 

Tertullian gives his verdict for adoration joined with prayer thus : cum modestia & humilitate adorantes , magis commendamus deo preces nostras : worshipping with modesty and humility , we commend or approve our prayers the more unto God . As if the common saying were true ( As no question but it is ) in this particular ; vis unita fortior , force united is the stronger : the worship of the body , joined with the devotion of the soul , in prayer to God , strengthens it to prevail the more forcibly with him . unto which , s. Hierome also gives his consent ; fixo in terram poplite magis quod à deo poseimus , impetramus : with a knee fixed upon the earth , we obtain the more of God the thing which we ask . With this Origen also concurs in his vote , though he expresseth it after another manner , that genuflexiones adorations , and bowings of the knee unto God , are condimenta , as if they were sauces to our services , suaviores cos facientia , giving them a better relish , and making them , like Isaac's meat , more savoury , and acceptable unto God . In the judgement of s. Austin , ( And no doubt but he speaks by his own experience ) acts of corporal adoration do much increase the inward devotion and worship of the soul . His words are these : cumbi motus corporis fierl nisi motu animi pracedente non possint , eisdem rursus exterius visibiliter factis , ille interior invisibilis , qui cos fecit , augetur . whereas these gestures of the body cannot be performed without the precedent motion of the mind , the same gestures being outwardly and visibly performed , the inward in visible , which caused them , is much augmented thereby . He then , that out of a pious devotion shall bow or kneel unto God , at his coming and being before him , to improve his devotion thereby , is not to be condemned for it , but rather he that does it not : otherwise , Salvianus would not have complained of that irreverence which profane persons practised in his time , in coming into their temples , which were houses of prayer , sine ullâ penitus reverentiâ sacri bonor is , without any respective reverence at all to the sacred honour of God . A complaint fit for these times . Damascen is also plain for this corporal adoration , reasoning it from our composition , quia ex duplici naturâ compositi sumus , &c.  because ( Saith he ) we are composed of a twofold nature , to wit , an intellectual , and sensible , therefore we offer unto God a twofold adoration ; a spiritual , which consisteth in the inward devotion of the mind ; and a gorporal , consisting in the outward humiliation of the body . I could recite a considerable reason out of Aquinas , ( Which May please any honest mind : ) but lest any should except against him , as one of the Romish party , i shall let him alone . And indeed i can well spare him , having enough beside , of our own , whose authority May , among our domestic opposers , be more convincing . This will make me take a large leap over many centuries of pious and learned authors , to insist upon the suffrages of some in these last days , of whom the first shall be mr Calvin : he , upon psal. 95.7 , hath these words : hoc quoque notandumest , non tantùm de cordis gratitudine hic agl , sed simul requiri professionem externan pietatis : hoc enim tribus verbis exprimitur , officio suo non defungi fideles , nisi palam , & genuflexione , & aliis signis , deo se in sacrificiû offerunt . this also ( Saith he ) is to be noted , that the thankful acknowledgement of the heart is not here only understood , but the outward profession of piety is together with it required : for this is expressed in three words ( Meaning worship , bowing , & kneeling , which the psalmist there mentions ) that the faithful cannot be said to discharge their duty , unless openly , by bowing the knee , & other signs , they offer themselves in sacrifice unto God . In like manner , upon psal. 96. 9  ( oh worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness , fear before him all the earth ) he comments thus : pulchritudinis nomine templo reverentiam conciliat propheta , ne temerè prosiliant homines in conspictum dei , sed metum & humilitatem afferant : eò pertinet clausula ver sûs , contremiscite à fancy ejus : ut reputantes quanta sit dei majestas , simpliciter coram co incurvent . by the beauty of holiness , the prophet counsels reverence in the temple , that men rush not inconsiderately into God's presence , but should bring along with them fear and humility : for , to this the clause of the verse tends , fear before him ; that men considering how great the majesty of God is , Might humbly bow themselves before him . Nor May i omit the testimony of the same author upon this place of scripture which we now handle . sicuti religio proprie spiritualis est , , externa autem ejus confessio pertinet ad corpus ; ita , non interior modò cultus debetur soli deo , sed externum quoque ejus testimonium . as religion is properly spiritual , but the outward profession of it pertaineth to the body ; so , inward worship is not only due unto God , but also the outward testimony of it . By which triple testimony , it May appear , ( If mr Calvin doth not deceive us ) that the candle must not be kept under a bushel , , but set on a candlestick , that others May see the light : that adoration of God is not to be shrouded inwardly , in our hearts alone , but outwardly professed : for , from that precept of our saviour , wherein he commands , that our light should so shine before men , that they May see our good works , and glorify our father which is in heaven , i know no reason that adoration should be excluded . 

Next comes the testimony of Beza , out of whose garden we have plucked one flower already : his words in his annotation upon this place , are these : the word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} is used for that religious worship , which is due only to God , conjoined with peculiar reverence , quo , et corpus , et animus , deo uni , sesetotum , ut {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} consecrat , tum interiore , tum externo cultu : in which worship , the body , and soul , do wholly consecrate themselves unto one God , as the only creator , with outward , and inward worship . 

heminglus , speaking of these two kinds of worship , the outward of the body , and the inward of the soul , will not have either of them exempted from God , but uterque deo juste debetur : both of them ( Saith he ) are justly due unto God : for , as concerning the soul , God hath create man after his own image , an the body hath he form of the dust of the earth , and hath endowed it with natural power , and doth also conserve it : thus Hemingius . 

Bishop Cowper , a pious , orthodox , and learned man , having said upon rom. 8.9 . that the spirit of God is within us : he explains himself thus : which i do not speak , as if i did condemn the outward service done in body to the Lord , provided , it flow from the heart : ye are bought with a price , therefore glorify God in your body , and in your spirit , for they are God's : and this also is to be marked for the amendment of two sorts of men among us , which are in two extremities : we have some who are become scorners of the grace of God in others , neither can they be humbled themselves in the public assemblies of the saints , nor be content to see others express their inward motion , by outward humiliation : they sit down in the throne of God , and condemn others for hypocrisy , not remembering , that the sin of hypocrisy is to be reserved to the judgement of God , who only knows the heart ; and those same things which they mislike in their brethren , the Lord hath allowed in others . 

mr Perkins ( Whose words have already been of considerable use ) speaking of corporal adoration , useth these words : the subjection which is due to God , is absolute , and for himself ; first , in regard he is sovereign Lord of our bodies , and souls , and consciences . Secondly , in regard of the infinite excellency of his divine attributes , especially that he is the author and giver of all good things ; that he hears and helps men everywhere calling upon him in the secrets of their hearts . And the adoration that is done even for the acknowledgement and signification of these things , is the adoration that is proper to God , and is therefore called divine or religious adoration ; and of it Christ saith , thou shalt worship the Lord thy God , and him only shalt thou serve . 

And if they who refrain from corporal adoration of God , merely out of scruple of conscience , will give heed to mr Perkins his declaration of this case , he May be satisfied . He thus defines religious adoration , differing but little from himself before : it is that worship of God , in which , religion and godliness is exercised , expressed , and signified : in it there be two things always joined together , and yet distinctly to be considered . The first and principal , being the foundation of all the rest , is , the intention of the mind , whereby God is conceived , as an absolute and omnipotent Lord , knowing all things , yea the heart of man ; hearing the prayers of all men , in all places , at all times ; the author , preserver , and giver of all good things . The second , depending upon the former , is , the outward prostrating of the body ; as the bowing of the knee , and such like , for this end , to testify our subjection unto God , as our absolute Lord . 

They then who deny to worship God with their bodies , what do they else , but impair and diminish ( What lies on their part ) God's absolute sovereignty , in withdrawing their bodies from under his subjection , so , as they shall not acknowledge any homage or worship to be due unto him ? 

But , as if the tendering of corporal adoration unto God were not only an acknowledgement of his universal sovereignty which he hath over all his creatures , and whence , in a relative sense , he is called Lord , but also an acknowledgement of his divinity , and absolute being in himself , whence he is called God ; the same author hath likewise these words : by outward divine worship , we acknowledge divinity to be in the thing whereto we bow or prostrate ourselves . Now , is it not necessary that all ways of acknowledging God for God should be put in practice ? And if any man's devotion shall secretly prompt him to make this recognition , what reason is there that any should condemn him for it ? Seeing the action of adoring God speaks but the same which every man is bound to confess with his mouth , that God is the only true God , and alone hath true divinity in himself : according to that acknowledgement of the persons of Israel , when they were so fairly convicted by Elijah's sacrifice , 1 Kings 18.39 . They fell on their faces , and said , the Lord he is the God , the Lord he is the God . so that they who shall condemn any for worshipping God with their bodies , May as well condemn them for testifying with their mouths the divinity of God : and also themselves , by reason of their own refusing to worship God after this manner , be condemned for not acknowledging God's divinity , as they ought , with those bodies which God hath given them ; and , amongst other purposes , for this principal one of adoration . 

doctor John Donne , a glorious star but newly set , shineth still in his works , and sparkleth forth his light in these words : i must say that there come some persons to this church , and persons of example to many that come with them , of whom , ( Excepting some few , who must therefore have their praise from us , as no doubt they have their thanks and bleslings from God ) i never saw Master nor servant kneel at his coming into this church , or at any part of divine service . And a little after : as our coming to church is a testification , a profession of our religion ; to testify our fall in Adam , the church appoints us to fall upon our knees : and to testify our resurrection in Christ Jesus , the church hath appointed certain times to stand : but no man is left to his liberty , as never to kneel : genuflexio est peccatorum , kneeling is the sinner's posture : if thou come hither in the quality of a sinner , ( And if thou do not so , what dost thou here ? the whole need not the physician ) put thyself into the posture of a sinner , kneel . 

Mr Hildershaus , a divine of no mean repute : no favourer of any practice accounted popish : in his lectures upon joh. 4. saith , it is but the speech of a profane hypocrite to say thus : though i make not that show as others do , though i use not to kneel and say my prayers , either with my family , or apart , though i go not so much to church , as others do , yet i serve God , as well as they : i serve him in my heart , i lift up my heart unto him , i serve him in my calling , i get my living by my earnest labour , i deal justly with all men : and God is a spirit , and will be wotshiped in spirit : it is the service of the heart that he looks for , he cares not for these hypocritical shows : it is no matter though i serve him not outwardly , so long as i have a good heart . 

And there be three reasons , why men May not content themselves to serve God in spirit only , but must do him outward and bodily service also . In respect of God : for he having create , redeemed , and sanctified our bodies , as well as our souls , is , of right , to have homage , and service done him by both . 1 cor. 6 . 19 , 20.  What ? know ye not ? &c. in respect of ourselves : for the service we do to God in our bodies , is a great , and necessary help to our spirit . rom. 10.17 . In respect of others : for ur light should so shine before men , that they May see our good works ( See that we worship , and serve God ) and glorify our father which is in heaven . matth. 5. 16.  thus mr Hildersham : and let me set a good bush at his back , who comes with his three reasons also , not much different : the reverend Archbishop of Armagh , in the page of his book which is cited before , to this question , is there any use of our bodily behaviour before God sith he is a spirit , and looketh to the heart ? He answereth thus : yes verily : for , the whole man , and consequently the body itself , oweth duty unto God . it is a glass wherein the affections of the mind are beheld . the mind is the better holden in the thing affected , and the better holpen , and furthered in the inward worship , when both body , and mind , are joined together . 

Since these authors , ( And i doubt not but many more , if they were sought into ) of unquestionable repute , have , like so many streams , bent their courses to the ocean of this truth : our late Archbishop of Canterbury is not to be condemned for his pious resolution , without the rejection and disproof of all the rest . For my own part ( Saith he ) i take myself bound to worship with body , as well as in soul , when ever i come where God is worshipped : and were this kingdom such as would allow no holy table standing in its proper place , ( And such places some are ) yet i would worship God , when i came into his house : and were the times such as should beat down churches , and all the curious carved works thereof with axes , and hammers , as in psal. 74. ( And such times have been ) yet i would worship in what place so ever i came to pray , though there were not so much as a stone laid for Bethel . my last authority shall be more general . 

When in the dawning of this church's reformation in King Edward's days , the night of idolatrous worship began to wear away ; our blessed reformers , spiritual and temporal , in their endeavours to establish an orderly method for the true worship of God , they ordered kneeling , at several times , in the performance of God's service : nor did they intend any other object of their outward bodily worship , but only God . And our brethren in Scotland were not disagrecing from the same practice , and injunction : for mr Knox ( Having been no otherwise taught in this by his great Master ) composing a liturgy for the public use of that church , this was one principal thing joined , that the minister , and persons should prostrate themselves in the celebration of their solemn fasts : so far , was he , or they in those days , from denying corporal reverence , and adoration to be God's due , and just prerogative . This consent of a multitude , proceeding , not from any heady inconsiderate rashness , but from good advice , & deliberation , is a good confirmation of God's propriety in our bodily worship . 

And though it be much spoken against no adays , by the ignorant , who cry it down at all adventure ; and by the careless profane not a whit practised in the public assemblies : yet it Might easily be hoped , the one would not condemn it , nor the other neglect it , but both would join with the profession of this service , if well and advisedly they would but look into it : as when Balaam's ass saw the angel of the Lord , she fell down under Balaam , for which his anger was kindled , that he smote her with a staff , and wished that there were a sword in his hand , for then would he kill her : yet afterwards , when his own eyes were opened , he did the same thing , he bowed down his head , and fell flat on his face : even so , if men , who are angry with the profession of corporal reverence unto God , and could find in their hearts to smite , and to kill such as they observe to do it , would apply themselves to a serious , and upright scrutiny of the thing , using those helps whereby their eyes Might be opened , and their understandings enlightened ( Their will not sitting as judge in the place of reason ) they would surely worship God , with their bodies , as others do : and withal , if they would consider , how little they can have from the writings of divines to countenance their opposition of God's bodily worship . Pens are commonly more deliberate than tongues : and though some men's tongues walk at liberty , and prate much against it , yet i have not seen , or heard , that any pen hath dropped so much as a letter in contradiction of this , that God is to be worshipped with the body : nor do i think there can be a face so bold , as to do it . I know they May break forth into exclamations against the corruptions , and abuses of bodily worship , which for mine own part , i am as desirous May be reform , as any gain-sayer of corporal adoration can be : and therefore for conclusion of this poor treatise , i shall level a caveat against two main evils , from which i desire every good Christian May be careful to keep himself , in his acts of corporal adoration : and these are idolatry , and hypocrisy : both which are high provocations unto God . 

For idolatry : this is a gross abuse , and misemployment of our bodies : which God ( Having made them only for himself ) will not that they should do any religious homage to any , but to him alone , having , by his own express edict often reiterated , excluded all things else whatsoever from having any part , or fellowship with himself in this service . Though there be angels , and saints in heaven , yet corporal adoration is not theirs , the angels have refused it , and i doubt not but the glorified saints ( If they could signify so much unto us ) are of the same mind , and would likewise show that they do refuse it . If St. Peter could be talked withal , he would surely dissuade from corporal adoration ( If it should be tendered unto him , as , ( Being alive ) he dissuaded Cornelius . act. 10.25 , 26.  Though the * blessed virgin be with Christ her son , yet she is not to share with him in our adoration : but if we will be wise , let us do like wise men , who , when they came where Christ and his mother were , they fell down , and worshipped only him , mat. 2.11 . moved ( Questionless ) thereunto by the secret instinct of the same spirit , which conducted them thither . Nor shall i fear to say , that the bread in the holy eucharist ( His nearest , and most lawful representative in the world ) is not to have any corporal worship done unto it : much less his image , picture , or cross , whatever Aquinas and the Papists are pleased to say , that it is to be worshipped with the same worship as Christ himself is . 

As for images of gold , or silver , wood , or stone , we are not only straightly charged by God himself to withhold our adoration from them : but we May be dissuaded even by their own impotency , vileness , & unworthiness ; they being of our own making , inferior to us , and regardless of us : in time of need they require more help from us than we can have from them : and they must needs be born , because they cannot go : they have no ability to accept , nor to make any retribution for what ever service is done unto them : therefore adoration is miserably misspent upon them : which should settle this resolution in the heart of every man , seeing we can have nothing from them , they should not have the least thing from us : not a knee , 1 Kings 19.18 . not an eye , ezek. 18.6 . not an hand , psal. 44.21 . But , as Moses said to Israel in another case , deut. 12.4 . so say i in this of adoration , ye shall not do so unto the Lord your god : ye shall not withhold from him your knees , nor your eyes , nor your hands ; but all your members shall express their part in the worship of God : your bodies shall prostrate themselves before him alone , without any oblique reference to any create nature . 

And for hypocrisy , let us take heed of that likewise : that in adoring , and worshipping God , our bodies May not go alone , but our souls and spirits May join with them in the action : else , if we make fair outward professions , in seemingly religious bowings , and kneelings , and act not the same part within , we shall expose ourselves , as laughing stocks , and marks of vengeance in the sight of God , and his holy angels , and be as the swan , which though it hath fair white feathers , yet having but black flesh underneath , was therefore adjudged an unclean bird . Let then our care be , not only to do the thing , but to do it aright , in sincerity , and truth , by associating our souls with our bodies , when ever any occasion be for us to give unto God the tribute of his worship . If we shall be careful of this , i dare promise these consequents : we shall nourish , and continue in our hearts an awful reverence towards the most sacred majesty of God himself : we shall make ourselves through the mediation of Jesus Christ , acceptable in his sight , when we present ourselves before him : we shall give proof and testimony , that we acknowledge God for our god : we shall conform ourselves to the judgement of judicious men who have approved it , to the examples of devout saints who have practised it , to the precepts in the holy scripture , which requires it : we shall ( And that in an excellent way ) acknowledge our thankfulness unto God for his blessing of food and raiment , protection , and preservation , and for those ( His principal ones ) of creation , and redemption upon these our bodies : and we shall ( Amongst other acts of our obedience ) send up our religious adorations to stand as memorials before God , that ( For the time to come ) he May in all our straits and necessities be mindful of us , in this present world , and ( This being ended ) bring us both souls and bodies into his everlasting glory . 

soli deo honor & adoratio ; nunc , & in secula . amen . 

Finis . 





isai. 5.20 . Ecclus 13.22 . Acts 18.13 . 2 Kings 8.5 . Acts 20.24 . 1 sam. 21.  gen. 28.16 . Luke 1.53 . 1 chro. 15.13 " 

vol. 2.pag.84 . col . 2.  C.  heb. 1.6 . vol. 3 . p. 403 . col. 2.  tom. 4 . Col. 269.  1 object . answ . joh. 2.15 . tom. 4. col. 502.  2 object . 2 answer . * attamengestus illi quid scripturis commemorantur , & sanctis viris usui fuer•t , publicis precibus admodum congruuns , neque superstitiosis actibus debent annumerari . loc. come . clas. 3 cap. 13.  § 12. pag. 671.  Jude vers. 10.  1 cor. 2.8 . 2 king. 20.7 . 2 sam. 10.4 . hor.  * superstitiosa rimiditos . aug. epist. 118.  3 objection . answer . * lex naturalis tres habet pavies , cujus prima h&c est , ut agnitus honoretur creator . ambros. in rom. 5.  joh. 19.30 . 4 objection . answer . * calv. in mat. 15.14 . aquin. 22ae , qu. 43. art . 7. & in rom. 14 21.  * k. James confer. at happed . Court . pag. 66.  * joh. Valdesso , consid. 76.  5 object . answ . * quid prodest , si genua corpor is mei adorationem veniens slectam deo , & genua cordis mei slectam diabolo ? orig home 2. in judic. in loc. 22ae qu , 84. art . 2 . 3m . totum vero hunc cultum , tam externum , quam internum , ideo spiritualem sacrae literae vocant , quia à spiritu nostro per spiritum sanctum ( quo fideles aguntur ) renovato totus proficis•itur , &c.  Ep. ante Miscellan . i argum.  i.  psal. 95.6 . 2.  1 cot. 6.20 . 3.  2 argum.  3 argum.  * a , juin . 22 . ae , qu. 122 40.  zanch. tom. 4. col . 363.  pisicator in matth 4 8.  * d Hammond in his apped , to his proct. cat. pag 303.  * perkin• Refor . Cath. point 14  4 argum.  Dod and Clevor on the 5 com.  busbequius ep. 3. mihip . 267.  Ovid . de ponto . lib. 3. eleg. 2.  * non sufficit exteri• obtemp•rare majoribus nostris , nisi ex intimo cordis affectu sublimiter sentiamus de eis . 

bern. serm. 3. de adven . 

mal. 1.8 . epist. 3.  Arrianus de expedit . alex. lib. 4.pag.86 . judg. 9.12 . Ludvicus Capellus in spicilegio , ad 1 cor. 11. 4. mihi pag 87.  5 argum.  mar. 9.40 . * levit. 17.7 . Psal. 106.37 . 1 cor. 10.20 . 8 argum.  rev. 4.10 . 7.11 . 11.16 . 19.4 . quis andeat affir mare dersubstanriam corporaliter videri , cum eam noluerit corporaliter adorari ? 

aug ep. 6.  

7 argum.  jer. 2.12 . Job 24.13 . 2 Kings 5.18 . liber Baro de ••bus muscoviticis , mihi pag. 55.  luk. 10.4 . Salute no man by the way . isa. 66.3 . 8 argum.  1.  heb. 12.21 . * nehem. 1.5 . 2.  * verbum {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} quando ad deum resertur , generale est , complectens omnem reverenitam , qua cum veneratione & religione deo exhibetur : cumque ejus pars sit adoratio , & diabolus se adorari postulaverit , ideo christus verbum generale timoris , seu reverentia , inutaz it in verbum adorandi . chemnit . Harm. Evangel. cap. 19 . mihi col. 275.  9 argum.  heb. 11.16 . matth. 26.56 . judg. 13.8 . aug. de vera relig. cap. 55. Tom . 1 . mihi pag. 517.  Acts 17.23 . Martinus Polonus in vita s. petri , mihi pag. 122.  in orat. dom.  com. in eph. lib 2.  in eph. 3.14 . tract. 25 in matth. mihi pag. 142.  gen. 27.4 . lib. de cura promortuis , cap. 5 Tom . 4.  de Gubern . lib. 3.  orthod fid. lib. 4.cap.13 . 22ae , qu. 84 . art . 2 . corp. in harm . Evang mihi pag. 61 . matth. 5.15 . matth. 5.16 . supra . pag.16 . in opusc. col. 742.  in his works in folio . pag.57 , 58.  like the dog in the manger . vol. 1 . P 707.  Col. 1 . A.  cases of conscience , book 2. chap. 11 . Vol. 2.pag.84 . vol. 3 . pag. 403.  Col. 2 . serm. 7 . P 72.  just . Mart.  pag. 182 , 183.  1.  2.  3.  1.  2.  3.  in hisspeech in Star-chamber , pag. 46 . numb 22.27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31.  * Acne quis hoc derivet ad Mariam virginem , maria erat templum dei non deus templi : & ideo itle solus adorandus , qui operabatur in templo . ambr. de sp.  Sa. lib.3 . cap. 12.  sit in honore maria , pater , & filius , & spiritus sanclus adoretur . epiphan. haer.79 . 3a patte 25.4 . See Bishop White against Fisher , p. 244 . dr Fearley in his cla. mist . page 157.  jer. 10.5 . levit. 11 , 18.  causinus . 




















