London's charity enlarged , stilling the orphans cry . 

By the liberality of the parliament , in granting two houses by act , and giving a thousand pound towards the work for the employment of the poor , and education of poor children , who many of them are destroyed in their youth for want of being under a good government and education , whereby they May be made serviceable for God , and the commonwealth . 

also this good work is much encouraged by the liberal contributions of many well-affected citizens of London , for the better carrying it on for the glory of God , the honour of the nation , and comfort of the helpless poor . 

with a platform , how many officers needful to govern 100 children in a workhouse , with laws and orders for the schoolmaster to read to the children once a day for a time , afterwards twice a month , whereby they May be kept under a godly and civil government , to the great joy of good people . 

With other observations worthy the reading . 

By s.h. a wellwisher to the nations prosperity , and the poors' comfort . 

London , printed by matth. Symmons , and Robert Ibbitson , 1650.  

The orphans cry , we perish , we die . 

As we you see 
So May yours be 
For the Lord's sake 
Some pity take 
Lay not this sin to their charge 
I am sick , i die 
Dead in the street 


To the right honourable Thomas foot , Lord mayor of the city of London , with the worshipful sheriffs , and to the gentlemen of the corporation for the poor , both aldermen and common-council of the city of London ; s.h. wisheth your lordship , and the rest , happiness in this life , and eternal consolation by Christ Jesus in the life to come . 

Right honourable , with the rest of the gentlemen : 

I hope this is the year of jubilee , or joy to the poor , and all God's people , and that by your helps and assistance , concurring together , such a work of reformation will be set on foot , and carried on for the good of the poor , as well for their souls , as their bodies , as was never so exactly performed in former ages in our nation . 

The work of the poor consists in two things , viz.  comfort , the honest helpless poor . 
reform , the obstinate ungodly poor . 


And for your ground and authority to carry you on in the performance of this good work , you have 1 the law and command of our god . 
2 the laws of our land , and the assistance of parliament if you need 


1 the law of God saith , he that will not work , let him not eat : this would be a sore scourge , and smart whip for idle persons , if God's law were so executed , that none should be suffered to eat , till they had wrought for it ( If they were able ) this would torment such persons ( Both back and belly ) more than ten lashes a day , and such a restraint from victual , would in time drive them to works whether they would or no , tho never so stubborn ; for if such should be made to fast that will not work , one or two days , before they eat , they will be glad to fall to his or her labour the third day ; for hunger will tame the wildest colt , and constrain him to come to hand for hey or straw . 

2 the laws of the land saith , he that is idle , and May work , and will not , let such be sent to the house of correction , and there be employed , and restrained from a begging idle life . 

There are other good laws made against incorrigible rogues , which i will omit to speak of , desiring those that would know more of them to search the statutes of England , which are very good in suppressing the idle , and relieving the needy , only if one thing Might be added : 

That no lusty person should have the benefit of a pass if he lived above thirty miles from London ; the reason why i speak of the distance of thirty miles , it is because the carrier's come two or three times a week , and a letter from the corporation to the parish , and the said carrier that dwells nearest to the parish to carry it ; and the porter that is servant to the carrier , to carry the said letter to the parish where the beggar saith he was born , or last dwelled , and he to deliver it to the constable or collectors for the poor , and they without delay upon a penalty to return answer by the first or second return of the carrier , and their hands with the hands either of a justice or minister of the parish , of the truth , whether ever any such person were born there , or inhabited amongst them ; by this means you will soon discover much falsehood amongst beggars , and much carelessness among constables , in not guiding home the beggars to their parish , a penalty on them will make them be careful ; therefore if the corporation do intend to do the work truly , faithfully , and with advantage to the commonwealth , they must neither take the word of a wand'ring beggar , nor the true service of a careless constable , for they are both ill members to a well-governed commonwealth , and will deceive ; therefore two letters from the corporation to the parish where the beggar saith he was born , or last abode will be very necessary , viz. one to know the truth whether ever any such person belonged to them , by this means you shall have a true account whether the beggars report be true : the other letter is when the beggar is sent away with the pass , to know whether he be come to his parish , if not , you shall be sure then to know what Constable was in the fault , that the beggar was not conducted to his parish , such constables being fined , will make others beware , this will be little charge to the corporation , and your work done very judiciously with care & prudence ; for some beggars May commit some misdemeanour in their country ; therefore it is a simple thing to take their word , for they will never tell truth ; as for example , 

Suppose a constable of London should take up a beggar in his precinct or parish , & should ask him where he was born or last dwelled , the beggar should say , at York , or Newcastle , when as peradventure he was neither born , nor inhabited in any of the foresaid cities , and it May be he was never in that country in all his life , yet upon the bare word of the beggar the constable makes his pass , corrects him , and sends him away to the place of his birth , or last abode , as he saith , and when he comes thither , the inhabitants there will own no such person , and so he must be brought back again to the great trouble of the country , according to this i will give you a precedent . 

A gentleman who is now one of the corporation being constable , a lusty beggar was begging in his parish , he asked him where he was born , he said at Dover , he caused the beadle to whip him , and made him his pass , and sent him for Dover , when he came thither , the inhabitants of Dover would not receive him , they had none such born there , they sent him back again to London from whence he was sent ; when the constable saw him , he admired that the laws were so defect ; and he was sorry the country was so much troubled , by carrying , and recarrying to no purpose ; then he asked the beggar where he did ever dwell , he said at Bristol , the constable sent him away for that place , and what became of him afterwards he could not tell . 

Herein we find it is a trouble to a commonwealth , that a constable have no more proof concerning a wandering rogues birth or abode , but only his bare word , which May lie if he please , as well as tell truth . 

Consider in the next place how a careless  Constable May prove an ill instrument to the commonwealth ; for if a lusty beggar pass through the hands of many constables safe as he is carrying along the country ; yet if at last he fall into the hands of a careless constable he can make his escape and go into another part of our nation , and continue still a trouble and a danger to the commonwealth , for some of them are very desperate and envious ; if a farmer give not them an alms to their own mind , or a cross-word , they care no more to set his barn and ricks of corn on fire , then to light a pipe of tobacco , so desperate many of them are to do a mischief by day or by night ; wherefore in my apprehension there 's no better way to guide beggars to their homes then by way of the carrier , for some carrier's have been complained of for bringing boys and girls , and leave them at London upon the charge of this city . 

I conceive a carrier or wagoner are the fittest men to convey beggars , that dwell about 30 miles from London , for trunk ; provided the parish pay the carrier for his pains , and if the carrier or wagoner do not perform their care for the good of the commonwealth , let a penalty be laid upon on them , by this means , the constable will be freed , and the country eased of such persons that are a pest and trouble to our nation . 

And if in case a lusty vagrant should say he was born a hundred miles or more , not then to have a pass , but rather be kept to work either in the house of correction , or in the galleys , or cleansing of streets , i mean little narrow places where carts seldom come , with such like employment , till such time they can be sent to the English plantations , unless such can procure good security to live orderly . 

I have no more to say , but beseech the Lord that your lordship , with the rest of the corporation , May be tender fathers to the honest poor , and severe to the obstinate , knowing , as i said before , you have the law of God , and our nation to strengthen your hands , and the power of parliament to countenance you . For which shall be the daily prayer of him , who is your humble servant , s.h.  

To the right honourable his excellency , tho.  Lord Fairfax , general of the English army . 

Right honourable , 

That which sets the chiefest diadem upon great persons , is not so much in their birth , and blood royal , as in their piety and charity , such persons whose hearts God hath seasoned with the graces of his holy spirit , they are of a higher blood , than those that are born from Emperors and great persons , such as they are but born of the flesh , they are not born of the the spirit : and Christ tells us , if we are not born of the spirit , that eternal royal seed , we shall never enter into the kingdom of God . by this we find ( my Lord ) that there is a necessity to seek after this second birth , being of the spirit , & from the spirit of God , as our first birth is of the flesh , and from the flesh of men ; the first birth is a fading birth that shall perish ; the last birth is a lasting birth that shall never perish , it shall never die , as Christ saith , viz. they shall never die in the spirit , though they suffer death in the flesh , and our saviour Christ bids his people , not to fear them that can but kill the body , but are not able to destroy the soul . 

my Lord , i hear many boast of their first birth , which is but from sinful man at the best ; but i hear but few in comparison of the other to boast or glory any thing in their second , which is from the highest birth royal of all , inasmuch as the is none greater than he , who is not only called King of Kings , but King of the saints , that is King of Kings to overpower them , for they are in hands like rivers of water , that have their tides , who have their flowings and swellings , ebbings and fallings , as pleaseth the Lord ; and he is also called the King of saints , because he is their governor and protector ; therefore he is not ashamed to say , i will be your father , and you shall be my children ; and Christ his dear son , is not ashamed to call them brethren . By this we find that the saints , whether rich or poor , noble or ignoble , are in great favour with God and Christ . 

And the apostle St. James saith , God loves the poor that are rich in faith ; and the poor so qualified , through the grace of Jesus Christ , are in a capacity to have a right to the high birthright of the royal blood of heaven , which is the highest birth and blood of all : and truly , my Lord , whereas God and Christ loves the poor , i rejoice when i see rich men , and great men love the poor that excel in virtue ; and this i must speak to the honour of your excellency , that both yourself , and the officers of your army , have been cordial in propagating the cause of the poor , and their miseries , in that your lordship upon request of some well-affected , to send two or three letters , some of them to the parliament , and one to the Lord mayor of the city of London , late deceased , that they would improve their power and interest for the carrying on of this good work , that poor children that beg , May have maintenance , employment , and godly education ; and all sorts of wand'ring poor kept under a daily government , whereby God May be glorified , and good people have joy and comfort in it ; 't is a mercy to a nation when great men are good men , seeking to advance piety and charity more than their own honours , and we have cause to bless God , that hath made you instrumental for the honour of God , and the good of the poor , and for the continuance of these mercies to the nation : it shall be my daily prayer , with the people of God , that piety and charity May never fail you to your dying day , and that you May then everlastingly enjoy that heavenly birthright , and by blood royal spoken of before . 

Your excellencies most humble servant in the Lord . s. h.  

To the reader , 

Christian reader , 

Pictures of misery , moves the hearts of merciful people to greev , the condition of the poor is like the pictures in the beginning of the book , deciphered out ; some crying , some dying in the streets , if thou desirest to remedy these miseries , by thy liberal contributions , according to that portion God hath given thee , thou dost like a good steward ; and God and Christ who is the father and saviour of the poor , who are rich in faith , will crown thee with mercies here , and with glory and life eternal in heaven hereafter ; but if thou hast this world's good , and yet are miserable and hard hearted , and regardest not to advance so good a work , as employing the poor , take heed thy condition be not like his that Solomon speaks of , saying , he that withholdeth corn in the time of famine , the poor shall curse him : i desire of God , that thy covetousness May not abound so much upon thee , that the curse of God and the curse of the poor should fall upon thee . Remember how much dives dogs were kinder to poor Lazarus then their Master , for they came and licked Lazarus soars , when as their Master would not give a penny towards the poor man's cure , so far in love with his money was he . but what was the end of his cruelty ? perpetual woe and misery , as the scripture saith ; and because he had not a favour to the poor man , he lost the favour of God . Thou knowest not what a third war will produce , for , rumours are abroad , therefore i council thee to be liberal to advance this good work of the poor , while thou hast it , that God May show mercy upon thy soul and body , and preserve the rest of thy riches from foreign plunderers , and doubt not , but God will favour thy life and estate , when thou favourest the poor . 

The advance of this work we hope will produce great joy to the nation , and we hope that the parliament will to their utmost stand for the honour of God , and the good of the people , which consists in piety and charity ; that is , by advancing the gospel of Christ , and seeking the peace of the nation , for so in several ordinances they have declared to do . 

1.  They have declared they will provide maintenance for preaching ministers in England , tho yet many places thereof are in darkness , wanting , as also for other countries beyond the seas belonging to this Natino that the word of the Lord May have its free course and be glorified amongst them as it is with us in this city of London . 

2.  They will endeavour that the relief and employment of the poor May be settled in all cities and market towns of the nation , as in London . 

3.  They will endeavour the releasement of poor prisoners that are not able to pay their hard hearted creditors , and yet lie in prison for a small debt ; and as for such that lie in prison and are able to pay , and will not do it , being the undoing of many a poor man and his family , which doth occasion great poverty upon the nation . 

3.  They will endeavour to appoint friend-makers in all great parishes of the nation , that the mighty May not oppress the poor ; this is a work of great concernment , and will prevent much poverty in the nation , and bring glory to God , and honour to the parliament : God is angry with oppressors , as he was with King Pharaoh , and it was his end throuwe , and God saith , they that oppress the widow , the fatherless , the stranger , the poor , he will take away their oppressors with horns , and fishhooks , he will not hear their cry in distress , but will scatter them among all nations , a fearful judgement will fall on such as neglect to settle a short and speedy way to right the poor against their oppressors ; therefore it was a good saying of one , that quick justice makes quiet kingdoms , but forma pauperis are oft times tedious to the undoing of many a poor man , and also many actions arising more from malice then matter , are a means to impoverish many a poor body . And truly i must speak plainly , it stands upon the parliam•t , to dispatch these high and public things out of hand , for the peace and prosperity of the commonwealth , for the honest rich , and merciful & comfortless poor , whither prisoners or others , wait for a reformation , as the thirsty ground for rain , and indeed i must say , there is as great need for the parliament to find out ways and means to preserve people from poverty , by oppressors or otherwise , as it stands upon them to keep people from starving when they are poor . 

And now Christian reader , thou that art cordial for a godly reformation , and desirest not only that swearing , sabbath-breaking and drunkenness May be pulled down , but also oppression , which is like a violent storm , and sweeping rain , as Solomon saith , but also desirest , that good things May be planted throughout the nation for the glory of God , and the peace and prosperity of it . 

Wherefore i pray thee be not impatient or unbelieving , but pray , and wait , and thou shalt see the parliament will act suddenly , according to the hearts desire of the godly , and merciful , rich and the oppressed poor , for the finishing and perfecting of all which , shall be the daily prayer of him , who desires to be , 

Thine in the Lord Christ , s. h 

London's charity enlarged , stilling the orphans cry . 

The corporation appointed by authority of parliament for the well ordering of the poor within the city of London , and the liberties , that the honest poor who are willing to work , May be countenanced , and the idle suppressed ; and the said corporation i hope doth desire to acquaint all well affected people that are willing to advance this pious and charitable work by their liberal contributions what their intents and purposes are ( By God's assistance ) to carry on the foresaid good work : and , 

Therefore to take off all jealousies that none May have the least suspicion of their fidelity , as well in relation to the preserving of the stock as also in performing the good work so long desired by many good people , shall be declared as a well wisher to them in these particulars ensuing . 

1.  They will endeavour that the Lord mayor May be moved to send his precepts to the marshals and constables , and beadles of the city of London , to bring all idle persons to Bridewell and the workhouses , and to allow something to the officers for every one they shall bring to the aforesaid places ; that the corporation May know how the better to dispose of them , either for sea or land . 

2.  I hope they desire an unanimous conjunction with the governors of Bridewell , London , that they May assist each other by taking up , and employing to work all the lusty poor they find begging . 

3.  I hope they will endeavour that the said lusty poor be kept hard to work , and not to depart thence at least , till he or she have been there a month , unless they can give sufficient security to the corporation and governors of Bridewell that they will behave themselves civilly and orderly , leaving off the trade of a begging idle life . 

4.  I hope they will endeavour that all such as are acquitted for petty felony May not be set at liberty , as formerly they have been , for within a month or less they have fallen to their old course of stealing , and brought to prison again : therefore that such upon the discharge out of prison , May be brought to the houses of correction , whether it be London , Westminster , Middlesex , or Surrey , where the party lived , or the these committed , or else employed in the ships and busses for the fishing trade , the better to make them serviceable to the commonwealth , by reforming their ungodly life . 

5.  They will endeavour that such as are incouragable to have power from the parliament to send them to the plantations belonging to the English , beyond the seas , to see whither God will be pleased to turn them . 

6.  I hope they will take care that poor children May be taught to write and read two hours in a day , so that by that time the boys come to the age of 12.14 . or 16. they will be able to read and write , fit for apprentices , but such as are quick witted to make scholars , and accomptants , or what they delight in , either for sea or land . 

And i hope also , they will endeavour that such poor that are willing to work at home with their children , that they May have hemp , flax , cotton-wool , & other materials to work upon at their own dwellings , they leaving a pawn , or bringing a friend for their security to return such materials again to the steward of the corporation , and not to sell it , or pawn it away for ale and strong beer , as some poor have done their Master's work . 

7.  I hope they will endeavour to use all means ( Some of them being justices of the peace ) to prevent such families from poverty , who are made poor by common drunken husbands , such drunkards bring misery and poverty in the commonwealth in three relations . 

1.  By it , they make their families poor . 

2.  By it , they are apt to charge and burden their parishes . 

3.  By it , they impoverish the plenty of the nation , by spending the plenty of it wastefully , and so threaten a famine upon us ; for two drunkards will spend more in drunkenness in one night , then will serve two moderate men half a week . 

8.  I could wish , for the better sanctifying of the Lord's day , for so i call it , especially from Christ's resurrection , because than our enemy death was overcome , and our full redemption wrought , that the schoolmaster on every such Sabbath , keep the children and others belonging to the workhouse , from wand'ring the streets and fields in sermon time by exercising his gifts of prayer , reading of chapters , singing of psalms , catechising them in such a catechism apppointed by authority ; that children May be prevented from errors , especially that of freewill , for a man is not saved by his own works , but the chiefest hopes & assurancet of his salvation standeth upon these helps ensuing . 

1.  By the free grace of God that pardoneth a sinner of his sins ; as a merciful creditor forgiveth a poor man a debt , when he hath nothing to pay , as Christ makes the comparison of the creditor and the two debtors , that when they had nothing to pay , the creditor forgave them , Luke 7.4 . Meaning God the creditor , and the two debtors were Jew and gentile , the gentile was the greatest debtor , for he was for a time a prodigal , yea without God in the world , having no fear of God before his eyes , but now the work of grace by Christ Jesus , hath wrought a great reformation in many a poor gentiles soul . 

2.  As God is the forgiver of sin , so he is the giver of power against sin , that is , by his holy and good spirit in converting a sinner , which makes the saints to rejoice and wonder when the strong holds of Satan in a sinner are thrown down . 

3.  Means we are saved by faith , that is , believing that Christ Jesus was the best sacrifice that ever was offered to take away sin from sinners , therefore Christ hath gotten him this honour , that he is called the unspotted lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world , that whosoever beleiveth on him should never perish but have everlasting life . 

4.  Means of salvation is a man's works , where God hath given him some measure of his spirit , for to act . Therefore a man must be careful not to deny his spirit by despising it ; nor he must not grieve the spirit , nor quench the spirit , if any do , God will be angry with such , for he hath made man a rational creature : therefore the apostle saith , we are the workmanship of God , create unto good works ; yet we are to know , that without Christ we can do nothing that is good , no more than a body can live , when the spirit of life is departed from him ; these are special things for a schoolmaster to instruct , and season children with , on sabboath-days . Also the reading of good sermons are very profitable , which i desire May consist of these heads . 

1.  A sermon concerning the holy trinity , in their offices and attributes , needful to be known in these erring times , for some deny a trinity , some deny Christ , and some deny a unity or spiritual union . 

2.  Sermon of faith . 

3.  Of love . 

4.  Humbleness of mind in these proud times . 

5.  Of sobriety and chastity , in these drunken and unchaste days . 

6.  Self-denial , that is , denying ungodliness and worldly lusts , we May live righteously and soberly , &c.  

7.  Of the excellency of patience that makes a man entire . 

8.  Of contentedness in a low condition , and affl•ction ; for godliness with content is great gain . 

9  Of the excellency of truth , which will cast out of a man , lying and stealing . 

10.  Of the excellent joys of heaven , and chiefly wherein , viz.  in beholding the beauty of God and Christ , as a bridegroom delights in the fair beauty of his bride , above all her riches . 

11.  The horror of hell , and chiefly wherein , viz.  the loss of the glorious presence of God , and his love and favour ; this is a hell beyond the unquenchable fire . The Lord deliver us from it . 

12.  A sermon not to be idle , but labour with our hands for the good of the commonwealth . 

T•se sermons being read , and the blessing of God's spirit carrying on young and old to the practice of it , who can tell but this May be a means to beget abundance of the poorer sort of persons , and their children to a holy knowledge and obedience to God , in life and conversation , and consider if any shall scruple at the reading of these things ? I answer it is ordained of God , as well as preaching . See these places in scripture which do confirm it . deut. 31.11 . josh. 8.34 , 35.  jer. 36.6 . dan. 3.16.17 . luk. 4.16 . act. 8.30 , 31.  act. 13.27 . 2 cor. 1.13 . collos. 4.16 . 1 thess. 5.27 . rev. 5.4 . 

9  Is in relation to their employment . 

1.  Upon the fishing trade , this will not only employ many thousands , but also be a means to bring in food for the great relief of the poor . There is a book lately come forth very useful to employ housands of people for the advance of fishing , and are sold at the greybound in Little-britain . 

2.  The children shall be employed to spinning , knitting , and sowing , and such other employment as consists to the making of their own clothes , therefore to have a weaver to weave the clothe , and a tailor to make and mend their clothes ; other employments in time May be found out , which May be very assistful to handycraft-tradesmen , and the good of the merchant . 

10.  Is in relation to raiment and food for the children . 

1.  For their raiment , a c•urse woollen suit for winter , and a canis or such like for summer , as for their food , i will speak of it afterwards . 

11.  Is in relation to their recreation . 

1.  Sometime warlike excercise , which many children take much delight in , this recreation will be comodious to the commonwealth , by bringing them up , some for the drum , and pipe , some for the trumpet , and all will be skilled with warlike terms and postures , which they will not forget when they come to be men . 

This excercise to be performed by each work house at home once a week , or fortnight , and once a month in summer time in some convenient place , then , and there all the children of ability of body , in the work houses to meet together , to excercise their skill and valour . 

Other recreations May be used in winter time , as the children of Christ's church do , for the sharpening of their wits , reviving their spirits , and preventing them from scurvyes , and dropsies , and such like . 

This usage of children serves to confute the thoughts of some , that thought the corporation would not be so kind , and tender-hearted unto poor children ; and therefore to take off all jeal•usieses , i shall be bold to say this of the corporation , i verily believe that such children whom God doth endue with grace , and towardliness of carriage , they will be willing to prefer to the best services and honest Masters they can get for them , for the better joy and comfort of such poor that live orderly . 

12.  I hope the corporation will endeavour that all such well minded people , whom God hath enriched with this world's good , and having their hearts enlarged to the poor , by giving them bread and other food , one day in the vv•ek• , or more , to as many as come to their doors , as to my knowledge some rich bakers of London do , that such bread or any other provision as they , or any else , that shall give , May be fetched from their houses by the beadle or the like officers , for the relief of the poor in the Workhouses , which will be a considerable thing to uphold the stock , because much of the stock will be spent towards feeding & clothing the young children , and that the beadle or other officer be careful for the receiving of it , having two or three of the persons of the work-houses to go with him in gathering it , and they to deliver it to the cook or sutler , for the use of the poor . This also will be a great succour to such women that beg with little children in their arms and hands , for bread , and broth , and beer , are the chiefest things that children feed upon , all which will be had with little charge to the corporation : only the beadle or officer for his pains , and i believe some men will , from a charitable disposition , do it for little gains , because it is for the honour of God , and the good of the poor . 

13.  And lastly , i hope they will endeavoor that these ensuing laws May once or twice a week for a time , be published to the children by the schoolmaster , for the better regulating them in the fear of God . 

1.  That none young nor old in the workhouse shall swear , neither by the name of God , nor the Lord Jesus Christ . 

2.  That none either young or old give their tongues to lying , railing , filthy talking , or singing ribald songs . 

3.  That none scoff at any man or woman's person , being deformed , seeing it is the workmanship of God , who Might have laid it upon thee that scoffest ; nor to scoff at any man's profession being never so low and mean in the world , if needful in the commonwealth . 

4.  That none have any cursed wishes in their tongues to any , neither in the workhouse nor abroad . 

5.  That none give their hands to stealing , or embezzling any of the goods of the corporation , or any of their fellows goods belonging to them in the workhouse . 

And if any refuse to obey these , or the like wholesome laws , and orders of the workhouse and despiseth to be under the government and correction of such punishment as the corporation shall think meet for such offences , greater or lesser , that then they be sent to Bridewell or house of correction , to receive further punishment for deserts . Consider that these laws and orders being read by the aforesaid schoolmaster , upon such days as the corporation shall appoint , and the punishment executed upon the offenders , young or old , will be a means to make many of them afraid to offend ; as it appears by Solomon's words , prov. 22.15 . foolishness is bound in the heart of a child , but the rod of correction shall drive it far from him . 

Here followeth to be considered the charge and the gain of employing the poor in these particulars ensuing : 

1 how many officers needful to govern 100 children . 

2 the wages of officers to govern the children from 5 or 6 year old , to 14 or 15.  

3 the charge of diet for such children whose parents are dead , or very poor . 

4 what profit will arise out of their labour towards this charge . 

First , how many officers needful to order 100 children in each workhouse ? 

1 a steward . 2 a schoolmaster . 3 a cook , or sutler . 4 a butcher . 5 a cobbler . 6 a barber . 7 five women teachers , to order the said hundred children in spinning , kniting , or the like ; in all , there will be need of these 11 officers . 

2 what wages each officer to have yearly in a competent measure for the better preservation of the stock , and a hopeful carrying on of this good work . 

  li . d.  s.  1 the steward's salary , besides his lodging , 50 0 0 2 the schoolmasters salary , with his loding , 20 0 0 

And if this be thought too little , allow him so much serge as will make him a suit and cloak of the children's spinning , which will be a good help to him . 

  li . d.  s.  3 the cook or sutler his salary , 12 0 0 

And the benefit of selling bread and beer to the work-peopl , &c.  

  li . d.  s.  4 the butcher his salary 6 0 0 5 the cobbler his salary , 4 0 0 6 the barber his salary , 3 0 0 7 the 5 women 5 li. a piece salary , comes to 25 0 0   120 0 0 

Besides , if every woman May be allowed a penny out of every shilling the children earn by spining , kniting , or other work , this will not only be a means to stir up the children , to make them quick-handed , but also the teachers , and the corporation will both gain by it , for the better preserving the stock for the good of the city ; as for example , the five women having 20 children a piece to govern , if each woman after a while , can by her industry and care , bring her 20 children to earn 12 d. a week a piece , this will bring to the teacher 20 d. per week , but when the children come to earn 18 d. per week , than it will be 2 s. 6 d. per week , which amounts unto yearly 6 livre. 10 s.  

So that with the allowance of the corporation 5 li. per annum , with her own care and industry to forward the children , will amount yearly to 11 li. 10 s.  

Consider , if the corporation allow a competent maintenance to every officer , they shall be sure not to want an officers or teacher , when any dye or be removed , for people will sue for an office in the workhouse , as parents sue yearly to get their children in Christchurch hospital ; besides , after a few years , the corporation will have teachers of their own training up , to serve their occasion when ever they need . 

Having shown the total of all the salaries , for all the officers amounting to yearly 120 livre. 

3 i come now to speak of the charge of diet for the 100 children , this will be a thing uncertain , because all the whole 100 children May not be at the charge of the corporation for thee meals a day , whether they be strangers or inhabitants , for that were to bring a vast charge upon the corporation and city ; and if the corporation should entertain all that come East , West , North , and South , they should have ten strangers for one parishioner , i believe it is not so intended by them , but rather the livelihood they appoint , is for such children that are in the parish where the workhouse is , or such parishes adjoining near , or about the workhouse , viz. such children who have neither father , nor friend ; but the parishes , and they ought to be the fathers to them to provide for them , and such children must have three meals a day , and lodging with it . 

Another sort of poor children there are , who are the children of poor widows , or poor parents , who are so poor they are not abl to pay for their children's schooling 3 d. or 4 d. per week , much less to find them victels , but are enforced to send them , to beg bread , and pottage , or what they can for their livelihood , such as these also to have some allowance three times a day , except on public fast days , they going home to their parents for lodging . 

There is another sort of poor children , whose parents are very poor , yet they send not their children a-begging , yet they fare very hard , scarce eat a piece of meat throughout the year , whose fare for the most part is bread and pottage , and roots in winter , and herbs in summer , or radishes , and salt , with a piece of bread , without butter or cheese , and their drink for the most part , fair water from the pump , and yet blessed be God , tho the fare be mean , yet they are long livers and healthy . 

These poor people if their children Might be allowed one meal a day , and their children's teaching , they would acknowledge it a mercy from God , so to put it into the hearts of good people , to provide for poor children , and others . 

I come now to speak of the allowance of three meals a day , and the charge of it , beginning with the winter season , because then provision is dearer than summer . 

1 for breakfast in winter 3 ounces of household bread , a mess of pottage , and half a pint of drink . 

The charge of this meal is about a ob . 

2 for dinner , 5 ounces of bread , a pint of beer , a mess of pottage , made sometimes of meat , sometimes of milk , and sometimes water-gruel , one herring , or that quantity in other fish , with a turnip with it , to qualify the saltness of it . 

The charge of this meal will be about 1 d. ob . 

3 for supper , 4 ounces of bread , half a pint of beer , one hearing with a turnip , and sometimes broth in cold weather . 

The charge of this is about ob . q 

By this we find , that the charge of three meals a day , amounts to 2 d. ob . q this will be the most , if these three things be considered , for the improvement of diet . 

1 if the fishing trade for the city of London be carried on by the parliament and the city , some pious persons with 600 l. stock , will undertake to bring from sea , fish monthly for the relief of the poor at the workhouse , which will much ease the corporation , and the charge will not be so great as to buy all at London . furthermore if a quantity of London busses May be set out by the parliament and city , the rich and poor in and about London would fare the better by it . 

2 if we May buy one time with another ordinary wheat at 6 s. per bushel , we May allow a child 12 ounces of bread for a penny that is 3 for breakfast , 5 for dinner , and 4 for supper , with other things with it , all which amounts unto each day except public fastdayes   2 d.  ob . •o . By the week it amounts to 1 s.  7 d.  q.  By the year about 4 livre. 3 s.  6 d 

3 some years we May buy wheat for 3 s. and 4 s. per bushel , which now worth 7 s. or 8 s. per bushel , so that when 't is a cheap year of corn , and our own industry and labour ( All hands working ) for carrying on the fishing trade , we shall be abl by God's blessing to find our children food at a cheaper rate than i have set down . 

Consider if one child's dinner cost 1 d. ob . which is for the whole week 10 d. ob . as well Sabbath days as others , for so i hope the corporation do intend to do , that so all boys and girls that come to school or work , May be kept under government on the Sabbath days , as i said before , from rambling abroad . 

Reckon then if one child cost for one meal a day by the week 

    10 d.  ob What will the charge be for the year 2 li . 5 s.  6 d.  Then reckon for 50 children a year is 113 li   15 s.  Consider then , 50 children 3 meals per day , amounts to by the year about 227 li   10 s.  

Now reckon the charge of 100 children's diet , as well those 50 that are to have but one meal a day , as those that are to have 3 meals a day , and see what the whole charge amounts unto . 

Their charge of diet amounts unto yearly about 341 li. 5 s.  The officers salary amounts to yearly 120 livre.   In all it comes to 461 li. 5 s.  

Here is the whole charge laid down in as low a manner as May be in Christian charity , as well for the smallness of the wages for the officers , as the littleness of the meals for the children ; and tho the allowance be small , yet it will be a great refreshment to many a poor child , for nature is content with littl , and grace with less . Also the contributors to this good work May see the care of the corporation is so much for the good of the city , that they would competently refresh the poor , and not wast and lavish the stock ; but that this charitabl work May be held up for ages , by God's blessing , and good men's endeavour . 

Upon the prosperity of the fishing trade , for the better ease of the charge of diet , if children eat fish 4 times a week ; that is , on Mundays , Wednesday , Fridays , and Saturdays , and meat on Sabbath days , and Thursdays . A quarter of a pound of beef for a child is the allowance of Christ's church hospital to their children ; and on Tuesdays a little dumpling or pudding , a fare that most children delight in ; and this note , if children be refreshed in winter with 7 meals for 10 d. ob . in summer , provision is cheaper . 

4 particular , what profit these 100 children will bring in weekly by their labour towards this great charge . 

Suppose after 2 or 3 months teaching , by the care of the teachers , the children May be brought to earn 12 d. per week a child , one with the other , viz. some children , tho in 2 or 3 months teaching cannot earn 12 d. per week , by reason they are dull , and heavy handed , yet others being quick-witted , and nimble-handed , May earn above 12 d. per week , so that one with the other , they May earn 12 d. per week or more . 

Reckon if 100 children by their labour , earn 12 d. per week one with the other , it amounts to per week , 5 li . and 5 li. per week , by the year amounts to 260 li. 

The charge of officers , and diet , being yearly 461 livre. 5 s.  The loss is yearly 201 livre. 5 s.  

Consider then , when the children come to earn 18 d. per week or more , the loss will not be so great ; but put the ease the corporation should lose 200 li. year , yet the church of God , and the commonwealth will gain by it , but he that seeks his own interest above the honour of God and the commonwealth , shows himself to be no true friend to God , nor the commonwealth ; therefore i counsel all people high and low to their uttermost , advance the honour of God , and the good of the commonwealth , lest they fall and perish , as many great men have done of late ; for 't is dangerous when God and a commonwealth , eyes a man as no friend to them . 

The work of well-ordering the poor is a rare work , and by it three excellent things will be produced , toward a good reformation . 

1 God's honour will be set up , when that that is good is advanced . 

2 the people of God will rejoice , when sin in children and others is beat down . 

3 the poor children will have a benefit by it , because thereby they are like to be made serviceabl for the commonwealth ; otherwise , they will be as thorns in the sides of the nation ; wherefore i rejoice when i see great men in high places to have pious hearts , and public spirits , such persons God , and a nation will stand for , against all their enemies , and he will make their enemies to be at peace with them . 

But as for such that are enemies to this good work , either by opposing it in their words , and works , or by starving it with their poor and small charities , i fear God hath a curse for them here , or a woe for them hereafter , when Christ shall say , go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil , and it is angels : and Christ will say to such , inasmuch as ye have not done it to the poor , ye have not done it to me : such opposers of charitabl good works , when they shall come upon their deathbeds , they will then wish they had given half their estates with Zacheus , that they could then obtain the love of a Christ , and the happiness of a Zacheus , that salvation Might come unto their house , as it did unto his ; therefore i wish all rich men that desire to obtain the love of a Christ , to make their hands and their eyes , their first executors , because their last executors May deceive them , as some have done . 

Consider , if children are kept under government and employment , they are the fit for tradesmen , & others , and so thereby , made serviceabl to the commonwealth , so that the loss of 200 l. is the preserving of 100 children from ruin : therefore we conclude , if the city of London should lose 1000 l. per annum in this work , yet they would gain by it , in the preservation of 500 children , and more ; for if children are not kept under a government , they will in time grow to a generation of ungodly wretches , having no fear of God before their eyes , and so become a dishonour to God , and a burden to the commonwealth . 

Therefore let us judge seriously , which will be the greatest loss , either money or people to a commonwealth ? viz. whether 500 children should perish yearly , rather than the city of London should lose 1000 l. over and above their other common charity ? 

If ungodly , uncharitable muck-worms should say , we had rather see 500 children beg and starve yearly , rather than the city of London should lose 1000 l. yearly towards poor children's education and relief ; i would say to such unchristian like people , as St. Peter said to Simon Magus , thy money perish with thee ; so say i , let their money perish with them , rather than poor souls should perish for the want of so small a portion of food for a meal , as i have set down before . 

And whereas the loss of 200 li. ariseth in the dieting of 100 children , if these ensuing helps May be gained ; the loss will then be very little , which is by way of gathering from bakers and others , who give bread one or two days a week constantly to the poor at their doors , but if the poor of the work-houses Might have it , they would rather give it there . For i understand there are many honourable and rich persons in and about London are resolved to give no more at their doors , since they have heard of a corporation appointed to regulate the poor by work , and other good government , therefore as Christ said . take up the fragments that nothing be lost . i believe the practice of this will save the city of London , 500 l. per annum or more , otherwise it will be lost . 

As i have spoken of the officers and their salaries , so i desire to show what is the chief work of a steward to do , and what the schoolmasters work is , and the cook or sutler's is , 

1 the steward's work is , to keep books of accounts , one book is , what he receives from the treasurer , either monies , or materials received from the public store house , appointed by the corporation , for the laying in of wool , hemp , flax , &c.  

The second book is , what commodities are delivered out , to work-people in the house , or abroad . 

3 book is , for the commodities received when 't is wrought . 

4 book is , to take notice of what loss was in any pounds of wool , hemp , flax , or cotton wool , as well in weight as tale , this will be a means to prevent stealing and carelessness , such losses the workers to make good , besides the allowance , some Masters allow one ounce in the pound loss in children's work . 

2 his care is to see to the house , that it be swept and washed , and kept clean and wholesome , when the corporation or strangers come into it , to see the persons at work . 

3 his care to see the instruments belonging to the work persons , that they be preserved , and if any hap to be broke , or out of order to see them repaired , and to buy such things as the corporation shall appoint . 

These are the chiefest things the steward is to perform , for the honour of the work . 

The office of the schoolmaster is , 

1 to pray with the persons once a day at least . 
2 to teach the children to read & write , 2 hours in a day , one in the forenoon , the other in the afternoon , the rest of the day to work 
3 to read the laws and orders at certain times to the children , to the end they May know how to walk before God and men , for the law read , is a terror to mild children , and such will reproov others that are more stuborn , saying i will tell my Master , because you did swear , or you did this or that evil , contrary to the laws of the workhouse , these words falling from the child will daunt the reprooved . 
4 to exercise those gifts , God hath given him , on the Sabbath days , by prayer , reading of chapters , and sermons , as aforementioned , and catechising the children , by this means the streets and fields will be cleared of many idle children who now spend their days in wickedness , to the dishonour of God , and the disgrace of this city , and common wealth . 


When God shall be pleased to bring this government , then rich and poor , affected with goodness shall say , happy art thou oh England in this thy reformation , and blessed be thy god for it . 

3 the office of the cook or sutler , to provide such provision for the children as the corporation shall appoint . 

1 by taking care , that all such provision that shall be given weekly by well disposed persons , for the comfort of poor children , whether it be bread from bakers , beer and broth from taverns inns , & others , or what else any shall provide , for the maintenance and upholding this good work . 

2 for his better livelihood , that he provide bread and beer , and such like for the comfort of poor persons that work in the house , for they will be glad to have it nigh them , that they May not be hindered of their work : besides , the having of it by small quantities , farthings and half penny worths , as they have need . 

These are the chiefest things , that these three officers are to act , for the glory of God , the honour of the corporation , and the comfort of the poor , that none May perish for want of bread , as many have done of late ; witness some about Westminster that lived upon dogs and cats these deer and hard times ; others upon beasts blood and brewer's grains boiled together , and the poor woman that killed her child , and died for it the last sessions 1649. upon her examination , she confessed extreme need and fear of famine occasioned it . 

To conclude , for the better relief of the poor , it was well observed of one , who said , that England had many hundred of acres of waft and barren lands , and many thousands of idle hands , if both these Might be improved , England by God's blessing would grow to be a richer nation than it is now by far . 

A parliament power would do much towards this work , to make it general throughout the nation , by causing all planting of tobacco to be thrown down in England , which is a hindrance to the poor Englishmen beyond the seas , and a wrong to the custom , if they sell it in other countries for want of vent here , that such lands May be employed in sowing hemp , and flax , and roots , and planting of trees for fruit and fuel , all which would be a great succour to the poor , as well to employ them , as relieve them ; the parliament have intentions to make this good work of employing and relieving the poor , generally throughout the nation . The great God of heaven is able to make them to act and perform it for a general good . 

Finis . 

April 12. 1650.  Imprimatur , John Downam . 























