A sermon preached to the two houses of parliament , at their solemn meeting to praise God for his infinite mercy in the restoring of the said houses of parliament to their honour and freedom with so little effusion of blood : at the Abbey-church in Westminster , aug. 12. 1647.  By Stephen Martial , b.d. minister of Finchingfield in Essex . 

and David said to Abigail , blessed be the Lord God of Israel , which sent thee this day to meet me . And blessed be thy advice , and blessed be thou which hast kept me this day from coming to shed blood , 

1 sam. 25 , 32 , 33.  

scatter thou the persons that delight in war , 

psal. 68 30.  

London , printed by r. Cotes for Stephen Bowtell , at the bible in popeshead-alley , 1647.  

die veneris , 13 augusti , 1647.  

Ordered by the Commons assembled in parliament , that thanks be given to Mr. Martial , for the great pains he took in the sermon he preached yesterday before the Lords and Commons the day of public thanksgiving : and that he be desired to print his sermon with the usual privilege . Sir William Massam is appointed to give him the thanks of this house ; and to desire him to print his sermon accordingly . 

H. Elsing , cler. parl. d. com.  

i appoint Stephen Bowtell to print my sermon : 

Stephen Martial . 

to the right honourable the Lords and Commons assembled in parliament . 

My Lords and gentlemen , 

I am not ignorant of the truth and weight of that speech of Pliny , aliud est scribere uni , aliud omnibus : the same holds of preaching , it 's one thing to preach a sermon to a congregation , another thing to preach it to all the world in print ; especially upon such an occasion as this , and such a season as this , when the spirit of jealousy and misunderstanding is let loose , and men's hearts as tinder ready to catch and kindle at every spark ; yet since you are pleased to conceive that this plain sermon May be useful to others , and thereupon to order my publication of it , i humbly obey your order , desiring the Lord's blessing to accompany it so far as to make men wisely consider the wonderful works of God , and return to him the glory due unto his name ; the same Lord watch over you , sanctify you and guide all your consultations , that you May be his blessed instrustruments to make this land a quiet habitation for his persons , and a place which himself May delight in : this is the daily prayer 

Of your humble servant in the Lord's work s. m.  

A thanksgiving-sermon preached to the two houses of parliament , August 12. 1647.  

Joshva 22. part of the 33 verse . 

and the children of Israel blessed God , and did not intend to go up against them in battle , to destroy the land wherein the children of Reuben and Gad dwelled . 

We are this day assembled to bless and praise the name of God for his infinite mercy , in restoring the two houses of parliament to their honour and freedom , with so little effusion of blood ; and for keeping the great city and army from dashing one against another . And i ( Being called to this service ) did endeavour to find out a text suitable to this mercy , because a word spoken in season , is like apples of gold in pictures of silver ; a sermon suited to the occasion of time , and place , and persons , is not only more acceptable , but profitable : but i confess , that in all the book of God i could not find one instance where his own persons were so near imbruing their hands in each others blood , and God so wonderfully appearing to prevent it , as in this our case ; this that i have read comes the nearest to it of any other ; for here were brethren of the same country , and of the same religion , who had for a long time been engaged in one common war against enemies which God had subdued before them ; and there remained nothing , but for them quietly to settle themselves in the fruition of all the good that God had wrought for them ; and now in the very close of all , they were ready to destroy themselves , and devour one another upon mistakes and jealousies , when no other enemy could do it ; and we have here also a most blessed end of it by a treaty , wherein God did so remove all stumbling-blocks , that their hearts were firmly united , and they joined together to bless God , and resolved not to go to war . 

Which , that it May be the more profitable to you , i pray take a very brief view of the story : when the wars were ended in the land of Canaan , the two tribes and half , the tribes ( I mean ) of Reuben and Gad , and half the tribe of Manasseh , whose habitation and possession lay on the other side of Jordan , were now to return home , and their brethren had dismissed them with a blessing ; but before they got out of the country there fell out an occasion of a quarrel and discord between them and their brethren , which begins about the tenth verse of this chapter , and all the rest of the chapter is a discourse about that discord and jar that grew between the nine tribes and half , and the two tribes and half ; wherein there are these two things , first , the original of the quarrel , or the causa procreans , what the difference was betwixt them ; secondly , causa corrumpens , the composure of it , the making an end of it : the original of the quarrel , briefly was this , the two tribes and half when they came upon the banks of the river Jordan , did there build an altar every way like to the altar of God , which by God's appointment was to stand before the ark , and the tabernacle , upon which only the Israelites were to offer their sacrifices ; this news was presently carried to the rest of the tribes , and they looked upon it , as if their brethren had built an altar to offer sacrifice to God , which had been crimen apostasiae , an apostasy from then true religion , and they resolved presently in this quarrel to engage their lives , and appoint a general rendezvouz at Shiloh where the ark of the covenant was , here they all met as one man togoe up to war against them ; here was their quarrel ; the rest of the chapter is the taking up of this quarrel , and that was done by a treaty , the sum whereof in a few words , is this , the tribes did send ten men , one for every tribe , and with them they sent Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest , they go as commissioners to their brethren , and when they come to them they first expostulate the greatness of the sin , which they thought they were committing , they show them the mischief that would come of it , not only destruction upon themselves , but upon all the whole congregation , unless they in the name of God should revenge it : this they prove by the example of the iniquity of Peor , from which they were not yet cleansed , and by the instance of Achan's sacrilege , which brought wrath upon all the congregation of Israel , but withal they request them , that if they thought their land was unclean , because they had not among them those pledges of God's presence , the ark and testimony , which their brethren had , that they would leave that country where they should be exposed to such temptations , and with all their hearts , they would part with a portion of their own inheritance , that they Might live together as brethren . To this the tribes and half make answer ; first , they do solemnly call God to witness , that they were far from being guilty of that which was laid to their charge , it never came into their thoughts to build an altar to offer sacrifice , they pleaded not guilty . secondly , they tell them the true reason of that fact of theirs , namely they were afraid lest the generations to come , Might occasion their posterity to fall off from the true worship of God , when the rest of the tribes should tell them that Jordan was the bounds of God's people's inheritance , and so they be cast off as persons that were not within the communion of saints : hereupon they resolved to build this altar , that it Might be a pledge , and that the generations to come Might plead it , that this was set up at the time , when the wars ended , to remain as an evidence that they and their brethren were all one , both in nation and religion . Which as soon as the commissioners heard , they rejoiced , they concluded God was amongst them , and they return home and acquaint their brethren with it , who when they heard it were all well pleased ; the thing pleased the children of Israel , and they blessed God , and resolved they would have no war with their brethren . 

Here is the sum of the story , and in this story there are very many excellent things for our instruction : this altar built on the banks of Jordan , is much debated of in the dispute of human significant ceremonies in the worship of God or for religious use . Whether such ceremonies May be justified by this example , is very disputable , but without any dispute , here are many notable examples of piety ; it was a great example of piety in the two tribes and half , that they were so desirous to provide that their posterity Might not be deprived of the communion of God's persons in his ordinances . 

And a great example of piety there is in this , that they were so ready by ( not only protestations , but ) oaths to clear themselves from any thought of corrupting the worship of God . 

We have also a great example of piety in the other tribes , that in such a cause , as the case of apostasy from God's truth , they would not have spared the lives of their own brethren . 

And a great example of piety was in them , that they were so desirous by all arguments , to take them off from any such sinful way , yea to have parted with their own inheritance to them , rather than they should be exposed to temptations to apostasy . 

Here are notable examples likewise of justice amongst them ; justice in the tribes , that before they would believe any informations , or apprehensions of their brethren , they would send commissioners to know the bottom of it , to see whether the things were so ; and justice in the commissioners , that they did so faithfully relate backe to the tribes the true state of the case , and so to hinder as much as in them lay the effusion of blood . 

Here are likewise some examples of human frailty , that are not to be excused ; it 's not to be excused in the two tribes and half , that they would go upon such a dangerous business , which is disputable to this very day , whether such a thing was lawful to be done , to set up such a way of instruction or remembrance , that they would go about such a thing which Might prove a stumbling block , and not first acquaint their brethren with their intentions . 

And as great or greater weakness was that in the nine tribes and half , that they would almost resolve upon a war , and make preparations for it , upon a rash and wrong interpretation , before they did so much as know , whether there were cause or no . 

But the greatest document of all the rest in the whole story , is that which they made the ground of their war , which you 'll find about the 23.  Verse , that if their brethren had played the apostates from God in matters of his worship , the wrath of God would presently fall upon the whole nation , unless they had joined together to vindicate the glory of God . 

All these & several other lessons are worth the handling , but i resolve to make a short sermon , and therefore wave them all , and confine myself to that , which is the result , and event of the treaty , which was a solemn thanksgiving to God ; they blessed God , and they resolved , not to go to war against their brethren ; the words are clear , and i think need no interpretation ; they blessed God , that their brethren had not committed the sin that they were afraid they had done ; and that therefore the wrath of God was not like to be kindled against them ; and as the close of both these , that God had mercifully prevented that which they feared , that they should have been compelled to imbrue their hands in one another's blood , they blessed God that there was no cause of fighting . And from this i shall ( By the Lord's assistance ) handle this , and this only lesson . 

that it is a mercy worthy of abundance of praises to God , when God doth seasonably appear to prevent his people's engaging in one another's blood , when they are near to do it . 

This lesson lieth clear in the words , 1 in the 31.  Verse . as soon as Phinehas had heard their apology he tells them , this day we perceive the Lord is among us , now you have delivered the children of Israel out of the hand of the Lord . and all this congregation here in my text bless God and intend not to fight , they rejoiced because the ground of a war was prevented ; and for further proof of it , look into a few plain texts of scripture , you shall find one in the 1. of Samuel 26. about the 32.  Verse . It is an example of David , who upon an unworthy usage of a gentleman in the country , a great man , one Nabal , that had extremely provoked him , and abused him , had sworn that he would cut off his family , and not leave a man of them ; and in his heat was going to avenge himself , but as he was in the midst of his March , Abigail nabals wife meets him , tells him the story , insinuates into him by her excellent counsel , endeavours to stop his hand from his enterprise ; now mark how David rejoiceth in it , though the war would have been but against one family , where he was to meet with no resistance ; blessed be thou of the Lord , and blessed be God that sent thee to me , and blessed be thy counsel that hath withheld my hand from shedding blood ; he looked upon it as a wonderful mercy , that when he was ready to engage , God had offered such a fair means to take him off from it . There is another in the second of Samuel , of a great soldier and general , Joab by name , when he was in the pursuit of one Sheba , that had played the rebel and traitor against his King , Joab had pursued him far , and now had chased him into a city called Abel , there besieged him and the city for his sake , with a purpose to batter the walls down , and to destroy all that were in the city , as guilty of protecting this villain ; very seasonably a wise woman over the wall calls to Joab , and would know of him , why he would come to destroy a city of Israel , and so to swallow up a part of the inheritance of the Lord ; now mark Joab's answer , the Lord forbid , saith he ) God forbid , it is far from me , that ever i should take any pleasure to devour , or swallow up ; there is no such matter ; there is one Sheba a traitor against his King , i pursue him only , deliver him up , i am gone , not a man dyes amongst you . You see a soldier , a man enured to blood , abominates the thoughts of it , further than necessity compels , to have his hand in the blood of any of God's persons . This will yet be clearer , if you consider , that the Lord himself looks upon it , as the saddest judgement , that ever he gives his persons up to , when he suffers them to imbrue their hands in one another's blood . Take but one or two instances , that in the 9 of Isaiah at the 19 verse ; through the wrath of the Lord ( Saith the text ) the land is darkened , the wrath of God was like a furnace , and the smoke of it filled all the land , and the persons shall be as fuel to this fire ; this was a terrible judgement which is expressed in such dreadful terms , darkness and devouring fire are horrid things , nothing more intolerable than these two ; but what was this judgement , or by what means should this fierce wrath of God be executed ? mark the next words , no man shall spare his brother , they shall snatch on their right hand and be hangry , and snatch on their left hand and not be satisfied , they shall every man eat the flesh of his own arm , Ephraim against Manasseh , and Manasseh against Ephraim , and both of them together help to devour Judah ; no man ever hated his own flesh , faith the apostle , but this persons should be so blinded , and so given up to a reprobate sense , that they should devour and destroy their nearest friends , and eat as it were the flesh of their own arms . If ever God give up a persons to this , that brethren thus come to engage in one another's blood , it is a token that the wrath of God burns the hottest that it can burn against a land . Take one expression more , it is in jer. 13. 14.  i will dash them one against another , even the fathers and the sons together , saith the Lord , i will not pity nor spare , nor have mercy , but destroy them ; a strange expression from a god of mercy , whose delight is in mercy , i will not pity , show no mercy ! kill , kill , kill ; but how shall this be executed ? why , i will dash them one against another , without any enemy from abroad , there shall be no need to send for strangers , the father shall destroy the children and children their fathers , and a man's murderers shall be his neighbours or the men of his own household ; you May by these plainly discern that God accounts it the terriblest of all judgements to give his persons up to destroy each other , and therefore it must be acknowledged a great mercy to have it prevented . 

To this i Might add , that in God's book , those men that are the occasions of people's ruining one another are accounted the most ahominable ; and they that endeavour to prevent it , are Counted the blessedest men that live ; this is one of the things that God's soul hates , even that man that sow's dissension amongst brethren , boutifews and kindle-fires are an abomination to him , and he will scatter the persons who delight in war , he will destroy the bloodthirsty man : the peacemakers that labour to compose and comprise differences , to keep persons from it , are blessed ; blessed are these peacemakers , they shall truly he called the children of God . but to open this truth more fully , give me leave to clear these three things . 

First , that bloodshed war is a terrible judgement , wherever it is , fall it out among whom it will . 

Secondly , that it is yet a greater judgement , when brethren come to devour and destroy one another , brethren of one nation ; civil wars is a greater judgement than war with strangers . 

Thirdly , and above all . 

The greatest of all judgements is , when God's persons who are brethren in the profession of his true religion , come to imbrue their hands one in another's blood : these things opened it will certainly be concluded , that God's mercy in preventing this , is most worthy to be acknowledged . For the first , 

that to have a persons given up to war , and blood , and spoil , is a great plague . you all know in the scripture it is Counted one of God's sorest judgements , ezek. 14. 21.  When i send my four sore judgements upon Jerusalem , the sword , and the famine , and the noy some beast , and the pestilence to cut off man and beast , the sword is the first and chief of God's sore judgements : it is granted that sometimes war is lawful , and necessary ; and indeed never lawful but when necessary ; when as the saying is , pax populi , patriaeque salus & gloria regni , when public safety , liberty and religion have no other way to preserve them under heaven but the sword , the sword is then lawful and then necessary : but however war May sometimes be lawful , it is always a great judgement , at least to the one part , if not to both ; it is the idea of all miseries that can befall a country ; nothing thrives where this wolf sets his foot ; and he that would have a landscape of it , that would have a representation of war , let him but conceive the burning of houses , confused noise , garments rolled in blood , ravishing of women and virgins , and dashing of infants against the stones , destroy of trade , spoil of wealth , blood , and wrath , and fury Marching everywhere , a country like the land of Eden before the face of man , and nothing but a desolate wilderness when once it have walked over it ; a land sown with the seed of man and beast , fruitful and flourishing , suddenly made an Aceldama , a Golgatha , a field of blood , or a place of skulls , this is war : in a word , if a man would in one short sentence describe a country to be most miserable , he need say no more , but hic fuit hostilitas , war hath raged and reigned in this place ; ourselves , alas , for these years past , have had so much experience of it , that our women and children are able now to be rhetoricians in setting forth the miseries of war ; and is it not a mercy when God will prevent this ? But secondly , look upon civil wars , and you will judge them a greater judgement , when brethren's swords come to be drawn against their brethren ; when a man's deadly enemies must prove those that were his old companions , when cities are divided among themselves , and countries among themselves , and all the miseries of war come to be inflicted by them that have been acquaintance and dear to us , when safety and shelter May as soon be expected among enemies as old friends ; let all men that have understanding say whether this doth not double , or treble the miseries of war ; had it been an enemy that had done me this displeasure , i could have born it , but tu Brute , thou my friend and companion , that these things should come from thy hand ! all men know how deep this sinks ; this tears the heart of man in pieces ; Solomon saith , that a brother offended is harder to be won then a strong city , and they are like the bars of a strong castle ; it 's hard breaking of them , but when once they are divided they are more hardly joined : as we say of a strong cord made up of a great many threads , it is hard to be broken , but when it is broken , you 'll hard ever sew it again to make it strong ; by how many arguments any did persuade their hearts , that they should not receive plunder , or spoil , or mischief from such a man , or family , from so many arguments ariseth a difficulty , if not impossibility to be reconciled ; and hence arise lasting grounds of animosity , enmity and hatred scarce ever to be worn out , when upon every meeting this thought is suggested , this is the man who as an enemy entered my habitation and spoilt my wealth , it May be murdered my children or parents , ravished my wife or daughter ; add further , that frequently in these civil broils the victory ends not the occasion or ground of the quarrel , nor takes away but increaseth the former misery , the conqueror commonly proving insolent , inhuman , cruel , and more grievous to the commonwealth , than the thing or persons were against whom men have fought , that i May boldly set down for a certain the conclusion of a wise man , that civil wars are not only a malady , but a fiery sickness , even a frenzy to a state ; and how ever God sometimes brings good out of them , ( As sometimes men have better health after a deadly sickness ) yet for the most part , states are never made better , but very often ruined by them ; and when once the seed of it hath took deep root in a land , if God from heaven do not miraculously appear , that fire burns till all is consumed ; and is it not then a mercy from God seasonably to prevent brethren , when they are falling into civil wars , thereby to devour and destroy one another ? But thirdly , which is nearest to my text , and indeed nearest to the occasion of our meeting ; 

The greatest misery of all miseries in the world is , when brethren of the same religion , when God's persons and servants come to be so far prejudiced against one another , or mistaken , that they come to imbrue their hands in one another's blood ; this i say is the heaviest judgement that ever God powers upon his church and persons . There is nothing so contrary to Christianity ; the Lord Jesus Christ is the Prince of peace , his holy spirit is a spirit of peace , his children are all called the children of peace , and by their covenant and duty bound to live in peace , if it be possible they must live in peace with all men , but among one another they must keep the unity of this spirit in the bond of peace , there must nothing hurt or destroy in the Lord's holy mountain which is his church : now when these that are one body have one spirit , have one father , one Lord , one hope , one baptism , one hope of their calling , one everlasting inheritance prepared for them , that these should so far deny their Christianity , as to imbrue their hands in one another's blood , and not be content to let one another live and breath on earth , with whom yet they hope to live eternally and triumphantly in heaven , oh qu•a dementia ! quisialia fando , temperet à lacrymis ! who is able to think of it without horror ? what upon earth brings forth so cursed fruits , as war amongst the persons of God ? Infinite dishonour to God's name , when his redeemed , covenant servants walk so contrary to his rule : religion becomes a stumbling block , a thing even therefore abominated by the enemies of it , when the professors of it shall be looked upon as factious , seditious , turbulent , bloody , hateful and hating one another , it overthrows all power of godliness in their own hearts , when once the grace of love which nourishes all good in the hearts of God's persons is overthrown , and the spirit of God thus quenched in them , grace decays , and the woeful fruits of Satan and sin prevail over them , and now they grow corrupt in their minds and conversation , loose from their God , bitter against their brethren , companions with wicked men , with whom they join against their brethren , and so leave their religion , profession and name , as a curse behind them . Now to have all these prevented , not only war and civil war prevented , but brethren in religion , who are the Lord's persons , hindered from destroying one another , when God seasonably apppeares to prevent all this , is it not a mercy worthy the acknowledgement ? to all this i Might add the excellency of the blessing of peace , which is hereby preserved , that blessing which is the jewel of the world ; yea the unity , peace and love of the church and persons of God preserved by such a seasonable prevention , which is such a mercy as no tongue or pen is able to express . behold how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in unity ; this is like Aaron's garment , this is like the dew upon the mountains of Zion , which makes every seed and every plant of God's planting to prosper ; where this is , the Lord commands his blessing , even life for evermore . A large volume would not contain what Might be said of this precious jewel , which is hereby preserved : but all this further clears it , that it is a mercy worth abundance of praise , when God seasonably appears to prevent his people's engaging in war one against another . 

I come now to the application of it ; and there are but three uses that i shall make of this lesson . First , 

This lesson doth speak very sadly against several sorts of persons : if it be so great a mercy , when God will prevent his people's destroying one of another ; then certain it is a great curse for any to be guilty of making God's persons destroy one another , that is clear ; therefore all such are guilty , as are the moral causes of the destruction of God's persons in blood and war ; i mean , who live in such sins , as for which God in his righteous judgement , gives the sword a commission to come and devour flesh , and to drink blood ; such as are the fins of idolatry and superstition , judg. 5. 8.  Contempt of the word , and ordinances , and ministry , mat. 21. 35. neglecting the day of grace , luk. 19 42. unprofitableness under the means of grace and salvation , esa. 5. 4. living in sins of blood , ezek. 35. 6.  Carnal security , laying nothing to heart , jer. 5. 12. abuse of peace and plenty , deut. 28. 47. trusting in an arm of flesh , 2 chron. 16. 9  Sabbath breaking , 2 chron. 36. 21.  Pride in apparel , Esay 3. 16 , 25. want of compassion to them who live and lie under the misery of war , Amos 6. 67.  For these sins , and such as these are , God hath threatened to send a sword , to avenge himself upon the doers of these things , and upon the nations where these live unpunished : and therefore let all such who dare walk in any of these ways , know , that however they May go for good patriots amongst men , when they happen to take the right side in these public quarrels , yet before God they will one day be found guilty of the rapine , and blood , and spoil , and plunder , and all the miseries that war hath brought upon us , and if they repent not of it , let them be assured , it will one day lie at their door , and they must answer for it . Secondly , 

It speaks more terribly against those that are the physical causes of it , that directly and properly do endeavour to widen differences , to divide between King and parliament , between parliament and city , between city and army , that they May by all means keep our wounds open ; and all this for their own private ends and interests . These indeed are cursed men ; whereas good men would be willing to die for their country , a generation of men are found amongst us , that are willing their country should perish for them , or perish with them ; who are willing to have the lives and blood of poor innocents' sacrificed to their lusts ; as if the persons for whom Jesus Christ thought not his own blood too precious for their redemption , were no more worth , then to perish like brut beasts for their cursed and carnal ends ; who , like the priests of Mars , scatter curses and firebrands betwixt army and army , to provoke and raise their fury ; who to their utmost labour that animofities and divisions , blood and contests be kept on foot : these politicians use to take in the differences of religion which are found among God's persons , and weave them into their own designs , and pretend to stand for religion , and join with this and that party for religion-sake , and thereby engage the consciences of such as fear God , when in the mean time religion is no part of their care , but only seek to make use of godly men for their own ends and interests . God will find them out , and reckon with them in his own time . I 'll say no more to them now , but as old Jacob said of his two sons , cursed be their rage ; the instruments of cruelty are in their hands : my glory be not thou associated with them ; into their lot let my soul never come : and let us all prey , that when God comes to call all men to an account , none of us be ever found among the persons that delight in war . And as these are cursed , so truly there is a third sort are not to be excused this day : i mean , 

Whoever they are , who in stead of rejoicing and enlarging their hearts to bless God for this his late mercy showed in preventing the misery and ruin that was coming upon us , have their hearts even grieved , and cannot look upon the work of this day as that which deserveth praise and thanksgiving to almighty God : i would not willingly pass a rash sentence upon any , i know jealousies and misapprehensions have been many on both sides , and God's administrations have been so dark , that the consciences of many godly men have not been clearly satisfied in the carriage of things ; but however , methinks any man that could look upon the Lord's dealing with a single eye , must needs say , it was an infinite mercy , that God should thus unexpectedly turn away that torrent of blood that was coming in upon us : for i beseech you , for what end should it have been ? what good could ever have come of it ? to say nothing of the misery of them that would have had the worst of it , i am certain who ever had been the conquerors , must have taken up the lamentation of the ten tribes , when they had almost destroyed the tribe of Benjamin , in the 21. of judges : and in stead of keeping a day of thanksgiving must have kept a day of mourning , and said alas , alas ! Oh Lord God of Israel , why is it come to pass this day that there should be one tribe lacking in Israel ? alas Lord ! why is it come to pass that either the parliament is destroyed , or alas Lord ! why is it come to pass that the goodly city is destroyed , or alas Lord ! why is it come to pass , that the army that hath done so worthily is destroyed ? certainly who ever had had the best , lamentation and woe would have been written upon every honest heart ; and therefore why all our souls should not be enlarged to praise God for it , join with those who have their hearts enlarged , i know not : nulla salus bello , our fighting could have produced nothing but ruin . 

The second and main use i intended , is , 

To help you this day to give that glory and praise to God , which the mercy of this day calls for at all our hands , God hath in all our public troubles watched over us , and appeared in the mount of all our difficulties , and hath hitherto always found out ways , when we could find none , and always come in with seasonable deliverances , blessed be his name for it , but to my poor thoughts , never did the Lord give a more seasonable deliverance , and appear more mercifully to keep us from utter ruin , then in that mercy , which we meet this day to celebrate , and i think you will judge so , if with me you consider these four things that meet in it : first , 

The sad occasion of our danger . Secondly , 

The persons ( Some of them through misinformation ) who were engaged in the preparation to this new war . Thirdly , 

The propinquity , the near approach of utterruine by it : and fourthly . 

The consequents of it . First , 

The occasion of it : the original was , that most horrid and abominable rape and violence offered unto the two houses of parliament , wherein the most loath some filth and dirt was thrown in the faces of our nobles , and our senators , that i think was ever found in any nation ; confident i am , the like was never done in England ; so great a blot and stain cast upon the parliament , as i May truly say , is tantum non irreparable , when a rude multitude shall by violence compel the honourable houses of parliament to pass what they pleased , shall reproach them , revile them , shall thereaten their lives , shall enter the house , and order what the speaker must propound to the question , what the glerke must write , and after eight hours keeping them prisoners and using them at their pleasure ; when night was coming on the members hardly to escape with their lives ; such an indignity it was , that i am persuaded , if rightly understood , many hundred thousands in this kingdom of England would not Count their dearest blood too great a price to vindicate or expiate ; and as if this were not enough , against the next Friday , printed bills set up , to call all the company together again , and hereby the speakers , and many of the noble Lords and gentlemen compelled to fly , so that they could not with safety of their lives attend the public serieve ; this you know was the original . Secondly , 

Consider the persons that were engaged in preparation for a new war . 

First , the honourable houses took both conscience and honour engaged to have this vindicated , and their safety provided for . 

The general and officers of the army hearing of the violence that was offered to the parliament , resolved to enable the parliament to call it to an account , or they would perish in it ; and thereupon the army that was scattered almost 200.  Miles , within the space of one week , was brought together to a rendezvous , which was within a few hours March of the city of London . 

The city of London ( Not to patronize or protect the insolency offered against the parliament for multitudes of them profess and protest an abhorrency of it ; but ) apprehending that the army would come , and either plunder them , or give laws to them , are presently upon their preparation for defence ; the army on the other side looking upon the city's preparation , judge that the city was resolved to protect this insolency , and villainy that was committed , thus both make all possible preparations . 

Thirdly , take in the propinquity of it , how near this was to execution , so near that i am persuaded most men that looked upon it , did ( As to the judgement of man ) conclude it unavoidable ; we must now dash one upon another ; so near , that the very night before the day , wherein we Might have been embrewitg our hands in one another's blood , there appeared no probability of right understanding between the two differing parties : so near , that i think there was never any destructive work so near the execution , unless it were the gunpowder plot . And lo , now in this nick of time , the Lord appears in the mount , the cloud breaks , the city will trust the army , they will open their works , & their gates to them , the army will trust the city , they will March in peace quite through it , from end to end , no word , or act of hostility between them both ; the speakers and the honourable Lords and gentlemen who were driven away return backe , the parliament fits in peace and safety , and all this preparation for war and destruction ends in a calm ; all this hath God done , but this will yet appear more wonderful , if you take in the fourth consideration , and that is , 

The consequents of it . First , 

What would have been , and must have been if God had not appeared . And secondly , 

The consequents that are , and i hope shall be upon this his merciful appearing for us . 

The consequents that would have been , my tongue cannot express , my heart cannot conceive how sad our condition would have been if the Lord had suffered this near engagement to have been brought to execution , if he had permitted this child of blood to have been born , certainly either the parliament , that hath so diligently and constantly consulted the good of the kingdom , city , and army , must have been destroyed , or the army that hath fought so faithfully , resolutely and successfully , for parliament , for kingdom and city , must have been destroyed , or the city which in the worst of our times hath so cordially with their state and blood adhered to parliament and army , must have been destroyed , and in the destruction of any one of these , i am able to apprehend nothing , but the ruin and destruction of them all , we should have seen a sad catastrophe , an end of all the expected hopes , even the giving up the ghost of what we have fought and contended for hitherto ; we had seen the embryo of reformation strangled , and made an end of , we had seen all delivered up into the hands of that party , that was full with the expectation of such a day , and now doubted not but all must be in their hands , who hoped soon to give laws both to parliament and army , city , and ministers , to all godly persons , by what names or titles soever they be called , each should be carved out , what they would have allotted unto them . In a word , actum esset , there had been an end of England for any good days that we should have hoped for ; but the Lord appearing hath prevented this , and given us hopes of better things , for already we have that which Phinehas took as a blessed fruit of his embassage here in my text , we perceive this day that God is with us ; this day have we a further pledge that God is not weary of the parliament of England , not weary of the city of London , not weary of the army , but his interposing thus seasonably to take weapons out of their hands , shows us new evidence of his watchful eye , of his careful heart , to do good to us all , gives us a further proof that he hath ways of deliverance when we have none ; and is not that a blessed consequence ? and this likewise we see already , that the parliament not only sits in peace and safety , but hath an opportunity put into their hands to send some timely succours to Ireland , that our brethren there May have cause to bless God with us , and for us , and to settle and make a comfortable close of the long calamities of England , and the King and parliament , city and army come to a better understanding each of other : there May be such consequences and fruit of it , if God please to bless and guide the parliament , to improve it , that the generations to come shall have great cause to praise God for appearing upon that day , when he kept his persons from imbruing in one another's blood . Now , honourable and beloved , is not this a mercy worthy of acknowledgements have we not cause to say this day , lo , this is our god , and we have waited for him , and he will save us ; this is our god , we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation : hath not the Lord done very mercifully , when as beyond our expectation he hath put this song of praise into our mouths ? whereas this day we Might have all been flying into caves or deserts , or seeing our dearest friends blood pouring out , and ourselves given up for a spoil : oh if you understand these things aright , give glory to God who hath vouchsafed this mercy to us . 

Since the Lord hath appeared thus mercifully , given us such a pledge as he hath done , let us all endeavour to improve this mercy : what shall i render to the Lord , is the constant question of a thankful heart ; so is this also , how shall i use this mercy aright . we must study therefore how to improve this great deliverance : for our help herein , i humbly commend two directions , one in general , which concerns all of us ; the other more particular , which properly concerns you the honourable Lords and gentlemen of the two houses of parliament . 

For all of us : besides all those uses which should be made of every deliverance , which are , to teach us , to turn to God , to believe in him , to trust him for time to come , to tell abroad his wonderful works which he hath done : besides all these , methinks this mercy doth hint to all God's persons , that God is very willing they should study to be reconciled one to another ; for truly ( Brethren ) if we had gone to war now , whatever Might have been the pretended cause , the real truth had been , God's persons had gone to destroy one another ; they that have fought together against their common enemies , who have prayed together , mourned together , loved one another , lived as brethren , contributed , born burdens , done all with one heart and one spirit , now under the pretence of i know not what , must have sheathed their swords in one another's bowels : and when they were so near it , and their father would not permit them , is it not a voice from heaven ; children you must be reconciled ? Doth it not speak to them , as Moses to the two Israelites , Sirs , you are brethren , do not fall out one with another : do not wrong one another ? Had God for our sins left us under this judgement , to help to destroy each other , and then the remainder of us given up into the hands of other adversaries , they would have taught us to be at peace one with another ; we should have agreed in prisons , or in banishment , or in the shadow of death . Oh that the Lord would fix it upon the hearts of all that fear him , to make this collection from this great mercy , that the persons of God must study to be reconciled and united together , and to bear one with another , every one to endeavour to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace : 

More especially ( My Lords and gentlemen ) this dealing of God toward you , seems to call for some notable duties at your hands : let me freely speak a few things unto you . 

1 that God hath oftentimes cast reproach upon you , and humbled you heretofore ; but in this last abasement , the Lord hath set such a stigma , such a mark of scorn , suffering you to be spit in the face , after that manner , suffering the young to bear themselves insolently against the ancient , and the base against the honourable ; that i cannot but say , there was some high displeasure of God , either to your persons , or to the kingdom whom you represent , or both : i do therefore most humbly pray you , that you would search your own hearts , and inquire whether there be not some cause why our gracious God did thus abase you ; certainly a father uses not to spit in the face of his child , if there be not some special cause for it : and i cannot think that the Lord would ever have let such an ignominious act , that carries so much abomination in the face of it , to be offered to a parliament , if he would not thereby put them to search for somewhat , for which they ought to lay themselves low in secret before him : when Shimei did curse and revile David , David presently reflected upon himself , so-let him curse , since God bids him curse David ; he presently remembered how he had dishonoured God in the matter of Uriah , and therefore looked at this reproach as righteously inflicted by the hand of God , how culpable-soever Shimei was in it . I commend it to your serious thoughts , whether as men , or parliament-men , or whether as houses of parliament , the honour and glory of God have not been slighted by you ; and therefore the Lord hath suffered this slight and scorn to be cast upon you ; inquire whether there be not as much cause , why the god of heaven let this reproach be cast upon you , as you have to appoint a committee to inquire who they were that have done it ; i blame not your care in that , but i humbly pray that you would be careful of this . As i would fain have you learn somewhat from the disgrace which God cast upon you : so , 

Principally i desire you to improve the deliverance that now God hath afforded ; he hath now vouchsafed in his mercy to bring you to sit in parliament in safety , that you May consult the welfare of this kingdom , my most humble suit unto your lordships , and you noble gentlemen , is , consider more seriously than ever heretofore , what a task lies upon you , you have a very sick patient of the kingdom of England to cure , it is almost ready to give up the ghost at your door , and in your hand ; now for the Lord's sake , if ever any of you have beforetime thought of any private interest of your own , lay it a side , and now attend wholly to the public , now God hath given you one opportunity more , try whether possibly you can save the kingdom , or no , and in your endeavours i commend only these two heads to your serious consideration . First , 

Know for certain , you can never save this land without God ; if the Lord will not work with you , you can work nothing ; except the Lord build the house , they labour but in vain who build it . But if you will work for God's interest , the Lord will work with you , and carry on your own interests , so far as yours is good : now the Lord's interest in the kingdom is religion , his worship , his truth , his saints , his persons ; let them have the deepest part of your care ; you will but set up a wall without mortar , arena sine calse , sand without lime , if you do not take God along with you ; preserve God's truth in the first place ; buy not peace with the selling of the truth of God . 2 look to God's worship , let that be set up and preserved in purity , and take all rubbish and filth from it . 3 let the ministers be encouraged with countenance , maintenance , provide that every flock May have a shepherd ; and that they May be helped forward , look to universities , those schools of the prophets , out of which May be sent labourers into the Lord's vineyard ; you have begun many good things in this kind , but you have been hindered by many intervening accidents , and the work still hangs , the reformation still sticks in the birth : now make it your great work , be faithful in building God's house , & God will build your house ▪ but if you shall be slight in it , know for certain , you shall never be able to settle the kingdom in civil peace and liberty : when Jehu cut God short in matter of reformation , God cut the civil state short , in matter of authority , liberty and wealth , and gave them up to be like the summer's threshing . 4.  As you should regard his truth , worship , ministry , so you must love , countenance , and encourage his persons , let your eyes be upon the godly in the land , consider their sad condition at this time , they are not only hated by wicked men , but extremely divided among themselves , be you pleased to reach forth a healing hand try whether God will honour you so far as to help to reconcile the divisions that are between God's persons ; that those things that rund and divide their hearts and affections one from another , May be taken away ; make it your care , and God will administer not only occasions , but will help you to do it ; begin it first in your houses , set an example to others to follow you ; oh that God would persuade you to believe that God hath showed you the mercy of this day for this very end , that you are as Joshua the high priest , zach. 3. 2. so many brands shatcht out of the fire , that you Might keep his charge and build his house , i am sure God's portion in the land hath been your safety hitherto , and if you be faithful in this work , it will be your security for time to come ; religion is God's glory , it will be your glory , and the lands glory , yea , the lands security : the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion , and upon her assemblies a cloud and smoke by day , and the shining of a flaming fire by night ; for upon all the glory shall be a defence : let this than be your first and greatest care to look to God's interest in the kingdom . 2 for settling the kingdom in matters of civil liberty and peace , that you would remember , it is unity of hearts , and not power of arms that must settle England ; and had you an army ten times as good and great as it is , unless you carry your affairs so , as to satisfy the hearts of honest men , of men that will be satisfied with reason , though you May carry things on , while your force compels men , yet things so set up , will not long continue , the kingdom will be divided , and you divided with them , and we shall be in danger to be ruined all together ; therefore i beseech you , let the interest of men who will be satisfied with honesty , truth , justice &c. be considered in their due place , carry things so , that no moderate men May wish they had power in their hands to dissolve or cut in pieces that peace and establishment which you shall make , yea , i could wish that even such as are liable to just exceptions Might be gratified with favors , so far as there is hope that they May be won , desperatio fasit audaces , ac fortes : he was a wise statesman who said , saevitia victoris sape facit magnas seditiones ex parvis , severity of conquerors oftentimes makes great seditions to arise out of small ones . But these things i only mention , you are wise , and know what is best in things of this nature : this i am sure of , stand you for God , and he will guide and honour you ; study to settle truth , peace , and unity in the kingdom , and that God who hath now given you such a deliverance beyond your expectation , doth well know how to repair your honour , to take away your reproach out of the land in one day , to make you the most honourable and renowned parliament that ever was ; and can make all these things that have been your discouragements and abasements , to prove so many scales , or degrees to raise you higher in the thoughts of God and man . consider what i say , and the Lord give you understanding in all things . 

Finis . 





introduction . showing the suitableness of the text to the occasion ▪  the sum of this chapter from verse •0 ▪ to the end . a discord between the two tribes and half and the other tribes . wherein two things . 1  the original of this quarrel . 2  the making up of this breach or quarrel . some general observations our of this story . doct. it 's a great mercy when God seasonably appears to prevent his people's engaging in war one against another . 1 sam. 26. 32.  2 sam. 20.  Esay 9 19 , 20. 21.  ier. 13. 14.  prov. 6. 19  matth. 5. 9  This doctrine further cleared by showing three things . 1  2  3  1 war is a sore judgement . 2 civil war a greater judgement . prov. 18 9  3 war of God's persons one against another the greatest of all judgements . rom. 12. 18.  Ephes. 4. 3.  Esay 11. 9  psal. 133. per torum . application . 1 for reproof of three sorts . 1.  of such as live in such sins as bring down judgements . 2.  of such as are physical causes , who endeavour to engage God's persons in war one against another . gen. 49. 56.  3 ▪  nor are they to be excused who praise not God for the mercy of this day . iudg. 21. 3.  use 2.  To provoke to bless God for the mercy of this day . 1.  2.  the greatness of this deliverance appears by considering four things . 3  4  1  the sad occasion of it . 2  the persons engaged in the preparation of a new war . 2  3  3  the nearness of our danger . 4.  the consequents of it . 1.  2.  1.  use 3. 3  Exhort . to improve this deliverance to right ends . 1  to all who fear God , to study peace and reconciliation , since our father is so unwilling we should fight  1 more especially it concerns the parliament to impr•ve it . 1 to search why God thus abased them . Esay 35.  2 to attend their great work now he hath thus restored them . in making religion their greatest care . 2 king. 10. 30.  zach. 3. 2.  Esay 4. 5.  







