LUNATICUS INAMORATUS OR , The Mad Lover . 

Hark how the Welkin thunders ; Hark! stand , stand . 
Dire Flames Belch forth , the Fury's are at hand . 
Pluto by Styx ! Foul Tisiphone avant : 
Ho Proserpina ! beauteous Proserpina , grant 
Me a Boon ; Command that Cerberus lie still : 
Tell the lowed Cur , 't is Amarantha's Will : 
My Amarantha ; She , who 's now at Play 
With Ariadne , in the Milky-way . 
The Studded-crown is staked ; OH unkind part , 
Against a Crown to wage thy Lovers-hart : 
Why Covets Amarantha such a Gemm ? 
Jove shall present thee with his Diadem . 
But , that these cursed - Manacles forbid ; 
I 'd mount the Globe , and place it on thy Head. 
Aurora speak ; What! has my Angel Wone ? 
't is so , 't is so ; now give it , to th' Sun , 
th' day's proud-post ; he 'll drink thy Health at Night , 
In Sweets extracted from his Thetis sight . 
What Plagues are these Cold-chains ? Why , Ixion ! 
Sisyphus , Sisyphus ! lay by that Stone ; 
Pledge Me , and Tantalus : This Glass to Her 
Who Tinds the Stars , keeps Me a Prisoner . 
Come , ye smoky Cyclops , come , Drink apace : 
That , to your Mistress ; next , to Juno's Grace : 
To Neptune now , quafed off ye frolic Slaves ; 
For Neptune Tipples the Impostumed Waves . 
Sirrah Boy , Ganymede , fill up their Bowls : 
't is well ; the Horned-god keeps thirsty-souls . 
more Nectar still , A Tun to him that sits 
Collecting Notions from a Bedlams Wits , 
Arm , arm Alcides ! Sooty Fiends Invades 
The Flowry-borders of the Elizian-shades . 
Charon , Scull , Ferryman , Steer towards Shoar ; 
Stem that proud Wave ; Bear-up , now waft me o'er . 
Whence blows that Gust ? be calm , be calm ; rude Wind 
Obey ; Love , and my thoughts are unconfined . 
Bold slave forbear to touch it ; know that Rose , 
Only to deck my Amarantha Grows . 
The Ruddy-morne has strung of Dewy-pearl ; 
A double Carcanet for thee , my Girl . 
Look , where She comes ; Hyperion stay , 
And strew thy Golden-attoms in Her way . 
Venus , thy Chariot ; quick , How dar'st thou see 
Her walk on foot , that is more fair than Thee ? 
Attendance there ; the Graces I 'll prefer ; 
'T would Grace the Sacred-nine to wait on Her , 
Jove , Tune the Whirling-sphears ; Arion come , 
And Sing my Sweet a Lovers Requium . 
ha Squalled Villain ! Scourge me ; hold , 
I 'm still , I 'm still ; Dear Heart , I was too bold : 
Forbear , I 'm quiet now : the God's can tell , 
My Amarantha does not take this well . 
These Ginn's oppress . 't is Gold , pure Gold ; the Stone , 
Dropped from the Ringlet of an Amazon . 
Hyppolita , perhaps , a Pilgrim might 
Do Adorations to 't , it looks so bright . 
Who Hollows there , Rogue , Captive , Lunatic ; 
If Molops hear , he 'll lash thee to the quick . 
SINGS Her Hair upon Her Shoulders spread ; 
Each curl , a Fringe for Beauty's Bed : 
Jun's-roses in Her Checks are born : 
From either Eye , 
A Serene Sky , 
Opes like the Windows of the Morn . 
Where is my Angel ? Ah! to sleep shrunk in ; 
To 'th fragrant Bud of some choice Jessamin : 
Or rests in Flora's Lap.  
Hark , silence there , does not yond , doleful Bell , 
Sound hollow as it were a mourning knell ; 
What sad departing Soul with lingering breath , 
Disturbs the drowsy Bed-maker of Death . 
For Amarantha , ha , and would she go , 
Not once farewell ; unkind , not let me know . 
Dead , Amarantha dead , draw o'er the Light , 
The sullen Curtains of the gloomy Night : 
Aurora's blushes , darkest Clouds Eclipse , 
Grow pale , as now my Amarantha's lips . 
My Glory dead ? Her Tenement resign , 
Why would she not , an Inmate , dwell in mine . 
See where she hovers , like a Cherubin , 
Hast , hast , bright Soul , to thy Celestial Inn. 
Stay not to Banquet , these insatiate Eyes , 
That must do service at thine Obsequys : 
ye purer Spirits of the Air attend , 
My wand'ring Angel to her journey's end : 
With Sable cloth , the spangled Canopy , 
That every Star may mourn as well as I : 
And as ye pass , her Legacies proclaim , 
To me her heart , to th' World her Virtuous , name . 
Come swift winged Mercury , 't is thou must be 
The Messenger , betwixt my Love and me . 
Where have you hid her Relics ? Let me climb , 
And fix them above the reach of wrinkled Time. 
Go , tell her Hermes , how my thoughts are bend , 
On Parian Cliffs , to raise her Monument . 
Plutus , base Miser , it is thou detains 
My Jewels Cabinet ; thy hollow Veins , 
I 'll rend in sunder ; search the Infenced Deeps , 
Breakup the Cells , where all thy Treasures sleeps . 
Discover what thy Avaricious mind , 
Since the Proleptick Age , hath close confined ; 
Black-warders , of your fordid Masters o'er 
By Dis , and Hell , I conjure you to restore 
His Theft ; How dare you keep what must be set , 
With Columns double Arched on Arraret ? 
Ho , Light-heeled Boy , What hast thou brought me there ? 
A Letter , ha , a Letter from my Dear 
Sealed with a Kiss . 
Who would not over Rapid Torrents wade , 
To kiss the Lips , that this Impression made . 
A curled Lock and Diamond too , by Styx , 
The wanton Archers strange Hyrogliphicks . 
My Amarantha deems me still as wife , 
As when I guessed her meaning by her Eyes ; 
To read these Characters , written by her looks , 
The gravest Cato , would have left his Books . 
From the Region of the Moon . 

Inhabits Amarantha there ? A place , 
Beseeming such a Beauty , such a Grace . 
Tarquin withdraw thy lustful Fancy from her , 
she 's now Diana's chiefest Maid of Honor. 
The sportful Goddess often takes delight , 
To let her wear the Crescent of the Night ; 
And with her smiling Nymphs attending , stray 
O'er Latmos , Ephesus , and Cayria . 
Ovid , thy Courtship she 'll no more approve , 
She must be courted with , Platonique Love , 
Such as the holy Virgin Nun may pant , 
When ended prayers to her Indulgent Saint . 
chaste Votaress , I will offer at thy Shrine , 
Flames , for their purity , shall equal thine . 
Permit me though , when under Morpheus charms , 
To dream I kiss , and keep Thee in mine Arms. 
Soft Rest approach , polluted thoughts be gone , 
thou shalt be Cynthia , I , Endyminon . 
With ALLOWANCE . 

LONDON , Printed by Sarah Griffin . 1667.  

