Certain disputations of right to sacraments, and the true nature of visible Christianity defending them against several sorts of opponents, especially against the second assault of that pious, reverend and dear brother Mr. Thomas Blake / by Richard Baxter ... / Baxter, Richard, 1615-1691. (Printed by R.W. for Nevil Simmons ... and are to be sold by him ... and by Nathaniel Ekins ...,London :1658.)

Certain Disputations Of Right to SACRAMENTS , and the true nature of Visible Christianity ; Defending them against several sorts of Opponents , especially against the second assault of that Pious , Reverend and Dear Brother Mr. Thomas Blake . 

By RICHARD BAXTER , Teacher of the Church in KEDERMINSTER . 

The Second Edition corrected and amended . 

Mark 16.16 . He that Believeth , and is Baptised shall be saved , and he that believeth not shall be damned . 

Luke 14.33 . Whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath , he cannot be my Disciple . 

Acts 3.23 . Every soul which will not hear that Prophet , shall be destroyed from among the People . 

LONDON , Printed by R. W. for Nevil Simmons Book seller in Kederminster , and are to be sold by him there and by Nathaniel Ekins , at the Gun in Paul's Churchyard . 1658.  

Disput. 1  Whether Ministers may admit persons into the Church of Christ by Baptism , upon the bare verbal Profession of the true Christian saving faith without staying for , or requiring any further Evidences of sincerity ? 

Disput. 2.  Whether Ministers must or may Baptise the Children of those that profess not saving Faith , upon the profession of any other Faith that comes short of it ? 

Disput. 3  Whether the Infants of Notoriusly-ungodly baptised Parents have Right to be Baptised ? 

Disput. 4.  Whether any besides Regenerate Believers have a Right to the Sacraments given them by God , and may thereupon require them and receive them ? 

Disput. 5.  De Nomine , Whether Hypocrites and other Unregenerate persons , be called Church-members , Christians , Believers , Saints , Adopted , justified , etc.  Vnivocally , Analogically or Equivocally ? 

Some Reasons fetched from the rest of M ● Blake's Assaults , and from Doctor Owen's and M ● Robertson's writings against me , which acquit me from returning them a more particular answer . 

To the faithful servants of Christ , the Associated Ministers of Worcestershire . Reverend and dear brethren . 

AS I owe you an account of my Doctrine , when you require it , so do I also in some regards , when it is accused by others : which accordingly I here give you ; and with you , to the rest of the Church of God. I take myself also to have a Right to your Brotherly admonitions ; which I earnestly crave of you , when you see me go aside . And that I may begin to you in the exercise of that faithfulness which I crave from you , I humbly exhort you , that in the study and practice of such points as are here disputed ( yea and of all the Doctrine of Christ , ) you would still most carefully watch against Self , and suffer it not once to come in and pled its Interest , lest it entice you to be Man-pleasers , when it hath first made you Self-pleasers , and so no longer the servants of Christ. You are deservedly honoured for your Agreements and Undertake : but it is a faithful Performance that must prepare you for the Reward , and prevent the Doom of the slothful and unfaithful , Mat. 25.23 , 26.  But this will not be done , if you consult with Flesh and Blood , Self-denial and the Love of God in Christ , do constitute the Newman ; The exercise of these must be the daily work of your Hearts and Lives ; and the preaching of these the sum of your Doctrine . Where Love doth constrain you , and Self-denial cleanse your way , you will find alacrity and delight in those works , which to the carnal seem thorny and grievous , and not to be attempted . This will make you to be up and doing , when others are loitering , and wishing and pleasing the flesh , and contenting themselves with plausible Sermons , and the repute of being able pious men . If these two Graces be but living in your hearts , they will run through your thoughts , and words and ways , and give them a spiritual and heavenly tincture ; They will appear in your Sermons and exemplary lives , and give you a special fertility in good works ; They will have so fruitful an influence upon all your flock , that none of them shall pass into another world , and take possession of their everlasting State , till you have done your best for their Conversion and salvation ; and therefore that we may daily live in the Love of God , in Self-denial and Christian unity , is the sum of the prayers of 

Your unworthy Brother , Richard Baxter . 

Kederminster , Jan. 17. 1656.  The Preface . IT is not long ago since it was exceeding far from my thoughts , that ever I should have been so much employed in Controversies with dear and Reverend brethren , as since that time I have been . I repent of any temerity , unskilfulness or other sin of my own which might occasion it , and I am much grieved that it hath occasioned offence to some of the brethren whom I contradict : But yet I foresee that some light is like to arise by this collision , and the Church will receive more good then hurt by it . We are united in Christ , and in hearty Love to one another , ( which as my soul is certainly conscious of ; so I have not the least doubt of it in most of my brethren with whom I have these Debates ) we are so far agreed , that we do without scruple profess ourselves of the same faith , and Church : and where the Consequences of our Differences may seem to import any great distance , which we are fain to manifest in our Disputes , we lay that more upon the opinion than the persons , as knowing that they discern not and own not such Consequences . And if any salt be mingled in our writings ( which is usual in Disputes that are not lifeless ) or it is intended rather to season then to fret , or to bite that which each one takes to be an error , rather than the man that holdeth it ; ( If there be two or three toothed contenders that have more to do with persons then with doctrines , that 's nothing to the rest ) And thus on both sides those that err , and those that have the truth , do show that Error is the thing which they detest , and would disclaim it , if they saw it ; and that Truth is it which they love , and are zealous for it so far as they know it ▪ And doubtless the comparing of our several Evidences , will be some help to the unprejudiced , to the attainment of a clearer discovery of the Truth . 

The greatest thing that troubleth me , is to hear that there are some men , yea ( which is the wonder ) some Orthodox Godly Ministers ( though I hope but few ) that fetch an Argument from our Disputes against the motions to Peace and Unity and unquestionable Duties , which on other occasions are made to them ; and if any Arguments of mine be used to move them , they presently reply , [ If he would promote peace , he should not break it , by dissenting from or writing against his brethren . ] But what if I were as bad as you can imagine , will you therefore refuse any Evidence that shall be brought you , or neglect any duty that God shall call you to ? Will my unpeaceableness excuse yours ? But stay brethren ; do you build the Church's Peace on such terms as these ? Will you have Union and Communion with none but your own Party , that are in all things of your own Opinions ? If these be your grounds , you are utterly schismatical in your foundations , though you should actually get all the Christians in Europe to be of your mind . O! me thinks men that are humble ( as all are that shall be saved ) should be so far acquainted with the weakness of their understandings , as to have meaner thoughts of them , and not to make them the Standard of the Church's Judgement , or the Centre of its Peace . there 's no two men of you all , of one mind in all things among yourselves . 

But I confess your faults excuse not mine ; and I am much too blame , if I be not willing to hear of them & reform them . But I can do nothing against the truth ; it is not in my power to be of all men's minds , when they are of so many and inconsistent . If I agree with some Reverend brethren , it must displease the rest by disagreeing from them . And therefore I have long resolved to study to please God , ( who may be pleased ) instead of men , and do my best to find out the Truth , and entertain it and obey it , as far as I can understand it , and to propound it to others , and leave it to God and them whether it shall be received or not . And for myself to be heartily thankful to any , that will help me to know more , and deliver me from any Error that I am in . 

The Differences that these brethren have blamed me for are in these three points or four : 1.  About the Interest of Faith , Repentance , and other Graces in our Justification . Of this I have not heard from any Brother , that yet he is unsatisfied , since I published my Confession ; save what is in an Epistle to the Sermons on john 17. to which I have long ago prepared an Answer ( and the by-exceptions answered in this Book . ) 

2.  About proving Christianity by Argument ; of which I have heard from none since I published my Papers against Infidelity . 3.  About the Universality of Redemption : and 4.  About the Controversies of this Book . 

For the former of these last , I find a Reverend , Learned man endeavouring to load me with some note of Singularity , I mean D. Ludovicus Molinaeus , in his Preface to his Paraenesis ad aedificatores Imperii in Imperio ( a Book that hath much Learning , and more Truth than is fairly used , the face of it being writhen to frown upon them that own it , and Parties wronged even where Truth is defended , though through the unhappiness of the Distinction oft clouded when it seems explicated , and through — I know not what , the Controversy seldom truly stated . ) This Learned man hath thought it meet , for the disgrace Amyraldus , by the smallness of his success to mention me thus , as his only Proselyte in England , [ Forsan eo consilio Amyraldus cudit suam Methodum , ut Lutheranis subpalparet , & gratiam apud eos iniret , sperans per eam Lutheranos reconciliatum iri Calvinistis : sed reverâ dum falsam studet inire gratiam , nulli parti eo nomine gratus est , nec ulla parte haeret apud Lutheranos , ut censet Calovius clarissimus Wittemberge Theologus ; nec de vincit sibi Anglos aut Belgas : In Belgio enim nulli nisi Arminiano ; in Anglia uni Baxtero , apprime placet ejus Methodus . ] And three leaves after , [ Sed in solatium Dallęo , ut Amyraldus Baxterum Anglum , sic Dallę is Woodbrigium itidem Anglum , peperit proselytam & admiratorem ] It is an ungrateful task to answer a Writing , whose Error is a multiplication of palpable Untruths in matter of fact ; for they are usually more unwillingly heard of then committed . But I shall lay these following considerations in the way of this Learned man , where his conscience may find them 1.  If in England Amyraldus Method do please uni Baxtero , and yet Dallaeus have proselyted Woodbridge also , and Amyraldus and Dallaeus Method be the same , Quaer . Whether Baxter and Woodbridge are not the same man ? 2.  Qu. Whether this Learned man know the judgement of all England ? 3.  I meet with so many of Amyraldus mind in the point of Universal Redemption , that if I might judge of all the rest by those of my acquaintance , I should conjecture that half the Divines in England are of that opinion . 4.  Is it not a thing famously known in England , that this middle way of Universal Redemption hath been by Writing and Disputing and preaching maintained by as excellent Divines for Learning , Judgement , holiness , and powerful Preaching ( as far as we can judge ) as ever England bred ? it 's famously known that B p Usher was for it , that B p Davenant , B p Carleton , B p Hall , Dr Ward , Dr Goad , Mr Balcanquall , being all the Divines that were sent to the Synod of Dort from Britain , were for it : and Davenant , Hall , and Ward , have written for it : that those holy , renowned Preachers , Dr Preston ( of which read Mr Tho. Ball in his life ) , Dr Stoughton , Mr Wil Whately , Mr Wil Fenner , M john Ball , Mr Ezek. Culverw●ll , Mr Rich. Vines , etc. were for it : And many yet living do ordinarily declare their judgement that way . And are not these more than unus Baxterus ? An excellent Writing of joannes Be●gius' to that end , was lately translated here into English , and published by Mr Mauritius Bohemus , a Divine residing in Leicestershire . 5.  Is it not famously known that the Divines of Breme go this way , and the Duke of Brandenburg's Divines , & that Wendeline complaineth to Spanhemius of it : and that Ludovicus Crocius , Mat Martinius , and Iselburge ( besides the British Divines gave it in as their judgement at the Synod of Dort ; so that the Synod hath nothing against it ; and nothing but what this unus Baxterus , and all of his mind do readily subscribe to herein . Nay , is it not manifested that Dr Twiss himself hath frequently written for it ? 6.  Can he that knows the Lutherane and Arminian doctrine believe both these , that the Arminians in Belgia are pleased with Amyraldus Method , and yet that nullâ parte haeret apud Lutheranos ? 7.  Can he that hath read what Davenant , Camero , Amyraldus , Lud. Crocius , etc. have written against the Arminians , and what Grotius , Tilenus , and others of them have written against them , be yet persuaded that the Arminians are pleased with Amyraldus Method , any further than to be lesle dispeased with it then with some others ? 8.  When Mr Woodbridge doth profess but that he is for Universal Redemption in Davenant's sense , [ especially since he read Daile , etc. ] doth this Learned man well infer thence , that he was Dailes proselyte , when the contrary is intimated , yea is the [ fatetur se nondum concoquentem Amyraldi Methodum . ] true or false ? 9  When this unus Baxterus did write a Book for Universal Redemption in this middle sense , before he ever saw either Amyraldus , Davenant , or any Writer ( except Dr Twiss ) for that way , and was ready to publish it , and stopped it on the coming forth of Amyraldus , and was himself brought to this judgement , by reading Dr Twiss , and meditating of it and had in print so long ago professed these things , whether this Learned man should after all this publish to the world , that I am Amyraldus proselyte ? I speak but as to the truth of the report ; for as to the reputation of the thing , I should think it a great benefit if I had the opportunity of sitting at the feet of so judicious a man as I perceive Amyraldus to be 10.  Whether is Calovius a competent witness of the judgement of the Lutherans in general , or a witness capable of dishonouring Amyraldus , when he so unpeaceably and voluminously poureth out his fiery indignation against the moderate Lutherans themselves , that are but willing of Peace , under the name of Calixtians , seeking to make them odious from the honourable name of Georgius Calixtus , who went with them in that peaceable way ? 11.  If it be David Blondell that he means , when he saith of Dailes Book [ Obstetricante magno illìc Viro , sed Armimianorum cultore ] ( and Blondell only prefaceth to it ) Whether any that hath read the writings of Blondell , and heard of his fame , should believe this accusation ? or rather — 12.  Is it a certain Truth or a Calumny that is thus expressed of Dallaeus , [ Certum est tamen hâc Apologiâ maluisse Arminianorum ordinibus inseri , quam sedem inter contrà-remonstrantes tenere ] ? And is it certain , that Dr Molin knows the mind of Dallaeus better than he doth his own , or is sooner than himself to be believed in the report of it ? 13.  Whether the desire which he expresseth that Camero had been expelled , and the words that he poureth forth against him , do more dishonour Camero or himself ? And if that Article of Justification were sufficient ground of his condemnation and expulsion , and consequently Olevian , Scultetus , Vrsinus , Paraeus , Piscator , Alstedius , Wendeline , Gataker , and abundance more should have tasted of the same sauce , Whether these persecuting principles savour not of too high an esteem of their own judgements , and tend not either to force an implicit faith in the Ministry , or to depopulate the Church , and break all in pieces ? And whether more credit is to be given to the judgement of this Learned man , against Camero , or to the general applause of the Learned , Pious and Peaceable Divines of most Protestant Churches ? For instance , such as B p Hall's , who in his Peacemaker , p. 49. saith of him , that he was [ the Learnedest Divine , be it spoken without envy , that the Church of Scotland hath afforded in this last age . ] 14.  Whether this Learned man had not forgotten his former Triumph in the supposed unsuccessfulness of Amyralds' Method , and the paucity of his partakers or approvers , when he wrote this in deep sorrow for the Churches of France , [ Seriò ingemisco Patriae & Ecclesiis in ea reformatis , quod jam totos viginti annos Methodus Amyraldi impunè regna verit : nemine intrà Galliam hiscere audente , aut ullo vindice veritatis ibi exurgente ] & do these words show his desire of Peace or Contention in the Church ? 15.  Whether it be truth that he saith , that all the Divines of the Assembly at Westminster were against Amyraldus Method , when Mr Vines hath often and openly owned Davenant's way of Universal Redemption ; and others yet living are known to be for it ? 16.  Whether it be proved from the cited words of their Confession , c. 8.  § . 5. that such was their judgement , when they express no such thing ? And I have spoken with an eminent Divine , yet living , that was of the Assembly , who assured me that they purposely avoided determining that Controversy , and some of them professed themselves for the middle way of Universal Redemption . 17.  Is there one man in Oxford or Cambridge ( besides himself ) that believes his next words , [ pari obelo confodiunt hanc Methodum quotquot sunt body Doctores & Professores Oxoniae & Cantabrigiae ] except on supposition that the foregoing words be untrue which pari relateth to ? 18.  Is it probable that Dr Twiss was an enemy to that doctrine of Redemption which he hath so often asserted , viz [ That Christ died for all men , so far as to purchase them pardon and salvation on condition they would repent and believe ; and for the Elect , so far further as to procure them faith and repentance itself : ] which he hath oft in many writings as to Mr Cranford's charge concerning his severe accusation of Dallaeus , and judging his very heart to be guilty of such dissimulation , as [ that he wrote not seriously , but contrary to what he thought , and that nothing could be more illiterate . I shall not put the question , whether it be probable that these words could pass from such a man , because he is alive to vindicate himself , if the report be false , or to own it , if true . 19  Do all the contemptuous expressions of a Dissenter so much dishonour the judgement of Dallaeus , as this Dissenters own praise of his former writings doth honour it , when he saith of him , [ A quo nihil hactenus prodii● quod non esset judicii acerrimi , eruditionis reconditissimae , & dostrinae sanctissimae , aut candidissimum pectus non referret ; in quo nulla suspicio malignitatis insideret ; multò minùs eâ aetate seriâ & serâ erupturae , cum lenit albescens animos capillus ] This is enough to make a stranger conjecture , that the man is not grown either such a fool as to err so grossly as is pretended , or such a knave as to write in the matters of God against his own judgement . And indeed he that will prove himself a wiser , a much wiser man in these matters than Dallaeus , Blondel , Amyrald . etc. must bring another kind of evidence for the honour of his Wisdom , then Dr Molin's Preface or Paraenesis is . 20.  Is it not an indignity to the dead , which the living should hear with a pious indignation , for this Learned man to feign that B p Usher thought so contemptuously of Amyraldus Method ? Whatever he might say of him in any other respect , it 's well known that he owned the substance of his doctrine of Redemption . The high praises therefore which Dr Molin doth give to this reverend Bishop , do dishonour his own judgement , that makes the Bishop's doctrine so contemptible and gross . The like dealing I understand , some Arminian Divines ( I am loath to name them ) have used against this reverend man : One of them of great note hath given out , that he heard him preach for universal Redemption , and afterwards spoken to him , and found him owning it ; therefore he was an Arminian : and I hear a Northamptonshire Arminian hath so published him in print . OH the unfaithfulness of men seeming pious ! The good Bishop must be what every one will say of him . Though one feigneth him to be of one extreme , and the other of the other extreme , when ( alas ! ) his judgement hath been commonly known in the world about this 30 years to be neither for the one , nor the other , but for the middle way . Do you call for proof ? If I give you not better than either Dr Molin , or the two Arminian Divines give , let me be branded for a factious Calumniator of the dead , whose name is so honourable , that the forgery is the greater sin . First there is a Manuscript of his own in many men's hands , dated March. 3. 1617. at Dublin , ( which I intent to print , if no one else do it first ) which asserteth this Doctrine in the same middle way as Davenant and Camero do . And I asked him whether he yet owned it , ( not long before his death ) , and he said , He did , and was firm in that judgement ; I asked him to whom he wrote it , and he told me ( as I remember ) to Mr Culverwell ( I am certain it was to him , or to Mr Eyr , who , he told me , was the man that fell so foul on Mr Culverwell . ) 2.  If my own word be not sufficient , Dr Kendal can bear witness that he was present , once when he heard him own this judgement of Universal Redemption in the middle way , and intimated that Dr Davenant and Dr Preston were minded of it by him ; ( as rejoicing that he sooner owned it ; ) and that we cannot rationally offer Christ to sinners on other grounds . Now because the Bishop went this middle way , when he speaks against the Arminians , some feign him to speak against his own doctrine . And when he spoke for Universal Satisfaction , the Arminians say he was turned to them . This is the faithfulness of the world ! It shames and grieves me to say , Of siding Divines ; and as much almost to say , Of a public Professor of History in Oxford : For the principal honour of a Historian , is his veracity , and impartial fidelity ; and how much of that this Preface to the Paraenesis is guilty of , I leave to consideration upon the taste that is here given . But enough of this . 

The fourth and last particular in which I offend some few brethren by my judgement , is that which is the subject of these ensuing Disputations . But I can truly say of this as of the rest , 1.  That if I should change my judgement and please these brethren , its like I should displease many more . For 2.  I take it for granted , that I go in the common road that the Church of Christ hath gone in from the beginning to this day ; so far am I from singularity . 3.  I am most certain that my thoughts were so far from intending singularity or the disturbance of the Church , by these or other points in Controversy , that I apprehended them strongly to be the truths that must be instrumental to the Church's peace when ever God seeth us meet to attain it . And though I never took a point for true eo nomine , because it was in the middle , or tended to peace , yet I purposely choose out these truths rather than other to vindicate , because they tend to peace . And to the praise of God I speak it , that in those ancient common disturbing Controversies between the Arminian and Antiarminian , Lutheran and Calvinist , jesuit and Dominican , I have discerned those Principles which quiet my own mind , and which I am confident , were they received according to their evidence , would quiet the now-contending Christian world : But I am past doubt , to be derided as arrogant for this confidence ; and should the Principles in a Method with Evidence be propounded , though purposely to heal the divisions of the Church , many of the several parties would but rage at the Reconciler , and pour out their impotent accusations and reproaches against him , because he would attempt the healing of their divisions , and would feign him to be the Author of some new Sect , for seeking to put an end to Sects . But let any man make good my just demand , that the Principles propounded shall have an impartial reception according to their Evidence , and I will give you security to make good my confidence , that they shall quiet the Chrstian world hereabouts . But I know this is to be expected from none but God ; nor at all on earth in any perfection . 

As to the present Controversy , it seemed good to Mr Blake to begin it with me ; and to my Defense he hath opposed an angry Reply ; not to my whole Book ( as I did to that part of his which concerned me ) but to here and there a scrap , disordered , and maimed , and parceled as he thought good . I was in doubt whether to make any rejoinder or further Defense ; but while I doubted , diverse Reverend brethren from several parts wrote to me , to move me neither to be silent , nor to answer all his words , which would be tedious to the Reader , but to handle the Controversies by way of Disputation , and to bring in Mr Blake's Arguments under them , so far as shall be thought necessary . Though at first I scarce liked this way , as seeming not a full answer , but such a course as he took with me , yet I did acquiesce in the judgement of my brethren . But yet indeed , I think I had never printed a word at all in Defense of myself against Mr Blake , but for another providence . The third Disputation , as here printed , was written before Mr Blake's Book against me was printed , or in the press ( as I have reason to think . ) A Copy of this I lent about two years ago to a friend : But by what means I know not , about three quarters of a year ago I received tidings from a pious learned Minister in the West ( writing to a friend of his not far from me ) that there were such abundance of Copies of that Disputation in those parts , and some were so purposed , that it would be printed if I did not do it myself . I confess I was much offended at the news , because the Disputation was imperfectly written , and on such a subject ( as to the later part , which shows what sins may consist with Godliness ) that I would have been loath it should have been by them made public , as knowing how unfit it was for the eyes of the Profane : But when there was no remedy , the best I could do , was to add some cautions , and annex the other Disputations here adjoined , which were hastily written , that the former might not go alone without that company that seemed necessary . And this is the occasion of this present writing . 

For the Matter of it , I have manifested that I hold the common Doctrine of the Church . And many another could I mention as consenting in it , besides those particularly there cited . Mr Wil Fenner in the second part of Christ's Alarm , p. 92 , 93. saith [ Another inseparable mark of a true Church , is a sincere Profession of the word of God and true Christian religion , either in truth and uprightness of heart , or else so far as man can judge : For though the preaching of the Word come to a place , yet it doth not follow presently that there is a Church of God — but when diverse of them embraced the Word either sincerely , or else to see to , as far as Paul and others could judge , than they were a Church : There must be a Congregation of People that do profess the pure Religion , and make it appear ( at least to the judgement of man ) that they are Godly in Christ jesus : this is an inseparable Mark of a true Church , as we may see 1 Cor. 14.33 . ] See further . 

Mr Vines in his Treatise of the Sacrament , p. 150 , 151. saith , That the Separatists [ laid the foundation , viz. That only Visible Saints are fit Communicants , which is true as to the Church's Admission : That real Saints only are worthy Communicants , which is true too , as to the inward Grace or Benefit ] — And 151.  There is a great difference between Christ's real Members and Guests at this Table , and as I may say , the Visible Church's Members or Guests . If he be a visible Professor of Faith , unshipwrakt , of capacity to discern the Lords Body , of Life without Scandal , he is a Guest of the Church . — ] 

And p. 205.  Though I should rest in serious Professsion of Faith and Repentance , which is not pulled down again by a wicked Life , or scandalous Sin , — yet when a man lieth under the charge of our censure for some scandalous sin , the case is otherwise , etc. ] Read the rest . 

And p. 324 , 329.  [ The Covenant of God with us is , that all that believe in Christ that died , and receive him for their Lord and Saviour , shall have remission of sins , etc.  Answerable to this act of God , the Believer accepts of , and submits to this Covenant and the Conditions of it , viz. to believe , and to have God for our God , and thereof makes a solemn profession in this Sacrament , giving up himself to Christ as Lord and Saviour , restipulating and striking hands with him to be his , and so binds himself , and doth as it were seal a Counterpart to God again ; and not only so , but comes into a claim of all the riches and legacies of the Will or Covenant , because he hath accepted and here declares his acceptance of the Covenant . The Seal is indeed properly of that which is God's part of the Covenant to perform and give , and is no more but offered , until we subscribe and set our hands to it , and then its complete , and the Benefits may be claimed , as the benefit of any conditional promise may be , when the condition is performed . And lest you should stumble at that word , I must let you know , that the Will accepting and submitting to the Conditions , is the performance of the Conditions required ( NB. ) — 

And pag. 249 , 250 , etc. Though as to admittance ( which is the Church's part ) to the outward Ordinance , he make Profession ( as I do , ) sufficient , yet to the question whether the Sacrament be a Converting Ordinance , he concludes that [ It is not an Ordinance appointed for Conversion ] His Arguments are ; 1.  Because no effect can be ascribed to this Ordinance which falls not under the signification of it , etc. as Vasquez . 2.  This Sacrament by the institution of it appears to praesuppose those that reap the sweet and benefit of it , to be Converts and in grace , namely to have faith in Christ , and to be living members ; and if this be presupposed by this Ordinance , than it is not first wrought by it . 3.  The Word is the only Instrument of God to beget Faith or work Conversion , etc.  And he answereth the Objections of the contrary minded : and to them that argue that the Lords Supper is a Converting Ordinance , because its possible a man may be then converted ; he saith , they may as well make Ordination or Marriage Converting Ordinances , because by the words then uttered a man may be converted . He citeth the words of learned Rich. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. pag. 5●6 . [ The grace which we have by it doth not begin but continue grace or life ; no man therefore receives this Sacrament before Baptism , because no dead thing is capable of nourishment ; that which groweth , must of necessity first live . ] — 

And for further Authority he addeth , [ And to this purpose all our Learned Divines have given their suffrage . And the Papists though they differ from us in denying remission of sins in this Sacrament , in favour to their Sacrament of Penance , yet they hold it to be an Ordinance of Nutrition , and so do all their Schoolmen ; and so doth the Church of England [ The strengthening and refreshing of our souls , etc ] I need not number Authors or Churches . It is so plain a case , that I wonder they that have stood up in defence of it , as a converting Ordinance , have not taken notice of it . There is an Army to a man against them ; and the ancient Christian Churches are so clear in it — So far Mr Vines ( & Hooker in him . ) 

Concerning the Distinction of Forum Dei & Ecclesiae , and its sense , see that judicious Agreement of the Associated Ministers of Cumberlan● and Westmoreland , pag. 47. where they take notice of Mr. Blakes questioning it . 

Since these Papers were in the Press , I was told by a Reverend Brother , that Mr. Blake professeth to hold the Necessity of the Profession of a saving Faith , as well as I ; and by one of his special acquaintance , in the Ministry , who heard me express my mind , that Mr Blake's was the same . I durst not omit the mention of this , lest it should be injurious to him : And yet how far the reporters are in the right , and understand his meaning , I am no further able to tell you , but that they are credible persons . For my part , I defended my own Doctrine against the charge which in two Volumes he brought against it . And I supposed he would not write so much of two Volumes against a Doctrine which he judged the same with his own . And I meddled only with his books , and not his secret thoughts . Whether I have been guilty of feigning an Adversary , that took himself for none , I am contented to stand to the judgement of any impartial man on earth that will read our books . Surely I found it over each page , that a Faith short of justifying entitleth to Baptism : and I never met with any such explication in him , as that by [ A faith short of justifying , ] he meant [ A Profession of justifying faith . ] And sure [ Faith ] and [ Profession ] be not all one ; nor [ justifying ] and [ Short of justifying ] all one . Nor do others that read his books understand him any otherwise then I do , so far as I can learn ; sure the Ministers that were Authors of the Propositions for Reformation of Parish Congregations , Printed for the Norwich Bookseller , understood him as I do , p. 17. where they say thus ; [ Obj. 3  But a dogmatical Faith may entitle to Baptism , as Mr. Blake , Treat . on Con. speaks , though there be no profession of a justifying faith & repentance . Answ. We cannot think so , seeing the faith required to be professed before Baptism , is such a Faith as hath salvation annexed to it . Mar. 16.16 . It is a Faith of the whole heart , Acts 8.38 . Repentance is also required to Baptism as well as Faith , Acts 2.38 . and the Church in the usual form of Baptism , enjoined the baptised person not only to profess the doctrine of Faith , but to give up his name to Christ as his servant and soldier , and to fight manfully against the World , the Flesh and the Devil , etc. we need add no more . Mr. Blake is mistake lies in this , that the ground of Baptism is either a Dogmatical faith , or a true justifying faith ; which because no Minister can certainly know , he must only require a Dogmatical faith . But we conceive neither of them to be the ground of Baptism , but the profession of a true justifying faith , or Acceptance of the Covenant ] So far these brethren . 

And whether it be not the Promise of a justifying faith that Mr Blake takes up with , besides his faith short of justifying , read his Books , and censure as you find cause . 

But yet if Mr Blake , be really of my mind , I have no mind to persuade the world that he is not , nor reason so to do ; but when I know it from himself , I shall heartily rejoice in the closure . For I am confident it is in love of Truth that both of us do dispute ; and therefore if Truth get by it , we have our ends . 

For my part , I must still say , that if I took [ a Dogmatical faith itself , or any short of justifying ] for the Title and necessary qualifications of them that I must admit , I would baptise none , because I cannot know who hath that Dogmatical faith , and who not . And I still find that even wise and pious men are oft as far to seek for the truth of their Assent as of their Consent , and would give a world that they were but certain that they truly Believe the truth of the Gospel . And I am sure that I am as far to seek for assurance of the one as of the other in those that I examine , in order to the baptising of their Infants . 

There is newly come forth a Book of William Morrice Esquire , which seems by the Title page to pled for the sufficiency of this Dogmatical faith . When I saw the Book , made up of so much reading and expressing so much industry and learning , I much rejoiced that England had such a Gentleman ; and I look on the Book , as a shaming reprehension of the idleness and ignorance of the multitude of the Gentry , that spend that time in hawking , and hunting , and complementing , which if better spent , might make a blessing , and not a burden to the land But out of that learned Volume I am not able to find any clear discovery , what the Author means by a Dogmatical faith . But I conjecture that it is somewhat that must be conjunct with the Profession of a saving faith . For pag. 215. he saith , [ because it is not only probable to Charity they may have found faith , but — ] And pag. 2●4 . [ He that receives the Seals of the Covenant , seals back a Counterpart to God , accepts of the Terms , and assents to the Condition , ( which as Mr Vines before shows , is justifying faith . ) — ] And I desire it may be observed what he saith , p. 247. to prove Baptism and the Lords Supper to be administered on the like grounds : And what he saith in p. 248 , 249. against Baptising the children of the Excommunicate , and what he citeth out of Rich. Hooker , Eccl. Pol. l. 3. p. 87. to that end ; and that the child 's right is rooted in the immediate parents : And that which he citeth out of Goodwins Mos. & Aar . l. 5. c. 2. p. 223. that [ Among the jews the male-childrens of those that were but under Niddui were not circumcised . ] 

And if any think that this learned Gentleman would have Ministers feed the humours of the carnal unruly multitude by giving them the Lords Supper , while they obstinately refuse to be ruled or to live a godly life , let them observe , that it is only Church-members , not living scandalously and still professing the Christian faith , that he pleads for . And no doubt but he will confess , that our Parishioners cannot by us be made Church-members against their wills ; & he distinguisheth between the Universal and a Particular Church , and well knows that all the Christian world belongs not to my pastoral charge ; and that I am not bound to deliver the Sacraments to all that have a right to them . And therefore if upon just reasons I desire of the whole Parish , to know whether they own their membership in that particular Church or not , and take me for their Pastor , and consent to the duty of members ; and some deny it , and others will give me no answer by word or writing , no not after I have waited a year or two ; and I told them , that I must take their silence for a denial ; but they will continue silently to hear , and will not once say they own the relation , nor will submit to the unquestionable acts of Discipline ; I am confident that it is not in the thoughts of this learned Gentleman , that I must needs take these persons for part of my charge , that will not tell me , they take themselves for such , or take me for their Pastor ; no more than he will think himself bound to take a woman for his wife , and estate her in his Lands , and perform conjugal offices to her , that will not once say , She consenteth that he shall be her husband . And this is the case of most of our people : The most Godly Ministers about us that gather not new Churches , but ( on sufficient reasons and joint agreement ) do only call the whole Parish to know whether they own their membership , and them for their Pastors , do find almost none but a few Godly that will own it , for fear of being troubled by Discipline . If all the Parish therefore be our Church , it must be against their wills . 

And if any think that several passages in that Learned Volumn do make against the power , and consequently the labour of the Ministry and the Edification of the Church , I propound to their consideration , 1.  That all the applicatory passages of the Discourse must be expounded as they relate to that controversy which occasioned them , which must be understood by the help of former writings . 2.  it 's not unusual with wise men in length and heat of Disputation , to make the face of Truth itself to seem sometimes to look awry in the application . 3.  And other passages in the same Book may help you to a fair exposition of the offensive . As , e.g. p. 85. he saith , [ Were a Pastor so familiarly conversant with his flock as he ought to be , and is some think employed not only in Paul is preaching from house to house , but also by those alike used idioms , [ the Church in , or among you , and you in the Church , ] or did not deem , the feeding of the Lambs by Catechising to be beneath his magistery and greatness , he would need no other marks or signs to know his sheep by , than such as he might take from common conversation ] And you need not question but this Learned Author would reckon them among the scandalous , that would not speak with a Minister if he desire it , but get away when they know he will come to their house , yea , or will not come to him , considering he is made the Ruler over them in order to their spiritual good , and they commanded to obey him , Heb. 13.17 . especially when a Ministers weakness , or the multitude of his Parishioners and business will not permit him to seek after them . I may conclude therefore that for all the word [ Dogmatical faith ] in the Title page , this Gentleman is not like to be my Adversary . 

To conclude , the Jesuits themselves do witness that the Doctrine which I have in this Book maintained , is the ordinary Protestant Doctrine , while they concur in opposing part of it , under that title without our disowning it , and tell the jansenians , that their Doctrine , by which they make the Church to consist only of those that have charity and true Grace , is the doctrine of the protestants ; as Petavius de Lege & Gratia passim ; & p. 28.  [ Au●●enim unà cum charitate ac justitiâ necessario fidem amittebant , quicunque lethale aliquod crimen incurrerant , dut si fides in illis haerebat adhuc , ea minimè suffi●iebat , ut in Ecclesiae parte aliqua numerarentur . Horum utrùm díxerint , nihil ad haeresim & Catholicae fidei ●abem interest : Nam utrumque pro haeretico damnatum , & inter caetera Lutheri Calvinique , & ante hos Wiclefi nefaria dogmata , jampridem Ecclesiasticâ censurâ notatum est . ] Vid. & p. 118. de Gratia initiali . But it 's in regard of the Catholic Church as invisible , and in the properest acception , that we own this to be our Doctrine . 

As to the rest of Mr Blake's Book , and also Dr Owen's & Mr Roberts . I have said as much as I now intent in the Conclusion of these Disputations . 

If any Papists or other Adversaries shall conclude that we are not of the true Church or Religion , because we thus differ , and are of so many minds ; they may as well prove a man to be no member of an Hospital , or no Patient to a Physician , because he is not in perfect health ; or none of the Scholars of such a Master , because he knows not as much as his Teacher , or as those of the highest form : Or that Paul and Barnabas were not both of the true Church , because they fell out even to a parting asunder : Or that Peter & Paul were not both of the true Religion , because one of them was to be blamed , and the other withstood him to the face , because he walked not uprightly , and according to the truth of the Gospel , ( an high charge , Gal. 1.11 , 12 , 13 , 14. ) yea , they may as well conclude that no man is of the Church while he liveth on earth , because while we are here , we know but in part , and see but darkly or enigmatically as in a glass , 1 Cor. 13.9 , 11 , 12. and because we accounted not ourselves perfect , or to have attained , but follow after , and reach forth to the things which are before us , and press toward the mark ; and where any is otherwise minded , we wait till God reveal this to us , Phil. 3.12 , 13 , 14 , 15.  Or as if they would make us believe , that there are not more differences among the Papists then with us . But of these things I purposely speak in some Disputations against Popery , which with this are in the Press . 

And lastly , for those that will convert the truths which I here maintain , into the nourishment of divisions , ( when their nature is to heal ) either making men Notoriously ungodly , that are not , and so rejecting them and their Children , or withdrawing into separated Churches , because such are Baptised or admitted to Communion , of whose qualifications they are unsatisfied , their guilt is upon themselves . The doctrine is not made guilty by their abuse : As the ignorant and unlearned have still wrested the Scripture to their own destruction , so have the selfconceited and erroneous always misused the Truth itself to the disturbance of the Church . it 's matter of double Lamentation , that yet there should be such Divisions , and Parties , and Distances ; when B p Hall's Peacemaker , and Mr Burrough's Irenicum have been extant so long . Were there but those two Books on that Subject extant in England , they will heal , or inexcusably condemn our distances . And indeed they are Volumes of accusation against us , & proclaim the shame ( let me speak what must be spoken ) even of the Godly , yea , of the most of the Godly Ministers of these Nations , that have yet done no more in this healing work . And I entreat all those Ministers & People ( that have time , and any regard to my advice ) that they would diligently read over and over again those two books , though they cast by twenty such as this for it . And for those that will censure the following disputations , as being not leveled to the in●erest of their several Parties , I shall be no further solicitous to remove their offence . And of the foresaid abusers of these reforming , reconciling verities , I now only crave the sober perusal & conscionable Practice of Mr Burrough's 2d , 3d , 4th and 5th Propotion in in his Irenic . Ch. 23 p 163.  Had there been but that one healing Leaf or Page in England , our wounds would be our shame , as truly as they are our hurt and danger . 

Mr Mead on Eccl. 5.1 . pag , 130 , 131.  Offer not the Sacrifice of Fools ; for they know not that they do evil . MY third Proposition was this : That when Sacrifice was to be offered in case of sin ; yet even then , God accepted not thereof primariò , primarily and for itself ; as though any refreshment or emolument accrued to him thereby ( as the Gentiles fond supposed of their Gods ) ; but secondarily , only as a testimony of the Conscience of the Offerer , desiring with humble Repentance to glorify him with a present , & by that rite to renew a Covenant with him . For Sacrifice was Oblatio foederalis ▪ Now Almighty God renews a Covenant with , or receives again into his favour , none but the Repentant sinner , and therefore accepts of Sacrifice in no other regard , but as a token and effect of this . Otherwise its is an abomination to him , as whereby men professed a desire of being reconciled unto God when they had offended him , and yet had no such meaning . Hence God rejects all Sacrifices , wherein there is no contrition , nor purpose to forsake sin , and keep his Commandments , which are the parts of Repentance : so is to be taken that Isa. 1.  To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices ? — Bring no more vain Oblations : Incense is an abomination to me . And Isa. 62.2 , 3. — And surely he that blesseth an Idol is so far from renewing a Covenant with the Lord his God , that he breaks it : so did they who without conscience of Repentance , presumed to come before him with a Sacrifice ; not procure atonement , but aggravate their breach . 

According to one of these three senses are all passages in the Old Testament , disparaging and rejecting all Sacrifices Literally to be understood ; namely , when men preferred them before the greater things of the Law ; valued them out of their degree , as an Antecedent Duty : or placed their efficacy in the naked Rite , as if aught accrued to God thereby : God would no longer own them for any Ordinance of his : nor indeed , in that disguise put upon them , were they . 

And in The Christ. Sacrif . p. 510 , 511.  PSAL. 50.  God saith , [ Gather my Saints together unto me , which make Covenant with me by Sacrifice . ] — [ But unto the wicked God saith , What hast thou to do to declare my Statutes , and take my Covenant in thy mouth , seeing thou hatest instruction , and castest my words behind thee ? ] Statutes here are Rites and Ordinances , and particularly those of Sacrifice , which who so bringeth unto God , and thereby supplicates and calls upon his name , is said to take the Covenant of God in his mouth . Forasmuch as to invocate God with this Rite , was to do it by way of commemoration of his Covenant ; and to say , Remember Lord thy Covenant ; and For thy Covenant's sake Lord hear my prayer . ] 

The Contents of the first Disputation . Quest. Whether Ministers may admit persons into the Church of Christ by Baptism , upon the bare Verbal Profession of the true Christian saving Faith , without staying for , or requiring any further evidences of sincerity ? Aff.  THE Question explained , pag. 2 , 3 What Profession is , pag. 4 , 5 Whether Profession be required for itself , or as a sign of the thing professed ? The later maintained , against Mr. Blake , p. 6 , 7 , 8 What profession it must be that we must take , pag. 9 , 10 , 11.  Objection . This will make Ministers Lords of the Church . Answered , p. 12 What profession in specie we must require , pag. 13 Of the Essentials of our faith , p. 14 , 15 , 16 The Thesis laid down , and proved from Scripture and Nature , p. 18 , etc.  Mr. Wood's words considered , p. 21 Reasons why Profession must be taken as a sign of the thing Professed , p. 23 , 24 more Arguments , p. 27 Objections answered , p. 30 An Observation for the healing of unjust rigour , and scruples herein , p. 33 Two causes of mistakes , and dividing among some good people , p. 38 The Contents of the second Disputation . Quest. Whether Ministers must or may Baptise the Children of those that profess saving Faith , upon the Profession of any other Faith that comes short of it ? Neg.  THE Question opened , pag 42 The judgement of some late Romanists , p. 45 , 51 Argument 1. pag. 53 Argument 2. pag. 62 Argument 3. pag. 68 Argument 4. pag. 71 Argument 5. pag. 79 Argument 6. pag. 88 Argument 7. pag. 91 Argument 8. pag. 96 Argument 9 pag. 98 Argument 10. pag. 100 In what sense whole Churches are called Saints , Dead with Christ , Risen with him , Sons by Adoption , Abraham's Seed , Heirs according to promise , justified . 

Argument 11. pag. 118 None may be admitted to the Lord's Supper without profession of saving Faith , p. 120 — Mr. Gilespie's 20 Arguments against unregenerate men's Right to the Lord's Supper , defended against Mr. Blake , pag. 123 How far that Sacrament is a converting Ordinance , p. ●38 Mr. Blake's Arguments considered , p. 139 Argum. 12 , & 13. pag. 144 , 145 Argum. 14 , 15. pag. 147 Argum. 16. from Scripture-example , p. 149 Mr. Blake's exceptions answered , p. 151 Argument 17. pag. 156 Argument 18. pag. 160 Argument 19 pag. 163 Mr. Blake leaves us at an utter loss , p. 164 Answers to Mr. Blake's Arguments , whereby he would prove that a Faith short of justifying gives Right to Baptism , p. 170 , to 191 Argument 20. from the constant practice of the Church , p. 195 The judgement of above 60 Protestant Divines in the case , p. 204 , to 232 Mr. Blake's Confessions , pag. 232 , etc.  Mr. Blake's conceits of my self-contradictions , ground lesle , p. 235 The Contents of the third Disputation . Quest. Whether the Infants of Notoriously Ungodly Baptised Parents have Right to be Baptised ? Neg.  The terms explained : specially [ Right ] p. 251 The Question divided into three , p. 253 Quest. 1.  Whether such subjects have Right by any Gift or Grant of God to themselves ? Neg. 1  They have no such Title for their own sake , p. 255 2.  Nor for the immediate Parents , p. 256 3.  Nor for their Ancestors , p. 261 4.  Whether they have any on the account of Undertakers , pag. 264 5.  Whether on the Magistrate's power to dispose of them , p. 265 Whether as they are Members of a Discipled Nation , or born in the Church , pag. 267 , 268 Qu. 2.  Whether Providence give them Right , p. 268 Qu. 3.  Whether Ministers ought to Baptise such , pag. 269.  Negative proved . Such are not credible Professors , p. 271 , 274 , etc.  The Notoriously ungodly are ipso jure excommunicated ; which is explained , confirmed and defended , p. 280 , etc. — more Arguments , pag. 294 , 295 , etc.  Arguments Answered which would prove that the Infants of the Notoriously ungodly have Right to Baptism , p. 303 , etc.  And first that from Circumcision . Argum. 9  Of the Nullity of Baptism supposed to follow , p. 315 , etc.  Quest. Whom we must take for Notoriously Ungodly , p. 326 , etc.  Cautions against the abuse of Answers , p. 333 The Positive Answer in ten Characters , p. 335 , 336 Quest. Is it not our duty to refuse the children of more than the Notoriously Ungodly ? Affirm . p. 338 Violenta praesumptio must cause us to forbear ; proved , p. 341 , etc.  Quest. What is such violent presumption , or ground to take men for no credible Professors , p. 345. showed in ten Characters . The Contents of the fourth Disputation . Quest. Whether any besides Regenerate Believers ( and their seed ) have a Right to Sacraments given them by God , and may thereupon require them and receive them ? Neg. pag 351.  The terms explained : specially [ Right ] , p. 353 Concessions in six Propositions , pag. 355 The Negative proved , pag. 356 Mr. Blake's judgement about Investiture , p. 360 , 364 , etc. — Receiving Sacraments as a duty must come after saving faith , and God warranteth none to do it before , p. 369 , 370 , etc.  Objections answered , p. 370 Whether this confine Sacraments to them that have assurance , p. 373 , 374 , etc.  more Objections answered , ad p. 403 The distinction of forum Dei & Ecclesiae , vindicated against Mr. Blake's opposition , p. 403 , etc.  Mr. Rutherford's judgement of that , and the main cause , ad p. 410 Mr. Blake's further assaults repelled , p. 410 , etc.  more of his Objections answered , to p. 419 An Answer to many Arguments of Mr. J. H. in his second Vindication of free Admission , p. 419 , to 431 Some sad Considerations about Mr. Prin's counsel for forcing Ministers to deliver the Sacrament , pag. 426 , 432 The Contents of the fifth Disputation . Quest. Whether Hypocrites and other Unregerate persons be called Christians , Believers , Saints , Church-members , etc.  Univocally , Analogically or Equivocally ? The judgement of Philosophers about the terms , to pag. 447 That the terms are used equivocally , proved by Argument , to p. 452 And by Authority : Thirty three Protestant Divines cited . Mr. Blake's Objections answered , to pag. 480 An APPENDIX fetching Reasons out of Doctor Owen , Mr. Blake and Mr. Robertson , against a particular Answer of them , p. 480 The little Reason for Doctor Owen's Indignation , and lesle for his gross misreports , and Socinian parallel , to pag. 488 The causlesness of Mr. Blake's tears and trembling , pag. 489 His untrue reports of myself , & of the profaneness of the Worcestershire Combinations , p. 500 His untrue and disingenuous report of my abusing Mr. Ball , p. 500 The complexion of the rest of his Dispute not yet answered , p. 501 A brief discussion of his doctrine of the Faith that entitleth to Baptism , pag. 502 , to 513 The impotency of more of his Accusations , pag. 513 , 514 The substance and quality of Mr. Robertson's Epistolary Disputation , pag. 515 , 516 His implacable kindness , and dreadful Protestation , pag. 517 Of Punishment and mental Remisson , pag. 518 , 519 Of a creeping MS. p. 520 Of the triumphing Dream of Doctor Owen ; and Mr. Blake of the terrible Conditions which I impose on my Answerers in the Preface of my Confession . p. 521 The first Disputation . Quest. Whether Ministers may admit persons into the Church of Christ by Baptism , upon the bare verbal Profession of the true Christian saving faith , without staying for , or requiring any further Evidences of sincerity ? Aff.  IN almost all our controverted Cases , the Church still findeth the mischief of Extremes : and among the rest , in this about the due qualification of those whom we must admit to the Sacraments . Some will not look after saving Faith at all ; but have found out a Faith of another species , which they call Dogmatical , which they take to be the Title to both the Sacraments . Others , while they look after saving faith , will not take up with that Evidence of it ( a bare Profession ) which God in Scripture hath directed them to accept ; but they must either pretend to search the heart , or stay for some better Evidences of Regeneration . The confuting of these last , shall be the business of this Disputation ; and the confuting of the former , shall be the matter of the rest . 

We here suppose that Baptism is a standing Ordinance of Christ , and that the use of it is to be the sign of our Entrance into the Church of Christ ; not only solemnising our Covenant with God , in which upon our consent we were before secretly entered , but also investing us in our Church honours and privileges . For as the Prince doth by a sword confer the order and honour of Knighthood ( which he might do before by private Grant ) or as a man doth by a Key deliver to a Tenant the possession of a House ; or by a twig and turf , the possession of Lands : so doth God by Baptism deliver to the true Believer the honourable order of Christianity , and power to be a member of Christ and his Church , and a son of God , and therewith he delivereth him the pardon of his sins , and other Privileges of his people : Though to them that come without this saving faith , there is only an Offer of the Internal Benefits from God , and no Delivery of possession ; and only a Ministerial delivery of the possession of the external privileges , without that Title which before God will warrant their Claim anh Reception ; though there be enough in the Minister's Commission to warrant his delivery upon that Claim . 

It is here also supposed , that it belongeth to the Ministerial Office to Baptise , and by Baptising to admit persons into the visible Church . And this is not the smallest part of their Trust , and Duty , and Honour , nor the least of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven , which is committed to their care . Ordinarily none can be admitted into the visible Church , or made a visible Christian as thus listed among such , but by the Office of the Ministry : And therefore the Minister is made the Judge of men's aptitude to this honour : for no man must act against , or without the conduct of his own Judgement . And therefore to whomsoever it belongeth to Baptise , ordinarily to them it doth belong to judge who is fit to be baptised . 

It may be thought that it is a very great power that Christ hath herein conferred on his Officers ; and that it may be easily abused to tyranny , while every Minister shall have power to refuse persons their visible Christianity , or the badge of it , and so to make Christians as they please . But first , they are tied up themselves by certain Rules , as we are further to show in this Dispute : and second●y , if one should tyrannize , there are enough more to relieve us ; thirdly , there is no power but may be abused ; but yet it must be trusted somewhere ; and into what hands should Christ have fitlier put it , than into theirs that are by Gifts and Offices fitted for the trust ? I have marvelled sometime , when I have heard secular Rulers on one side , and the People on the other side , cry down the Ministerial power of excommunicating , or so much as keeping from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper , that they did not as much or more contend against their Power of Baptising and Judging who should be admitted into the Church . But I think the reason is , because Ministers admitted all so generally , that they were not awakened to the observation of their power herein , nor to any jealousy of them , left they should ( as they call it ) tyrannize . But undoubtedly they might as fairly say , that it belongeth either to the Magistrate , or to the Bishop alone , or to the Mayor Vote of the Congregation , to Baptise , or Judge who shall or shall not be baptised , and so admitted into the honour of visible Christianity and Church-membership , as to say that it belongeth to the Magistrate or the Bishop alone , or the people to excommunicate , or to judge who shall be excommunicated . For the Power of taking into the Church Universal , is as great as that of putting out of a particular Congregation . And Christ gave the Keys conjunctly and not dividedly ; and therefore he that hath the admitting Key , hath the Excluding Key . 

Had our people but well considered , what Interest the Ministerial Office hath in their very Baptism and Christianity , and that they cannot be Newborn into the Kingdom of God , without the help of these Midwives , at least , ( and Scripture gives them also the Title of Parentage ) they would then have discerned that by their very Baptism they are engaged to the Ministry subserviently , to God the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost , to whom they are principally engaged : For , as the Liturgy speaks , they are Dedicated to God by our Office and Ministry , and they have their visible state in the Christian Church and Possession of its Privileges , delivered to them by our Office and Ministry ; and therefore , me thinks , they should well bethink themselves before they renounce it and despise it , till they dare renounce and despise their Baptism : and those that do that , I do not much wonder if they renounce our Ministry . 

Furthermore , It is here supposed that a Profession is necessary , before we may admit men to Baptism ; and that this must be a profession of the true Christian saving faith , and not only of some other sort of faith . And we take it for granted , that the aged are admitted upon their own profession , and the Infants upon the profession of the Parent , by whom he hath his Title to the Covenant , even as he is the seed of a believer . 

The Question then that we have now to discuss , is only concerning the sufficiency of this Profession , as to the satisfaction of the Baptizer , without any further Evidences of sincerity . 

For the explaining and resolving whereof , I shall first show you what that Profession is which we require , and shall be satisfied in : and secondly I shall prove the Affirmative of the Question . 

And for the first , I shall first show you what Profession is in general , and the formal nature of the thing , and the requisites thereto . Secondly , I shall show you what this Profession must be in specie , as it is specified from the subject matter of it . 

And first Profiteor , is but palam fateor , in the common acception of the word . In civil cases , prositeri est publice & apud acta aliquid ultro denunciate , ut Calu. more especially , professio is sometimes , ad interrogata responsio , and sometimes sponsio ; and in military affairs , it is nomen dare . Ours in question hath something of all these conjunct . It is a solemn voluntary declaration ( expression or confession ) of our faith in God the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost ; ( in answer , usually , to the Interrogation of the Minister ) with a giving up our name to God , by solemn sponsion , and renouncing the Flesh , the World , and the Devil ( or in general , all inconsistent ways ) Profession is a relative action , and hath in it somewhat Material , viz. the Action ; and somewhat Formal , viz. the Relation , which must be distinctly considered of . For Profession is a signification of a man's mind concerning the thing professed . The Action , which is the Matter of the sign , is not necessarily one and the same thing in all and at all times . The common action is by word of mouth : Where that cannot be had , ( as from the dumb ) it sufficeth that they express by writing : where that cannot be had , the lifting up of the hand , or motion of other part of the body , or any thing that is apt to signify what is in the mind , may be a just Profession . And if word , writing , and corporal motion be all joined together , it is but the matter of the same Profession . God hath tied us to no one particular sign as necessary , nor restrained us from any , by his Word ; but only as the general Directions , ( of doing all things Orderly , decently , to edification , etc. ) may be an Obligation or restraint : but the more particular Direction must be fetched by Christian prudence from the Light and Law of Nature itself . The nature of the thing , with concurrent circumstances , will teach us which is the fittest sign : And sometime the commands of our Teachers or Governors may determine that case , it being a matter within their power to determine ( according to God's general Rules . ) 

The formal Reason of a Profession , is , that it be signum mentis , aut verum , aut ( et si ementitum , tamen ) apparens : if it be only a seeming sign , or sergeant , it is truly a Profession , but not a true Profession . I mean , it hath a Metaphysical verity , inasmuch as it is an action apt to signify the mind , and doth signify that which the man would have you think to be his mind : but it is not morally true , but false ; because it doth not signify that which is his mind indeed . All words are to be signa mentis ; but when a man lieth , his words are truly words , though not true words ; and he doth speak that which he would have you take to be his mind , though not that which is so , etc. he useth a sign that is apt and appointed for the expression of the mind , though he abuse it to the concealing of his mind , and the deceiving of the Hearer . Yet if any will insist upon it , that it hath not the formal Reason of a Profession , unless it be true , and agreeable to the mind ; let such know , that we take the word in a larger , and commoner , and ( I think ) fit sense , even for that which a pretended to be a true sign of the mind , whether it be indeed true or not . Yet still pretended it must be to be a true Discovery of the mind , and to that use it is that the Minister must receive it : and thence it comes to pass , that there are besides the bare words , writings , and some modifications , which are of necessity to the very constitution of a real Profession , and without which it cannot properly be called a Profession , or may not by a Minister be taken for such . Concerning which , 1.  I shall enqure further , Whether this be so or not ? 2.  What those Modes or concomitant Acts must be ? 1.  And for the first ; the reason of the doubt is , because some conceive that Profession is so far required for itself , ( or for some other end , I know not what ) as that it is not to be looked at or required as a seeming or probable evidence of the thing professed . Mr. Blake Treat of Sacr. p. 129. saith of me : His Grand Rule is , That a serious Professor of the Faith is to be taken for a true believer . — If this Proposition were a Scripture Maxim , than it would have born a further superstruction ; but being neither found there , nor any proof made that it is any way deduced thence , mother and daughters may all justly be called into question . — I do yield , that charity is to hope the best ; but that we should put our charity to it , or our reason either , for probability or certainty when we are nowhere so taught , and have a more sure Rule for our proceeding , I see no Reason . I can scarce meet with a Minister that saith ( and I have put the question to many of the most Eminent that I know ) that he baptizeth any Infant upon this ground of hope , that the Parent is Regenerate , but still with earnest vehemence professeth the contrary . 

Answ. 1.  That serious Profession of true faith is to be taken by us as a probable Evidence of the thing Professed , till men forfeit their credit , I shall ( God willing ) prove anon from Scripture . And if I did not before stand to prove it from Scripture , I desire Mr. Blake , as he findeth cause , by the following evidence , to impute it either to my disability , or my modesty ; If he find that I now prove it not , let him tell the world that I could not ; ( but let him not thence conclude that it is not true ; for another may prove it , if I cannot ) : but if I now prove it , let him impute the former omission to my charity , which provoked me to hope , that with such as he ( and so many as he here intimateth ) it had not been necessary : nay , I thought it had been out of controversy with us . 

2.  If he yield that charity is to hope the best , Why not then to be put to it ? Is it not put to it , when it must hope the best ? Or is not this a contradiction ? 

3.  What kind of holy Ordinance is this , wherein neither Charity nor Reason must be put to it , when the state of another is presented to our consideration ? 

4.  What is the more sure Rule for our proceeding , which is here mentioned ? I must profess , that upon my most diligent search , with a willingness to discover it , I am not yet able to know what Mr. Blakes Rule is , ( sure or not sure : ) I mean , what that qualification is , which he saith doth entitle to Baptism . Though he call it a Dogmatical Faith , yet he requireth the will's consent ; but to what , I am not able to discern , he doth so vary his Phrase and contradict himself . Onle by his Title on the top of the Leaf , I know that it is [ A Faith short of Justifying ] which he meaneth , which telleth me what faith it is not , though not what it is . 

5.  Either he will require a Profession of true Faith , or not : If not , than we are not yet fit to dispute about the ends to which that Profession is requisite , seeing we are not agreed whether the Profession itself be requisite in those whom we must admit . If the Profession itself be acknowledged necessary , then either for itself , or for another thing . Not for itself ; For , 1.  There is nothing in the thing . 2.  Nor in Scripture , to intimate any such thing . But on the contrary . 1.  It is signum mentis , and therefore is required to signify what is in the mind . 2.  Else a false Profession should be requisite and acceptable as well as a true , if it were Profession , quâ talis , and propter se , that were requisite . If it be not for the signification of what is in the mind ; then though it signify not the mind , it is acceptable : But that cannot be : for God hath forbidden lying , and never accepteth it , nor maketh it a condition of our Title to his benefits , as given to us by him . 3.  It is not any one sign that God tieth us to : Not speaking , for then the dumb could not profess : Not writing ; for than none could be Professors that cannot write : But it 's any thing that may signify the mind ; which plainly shows , that it is required to this end , that it may signify the mind . God never encouraged any to speak the bare words , be they true or false ; but only to speak the truth . 

6.  Suppose it were only another species of Faith which is necessary to be professed in order to Baptism , would not Mr. Blake put either his Charity or Reason to it , to judge whether the person do in probability mean as he speaks ? If not : 1.  then he will not sanctify God in his Ordinances ▪ but abuse them , and wrong his Neighbour , by laying by Charity and Reason so much in the administration . 2.  And then , if he knew that they came in scorn , or learn the word as a Parrot , he would accept them , which I will not imagine . But if he will put his Charity and Reason to it , to judge of the truth of a common Profession ; let him show us his warrant , and it shall serve us to prove that we must do so also in case of a special Profession . 

What ever the Faith professed be , If you say your Profession is required propter se , for the matter of the sign , and not for the formality and use of signifying , it were not only groundless , but a reproachful ascribing that to God , which we would not ascribe to the silliest man or woman about us , that hath the free use of Reason . And if the Profession be given , and taken ( and so required ) not propter se materially , but ut signum mentis , for the signifying of our minds ; then sure I need not dig deep into Scripture or Reason , to prove that both the Reason and Charity of the minister is here to be Employed , to judge whether indeed it do signify the man's mind according to his pretences , or not . It grieveth me for the Church's sake , to read Mr. Blake's words of the Ministers he meets with : for if they do scarce any of them so much regard the probability of the Parents Regeneration in the administration of that Sacrament , than they either Baptise upon an apparent Lie ( if the Parent profess saving Faith , when he hath not the least probability of it ) ; or else they take up with the Profession of another species of Faith ( as Mr. Blake doth . ) And I crave their patient sober enquiry , Whether that be not to make another species of Baptism and of visible Christianity ? and also , whether they have yet well discerned and determined what that Faith is that must be professed , and whether the world have ever yet seen an exact or satisfactory definition or description of it ? and where ? and in what words ? and also whether they have not the same uncertainty of the sincerity of that lower Faith in the Professors , as of true saving Faith ? and consequently , Whether Mr. Blakes doctrine have delivered them from difficulties , or ensnared them ? I crave of all those Reverend brethren whom Mr. Black meets with , and are guilty of what he charges them with , that they would once more consider the matter . 

2.  Having thus showed that a Profession is necessary and that in its formal nature , and to its proper end , as it is a signification of a man's mind , and in order to the discovery of the mind , and not barely for the very terms or signs of Profession ; I am next to show what things are necessary ( besides the bare words or other signs ) to the Being of a Profession , or what properties or requisites are , sine quibus non , to the validity of it to its End , that it may be indeed taken by us to be signum mentis , and not be accounted Hey-boyss and vain . 

And in General it is necessary that the Profession seem true : for a Profession that is notoriously falls , is uncapable of the Ends atd use that it is required for : for such a one will not signify a man's mind , but the contrary . 

more particularly , 1.  The Professon which we must take as valid , must seem to be made in a competent understanding of the Matter which is Professed . it 's a known rule in Law that Consensus non est ignorantis . If a Parrot be taugh to repeat the Creed , it is not to be called a Profession of Faith. The same we may say of any such Idiot or child , or persons at age , who are notoriously ignorant of the matter which they speak : therefore it is the duty of those that require such Professions , to endeavour to discern whether the person understand what he professeth , before he do it : and therefore in the ancient Churches their Catechists or other Teachers did first see to their understanding the sum of the Christian Faith , before they baptised any at age : and so should the Parents themselves be examined , before we baptise their children upon the account of their Profession , except it be when we have just cause to presume that the person understandeth the matter professed . Yet if any shall grounldesly so presume , and be mistaken this makes not the Profession Dorid , as to the use which the Church makes of it , though it be Dorid as to the real internal Covenant of man with God , or to the Benefits of such a Profession by any grant or Gift from God ; for in in foro Dei , it is no Profession or worse . 

2.  We must take nothing for a Profession , but that which hath a seeming seriousness . For if it be Notoriously or apparently ludicrous , or in a scorn , or not meant as it is spoken , it is then apparently false : and we are not to believe apparent falsehoods . 

3.  It must seem to be voluntary or free : I deny not but some force may stand with a valid Profession : but that is only such a force as is supposed to prevail with the Heart itself , and not only with the tongue when the heart is against it . If any should say to a Jew , [ If thou wilt not Profess thyself a Christian , I will presently run thee through with my sword , the words that should be forced by this threat are not to be taken for a true Profession , when it is apparent , that they are merely forced by fear . So that which done in a passion of Anger or the like , contrary to the ordinary prevailing bent and resolution of the heart , is not to be taken as a voluntary and valid Profession . 

4.  It must be a Profession not prevalently contradicted by word or deed : Otherwise , still it is an apparent or notorious lie , which no man can be bound to believe . If a man say in one breath , [ that he believeth in Christ ] and in the next will say [ that he doth not believe in him , ] he nulleth his own profession by a revocation : and if he revoke it in the direct sense , it is all one as if he did it in the same terms : As if he say that he believeth in Christ , but withal , that he believeth him to be but a man , or a Prophet , or not to have died to ransom us from our sins , etc. so if he should say [ I am a Christian [ but yet ] ay love the world and the flesh more than Christ ] the same must be said of a Practical contradiction , which is effectual to invalidate a Verbal Profession . If a man should profess to the Prince , that he honoureth him , and when he hath done , should spurn at him , or spit in his face : or if a man should profess that he loveth you , and desireth your safety , and withal shall discharge a Pistol at you , or run at you with his sword ; I leave it to yourselves whether he be to be believed . 

Yet some Contradiction there may be , which may not nullify a Profession : As when the terms of Contradiction seem not to be understood by him that useth them , or not to be meant in the contradicting sense ; or when he seems not to discern the contradiction , but thinks both may consist , and seems to hold the truth practically , and so contradicts it speculatively or ignorantly : or when the contradiction is more weak , and not seemingly prevalent , as [ I believe , Lord help my unbelief . ] 

5.  When a man hath utterly forfeited the credit of his word ; the Profession of that man must not be merely verbal , but practical . This is all clear in the Laws of Nature . When a man may be justly said to have forfeited the credit of his bare word , is a matter of consideration . The common reason and practice of men , is against trusting a perjured man's bare word , till he give sufficient evidence of his repentance for that perjury : And the like may be said of one that hath often violated Promise , and given no Evidence of any effectual change upon his heart , but that still he hath the same disposition . The Novatians thought that those who lapsed heinously after the Baptismal Profession , were not again to be absolved , and admitted into the communion of the Church , but they did not exclude them from God's pardon , as is commonly believed to them . Clemens Alexandrinus , and others of those ancient Churches , do seem to exclude all from pardon of sin , after twice or thrice offending : but I suppose , they meant it only of heinous sin , and of pardon in foro Ecclesiae , and not of pardon in foro Dei ( a distinction that was not then detested . ) 

The truth is , the temper and quality of persons , and the nature of the fault , and many circumstances may so vary the case , that it is not the same Number of promise-breaking , or sins after promises , that will prove the forfeiture of each sinner's Credit . Ordinarily , in case of gross heinous sin , if a man have oft broke his promise , his bare word is no more to be taken , but an actual Reformation must prove the validity of it . But there are some cases , in which once or twice breach of promise may forfeit credit , as to the Church , and some cases wherein more than three or four brecahes may not do it . But as for an Infidel that newly comes to the Profession of the Faith , or a notorious ungodly man that newly comes to the Profession of godliness , we must take their first profession , though their lives were never so vicious before ; because though they have oft committed other sins , yet not this of Covenant-breaking with God , and they seem to be recovered from their former unconscionableness . 

Perhaps some one will say , that , if all this be to be looked after before the validity of a Profession can be discerned , than this is an uncertain Rule for us to proceed by , in administering the Sacraments : for Ministers will be uncertain when all these qualifications are found in men's Professions . Besides that , it puts tyrannising power into Ministers hands , which you tell Mr. ●ombess of in your book of Infant-baptism . 

Answ. I have there showed that the danger is greater in the Anabaptiss way of using this power than of ours . 2.  This objection is as much against them that are for the title of a Dogmatical faith , as for us that require the Profession of a saving faith . For they cannot be certain of their lower faith itself , and therefore must take up with the profession of it : and if they will not require all these qualifications forenamed of that Profession , than they may as well admit professed Jews and Heathens , and they will openly subject Gods ordinances to profanation . 3.  Because it is a variable case , and requireth Judgement in the Administrators ; therefore hath God made it a considerable part of the office and work of his Ministers , to Judge rightly of men's profession , that they may discern the meet from the unmeet : and therefore hath he required so much prudence and piety in Ministers , that they might be meet to judge in such cases . To bear these Keys , and wisely and faithfully to discern who are to be admitted , and who to be excluded , is no small part of their Trust , and Power , and Work. The great necessity of Church Officers , and the nature of its Government , would be the better understood , if this were well considered . It is not a possibility of men's erring in such Cases as are committed to human determination , that will warrant us to condemn that way , or to cast about for some more Infallible or easy course : such contrivances will have but the Popish success , and will lose us the credit of our honest just Authoritative decision , while we will needs pretend to an Infallibility , that the world may discern that indeed we never had it . The common-course of quarrelling with all Government where there is a possibility or danger of any great abuse , and evils thereby , doth directly conclude in the simple rejection of all Government by man and almost any thing else that man must be the agent in : for as long as such vile imperfect wretches are the Governors , how can you think , the actual administration will be perfect ? Get Angels to Govern immediately , or stay till men be as Angels of God , and then you shall have a cure for all these Inconveniences : but till then expect not good without evil , nor that so bad a creature as Man ▪ even the best of men , should govern any Society , or do any considerable work , without leaving upon it the Impression of his sinfulness , and many Imperfections . 

2.  Having showed what this Profession must be in the General ; and the Nature of the Act , I must next show what it must be Materially , and in Specie , ( as it is morally specified from the subject matter , ) And in general , the thing to be Professed , is : [ that the Professor is a Christian ; ] or , that he is a true penitent Believer in Christ.  

Object . It is not his own belief , qua creditur , which he is to make Profession of , but the Christian belief , quae creditur , that is , the Doctrine of the Gospel . 

Answ. 1.  This is a contradiction : He that professeth the Gospel to be true , doth eo nomine , profess his own belief of the truth of it . For will he profess it to be true , when he takes it not to be true ? otherwise he either speaks but the words , while he takes it himself to be false which he speaks , or else he only meaneth or saith that , ( other men think it to be true ) though he do not . 2.  We need not to ask any man for a profession to Evidence the Gospel to be true , but only to evidence his own Belief of it . The Gospel needs not their testimony , much lesle a testimony which they believe not themselves , which is as none . 3.  Infidels are meet to be admitted to Baptism , if there be no Profession of their own faith required . But I suppose I need not to use more words against this objection . 

more particularly as Christianity , in sensu famosiori is the saving entertainment of Christ in the soul ; and faith , in sensu famosiori , is that which is called justifying saving Faith ; and a Church member , in sensu famosiori , is such a true Christian ; so it is true Faith and Christianity whose Profession is thus necessary : and if there be but a bare profession without the thing Professed , these are called Christians or believers but Analogically or ( as our Divines commonly tell the Papists ) Equivocally . 

The Faith thus to be professed must be considered , in its Acts , and in its Objects . The first Act is the understandings assent to the truth of the Revelation , upon the credit of the Revealer , which Implieth , yea formally containeth a crediting of his Veracity , and so an Affiance therein . 2.  A Consent or Willingness that Christ be ours on the Gospel terms ; or an Accepting Christ and life , as offered : which Scripture calleth the Receiving of Christ Jesus the Lord , Joh. 1.10 , 11.  Col. 26. which is still employed in the Affiance or Recumbency by which the Act of Faith is so oft entitled in Scripture , and which must be added . 

As the act of faith must needs be both of the Intellect and the Will , so the Object must be answerably , the Truth of the Gospel , and the goodness of the benefits there revealed and offered . The Church is more agreed about the particulars of the Latter , then of the Former : for as the Papists would make us believe that the Fundamentals and Essentials of the Christian Faith cannot be known as distinct from the rest , but that all which the Pope saith , is de fide , is of necessity to salvation : so among ourselves we are not well agreed , whether Fundamentals ( that is , Essentials ) can be enumerated . There is no doubt but we may easily enumerate them in General terms ; and so our whole Christian Faith is contained in our common Profession at Baptism , [ I believe in God the Father , the Son , and the Holy Ghost . ] If we yet descend to some particulars the case is clear : that to believe in God the Father , is to believe , that he is the most Wise , and Great , and Good , and our Maker and Ruler , and our chiefest Good : to believe in God the Son , is to believe that he is God and man , the Redeemer and Saviour , ransoming us by his blood , and overcoming death by his Death and Resurrection , and procuring us pardon and everlasting life by his Merits : to believe in God the Holy Ghost , is to believe that he is the Sanctifier of the people of God that shall be saved . Thus much is Evidently Essential to the Christian Faith , and nothing but what is contained in this . But then the great difficulty lieth here , whether a more particlar belief of some truths contained under these comprehensive terms be not Essential to Christianity . 

To which I only say in general , 1.  That the belief of the Truth of the Promise , or other verities , being necessary in order to the determination of the Will , to the Acceptance of the good revealed therein , there is therefore so much of the doctrine of Necessity to be believed , as is of Necessity to the determination of the Will , to accept God for our God , by Creation ; and Jesus Christ for our Saviour by Redemption , and the Holy Ghost for our Sanctifier . 2.  All that is essentially contained in these Relative Tit●eses [ our God , our Saviour , and our Sanctifier ] must be particularly conceived of and believed . 3.  The foresaid Explicatory terms well understood , seem to contain all such Essentials . 4.  He therefore , that upon a true understanding of ●hem , doth believe all these , doth believe all that is Essential to the Christian Faith. 5.  Some persons can understand the Matter contained in these words without any more words ( having first the Grammatical and Scriptural Explication of them ) : others have not yet had such Explications , or at least understood them not , and so must have more particular express , expository terms , that they may understand . 6.  It is Matter that is primarily Essential , and Fundamental , and that Propter se : Words are to be called Essential , or Fundamental , but secundarily , and propter aliud , viz. so far as they are Means , without which the Matter cannot be received , but no further : and therefore no particular words are properly fundamental , or essential to our Religion ; seeing that he that never heard those words , and yet believeth the matter by equiplloent terms , or any signs , is truly a ●hristian . 7.  The Essentials primary in the Matter are to all the same , but the Terms of Necessity for expressing them are not the same to all , either for number of words , or sentences ; seeing one can receive that in ten words , another cannot in twenty . And hence is it , that if twenty men be set to draw up the Essentials of Christianity , they may do it in twenty several forms of words , and yet all express the same essential Matter : and one Confession may be in ten lines , and another in more pages , and yet both speak the same Fundamental Tru●hs ; one more concisely or generally , and the other more copiously and plainly . 8.  Whatever other words may be necessary to some , besides those that directly express the abovesaid Matter of Belief , in God the Father , Son , and Ghost , they are not to this end necessary , that we may have more matter of Faith than is there contained , as if it were not all that is essential , but that this may by the ignorant be better understood : so that those other particular Articles , which some call Fundamentals , are but expositions of those three Fundamentals , that indeed we may receive them . 6.  In point of duty , a Minister must require a more full and large expression of his Faith from one man than from another , viz. From those that he hath apparent cause to suspect of not understanding , or not believing what the more Comprehensive Concise Terms do express : but yet , if either he neglect that duty , ( or his previous inquiry and examination ) though sinfully , or if the party that gave no cause of suspicion , be yet ignorant , or an unbeliever , it doth not follow , that the Concise Profession was a Nullity for want of larger Explication . He that professeth to believe in God the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost , hath made a Profession of saving Faith in all the Essentials , as to the sense of the words , and it is to be taken as valid , in foro Ecclesiastico , in the Judgement of the Church if there be not some of the abovenamed particulars apparent to invalidate it , ( as Contradiction , apparent Ignorance , Derision , etc. ) May it not be the safest way to imitate the Scripture examples in such cases , where we always find Profession in order to Baptism , made but in few comprehensive terms ? for , as by this way we follow the surest Guide , so are we most likely to comprehend all the Essentials , and leave none out ; when spinning out a Profession to a Volumn in more particular Explicatory terms , if these same generals be not among them , may leave out much of the Essence of Religion , which these do comprehend . Not that I would have the people hear no longer discourses for Explication ; but it is one thing , to put them into a Sermon , or Discourse ; and another thing , to put them into the Profession of Faith.  

If , notwithstanding all that is said , any shall still be prejuced against the requiring of a Professon of saving Faith , because of the difficulty of discerning when it is that all the Fundamentals are professed ; let such consider , that it doth as much concern those that differ from us , to untie this knot , if they can , as us . We have long showed the Papists , that themselves must be forced to distinguish between those points of Faith which some may be saved without , and those which none can be saved without : and so indeed Bellarmine and others of them confess . And those that say , it is a Dogmatical Faith that must be professed , must needs comprehend all the aforesaid Essentials in their Dogmatical faith , or else they cannot call it the Christian Faith. So that , as to the Object of Assent , they are equally concerned in the difficulties . 

2.  And then , for the second part of Faith , which is , the Wills consent , or Affiance , or Entertainment , Receiving , Acceptance , Embracing ( or what other term to that purpose you will use ) of the Good proposed in the Gospel , the same forementioned words do also comprehend all that is Essential to the Object of this Act : for the Will as well as the Intellect , to Believe in God the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost , is all our Faith : that is , [ To receive God as our God , our Creator , our Soveveraign and Felicity , and Jesus Christ our Saviour , from the guilt and power of Sin , and to bring us to everlasting Glory , and this by Ransoming us by his death and merits , By Rising , Interceding , Teaching , Ruling us , and at last Raising and Judging us ; and to receive the Holy Ghost as the witness of Christ , the inspirer of the writers of his Word , and as our Sanctifier . ] Thus is the Object of true Christian faith expressed , as containing the Objects of the William  

To conclude , in a doubtful case , it is safe to be as express and particular as we can , in our Instructions and Examinations , and not barely to keep to the mere Essentials : because there are many of the Adjacent truths , or superstructures , which are of so great use , as that the fundamentals are hardly and seldom well entertained without them . 

And yet when we play not the part of Instructors , and preparers , but of Administrators of God's Ordinances , than we must take heed of exacting more as necessary , then is indeed necessary ; and in difficult Cases , when the difficulty lieth in the Darkness of the persons heart , and you doubt , by reason of the scantness of his expressions , whether he believe as he speaketh , we must give credit to his own words , as far as reason will permit , and to judge the best , though we may fear the worst : and this will be our Duty ; and if we should be deceived , it will not prove our sin , but his that makes the false profession : And this leads me up to the next part of my Task ; which is , having thus explained the Nature of the requisite Profession , to prove the Affirmative of the Question 

THESIS' Mi●isterss m●y admit person's into the visible Church of Christ , by Baptism , upon the bare Verbal Profession of the true Christian saving faith ( such as before described ) without staying for or searching after any further Evidences of sincerity , ( ordinarily , and as of necessity to this end . ) This Proposition I prove ( in short ) by these Arguments following . 

Argum. 1.  We have the warrant of their approved Example in Scripture whom we are to eye as our Pattern in Administrations for the administering of Baptism upon a bare Verbal Profession : therefore we may so Administer it . 

I here suppose the Practice of the Church before Christ's Incarnation ; which is out of all doubt : Moses took the Verbal profession of all Israel , to be a Covenant between God and them ; wherein they avouched the Lord to be their God , and God avouched them to be his people . On the like terms did Joshua , Asa , and others renew the Covenant of God with that people ; and on the same terms was circumcision administered . On these terms did John Baptise multitudes , whose lives he knew not before , and of whom he required no further Evidence than these present Professions to sati●fie him of their capacity . On the same ground did Peter's Converts receive their Baptism , Acts 2.41 . For they baptised them suddenly , and the Scripture mentioneth no further search that was made by the Apostles after their sincerity ; nor is it probable , it could be done upon three thousand souls . The same may be said of the Eunuch , Acts 8. and the Jailor , Acts 16. and other Scripture Examples . It is past question , that they then took up with a present profession , and therefore so must we . For if any will be so overwise , as to give reasons why they may swerve from these Precedents , let them consider , whether they teach not the licentious a way as effectually to avoid other Examples of the Apostles , and so to destroy the order and Discipline of the Church . 

Object . In those time's Profession did hazard men's Lives ; and therefore it was then a greater Evidence of sincerity , than it is in prosperous times . — Answ. it 's true , that often it was hazardous : yet 1.  When 3000 were converted at a time and when the Rulers durst not persecute for fear of the people , and when the Churches had rest and were so edified , walking in the fear of the Lord , Act. 9.31 . than it was not so dangerous . 2.  This Difference is but gradual and altereth not the case : For as still they that will Live Godly , shall suffer persecution , so Profession is taken in Scripture for a satisfactory Evidence . 

Arg. 2.  The Law of Nature , which is the ground of human converse , requireth that we believe men , till they have apparently forfeited their Credit ; therefore so we must do here : and therefore must take their Profession as a sign of the thing Professed ; and consequently valid . 

Deny the Antecedent , and you must overthrew all Communities and Societies , which is contrary to Gods Will revealed in Scripture , and in Nature : They that will not believe others , must not expect that others should believe them ; and so human Converse will be overthrown , and all men must live by themselves , or live as enemies , in constant diffidence of each other . 

Obj But wicked men have forfeited their Credit ; and therefore their word is not to be taken . 

Answ. They have not made such a total forfeiture ( quâ wicked ) as to warrant our unbelief For 1.  There are such remnants of Common honesty in man's Nature , that commonly makes a Lie to be odious , and a matter apparently evil among unconverted men . 2.  They Profess themselves to be turned from their Wickedness ; and therefore you cannot refuse Credit to them upon the supposition of their wickedness which they disclaim , without proof . 3.  The Apostles took their Profession who within a few hours before had been persecutors , and guilty of the murder of the Lord of life : therefore a man's wickedness before , is not enough to invalidate his following Profession of true faith , repentance , and reformation . 

Argum. 3.  We must not censure our Brother to be a Liar without clear evidence that he is so indeed : therefore we must take his Profession to be true , and consequently , to be valid . 

The Antecedent is plain in Scripture . no man may Judge ( that is , ungroundedly , or without a Call ) that would not be Judged . Who art thou that Judgest another man's servant ? Rom. 14.4 . Therefore we may not Judge them to tell a lie , when we cannot prove it , till they have quite forfeited their credit : no more than we may lawfully Judge a man to be a thief , or murderer , or adulterer , or Heretic , when we cannot prove it . If the slander of the tongue be a sin , so is the slander of the heart . 

And for the Consequence , it is most clear , that either the Minister must believe the man's Profession , or take him for a Liar ; there is no third way that can be pretended , save one , and that is , that we must suspend our belief , and neither Judge his Profession to be true or false . But this cannot be here pretended , with any tolerable appearance of reason . For , 1.  God would never make men's profession necessary to their admittance , and put the Minister in the power of Baptising upon such a Profession , and consequently , of requiring , receiving and Judgeing of that profession , if we might wholly suspend our Judgement of it whether it be true or false . It cannot be that I can be required , as an officer of Christ to require , and receive a man's Profession , without any respect of the truth of it : for it is therefore required that it may declare the mind : or else , why may not an Infidel be received without Profession : 2.  And if I be not to Judge of the truth of a Profession , or of the falsehood ; then a Profession apparently false , may be received : but that may not be , as hath been manifested . 3.  It is denied by learned Philosophers , that the mind can possibly hang in equilibrio , in such cases . 4.  it 's one half the uncharitable sin of rash Censures to suspend the Judgement of Charity , and not to Judge the person to speak truth , when he hath not forfeited h●s credit , as it is the other half to Judge him positively to speak falsely . 5.  A pari , We must not suspend our judgement of the truth of men's Profession of Penitence , that they may be Absolved and Readmitted to Communion ; but must discern whether probably their Profession be true or false : nor may we suspend our judgement of the Truth of that Profession , which we may have occasion to require , in order to the Lords Supper ; or , to the private comforting of an afflicted conscience etc.  Therefore not here neither ; seeing the Profession is the same ; and the reasons , at least , as urgent : 

In this point , I find a learned sober Divine , Mr. James Wood , Professor of Theology at Aberdeen in Scotland ▪ hath with much Christian moderation manifested his descent from me by name , in a book against Mr. Lokier concerning the matter of the visible Church , pag. 149.150 , 151 , etc.  ( A book that I never saw till a day or two before the writing of these words , June 12. 1656. ) This Reverend man agreeth with me in the main points wherein I differ from Mr. Blake . He owneth fully he necessity of the Profession of a saving Faith , and alloweth of no lower Profession , as a tittle to Baptism : he frequently owneth the distinction between forum Dei vel interius , & forum Ecclesiasticum & exterius ; and consenteth too , to the application that I make of it : But he thinketh , that though the profession of true Faith is necessary to Baptism ; yet , not as an Evidence of Regeneration , but that we are to abstract the Profession wholly from Conversion , or non conversion . Pag. 8. he saith [ 2. when he saith , Hypocrites have no Right to be in the Church , or , as afterwards , should not be there , if the meaning were , that men , though they make a Profession of Religion , yet continuing Hypocrites , and graceless in their hearts , do sin in adjoining themselves to the visible Church ; and that they have no Right in foro interiori , this we should not deny ▪ but if his meaning be , that no Hypocrites have a jus Ecclesiasti●um and in foro exteriori , to be in the visible Church , we deny it and he shall never be able to prove it . ] 

And pag. 20.  He hath the like . And pag. 23 and 25. & passino , the like . And pag 20.30 . He saith [ Concl. 2.  A serious sober outward Profession of the Faith , and true Christian Religion , together with a serious Profession of former sinful courses — a serious consideration of these things , as such , considered abstractively ( abstractions simplici ) from the work 〈◊〉 saving Grace , and heart-conversion , by true Repentance , & Faith , is sufficient qualification in the Ecclesiastic Court to constitute a person sit matter to be received as a member of the visible Church , accounted 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , i e. Among these that are within . If I be asked , what I mean by a serious Profession ? I Answ. Such a Profession as hath in it , at least , a moral sincerity ( as Divines are wont to distinguish ) though happily , not always a supernatural sincerity , i e. ( that I may speak more plainly ) which is not openly discernably simulate , histrionick , scenical , and hypocritical , in that hypocrisy which is gross : but all circumstances being considered , by which ingenuity is estimate among men , giving credit one to another , there appears no reason , why the man may not , and ought not to be esteemed , as to the matter , to think and purpose as he speaketh , from whatsoever habitual principle it proceedeth , whether of saving Grace or Faith , or of faith historical , and conviction wrought by some common operation of the Spirit . A man that hath such a Profession as this , and desireth Church-communion , the Church ought to receive him as a member . And all be it I deny not , but where there is just or probable ground of suspicion , that the Profession hath simulation and fraudulent dealing under it , as in one new come from an heretical Religion , or who hath been before a Persecutor of the Faith and Professors thereof : there may be a delay in prudence , and time taken to try and prove if he deals seriously and ingenuously — etc.  

And in Page 150 , speaking of myself he saith , [ 1.  The Learned Author and I , are fully agreed upon the mater concerning the outward ground , upon which persons are to be admitted and acknowledged members of the visible Church ; viz , A serious Profession of the faith , including a Profession of subjection to the commands and Ordinances of Christ , is sufficient for this , and that persons , making this Profession are without delay , or searching for trial and Discoveries of their heart-conversion to be admitted . — I do heartily approve his weighty Exhortation subjoined . But I cannot yet agree with him in this , that men are not to be received into the visible Church but under the notion of true Believers , and positively judged to be such , though but probably . ] And Pag. 151.  [ I confess also , that were a man's outward carriage and way such , as did discover him to be an unregenerate man — he were not to be received into the fellowship of the visible Church : but wi●hall I say , He were not to be debarred , or not received , not upon the account of non-regeneration ; or upon that carriage , considered under this formality and reduplication , as a ●●gn and discovery of non Regeneration , but materially , as being contrary to the very outward profession of Faith : — My reason is , because I conceive it is Gods revealed Will in his Word , that men be received into the visible Church , that they may be regenerate and converted , and that the Ministerial dispensation of the Ordinances are by Gods revealed will set up in the Church to be means of Regeneration and Conversion , as well as Edification of such as are Regenerate . ] [ 3.  I conceive , that between such as are in a course discovering certainly non-regeneration — there are a middle sort , of whom there is no sufficient ground probably to judge them regenerate . — ] My reason is , because to ground a positive act of Judgement that a man is regenerate in foro exteriori , there is requisite some seemingness of a spiritual sincerity in a man's profession : i e , that he doth it from a spiritual principle , upon spiritual motives , to a spiritual End : But a mere sober , not mocking serious Profession , without more , is not a positive appearance of spiritual supernatural sincerity . — I humbly conceive , there cannot be had positive probable Evidences of this ordinarily without observation of a man's way after Profession for a time , wherein notice may be taken of his walking equally in the latitude of Duties and constantly in variety of cases and conditions . ] [ To conclude ; Mr. Baxter and ] are at agreement upon the Matter , concerning the qualification that is sufficient for admitting persons into the visible Church , viz. Serious profession , without delay to inquire for more : and so we are agreed , in the main ▪ about the matter of the visible Church . We differ in this , that he thinks persons are not to be admitted , but under consideration of persons judged ▪ at least , probably converted and regenerated : My mind is , that they are to be admitted , under the name of serious , sober outward Professors , abstracting from Conversion or Non-conversion . 

I have thus at large recited the words of this Reverend Brother , that the Reader may perceive the true state of the Controversy , and how we are agreed in the main , and on what grounds he proceedeth ; and that if there be any that consent not with me , in the point wherein he and I differ , they may yet be persuaded to take up in his way , and not remove so far from the truth as I conceive Mr. Blake hath done . And , as to the difference itself , 1.  The main thing wherein I perceive that ▪ I differ from this Reverend man and some other about such matters , is , that my Judgement of Charity is much more extensive than theirs seems to be . I confess , that when it comes to a confident persuasion of another man's sincerity , I am apt to be jealous as well as they ; and also when we speak of the Profession of men collectively considered , I am forced to some harder thoughts of many , than some have : but when I have to do with Individuals , I am apt to extend this charitable Judgement further than I see many do : not by making the way to heaven any broader than they : For when we are upon the point in thesi , what is the proper qualification of a Saint , I think there is no difference among us : but when we speak of it in hypothesi , and of the actual qualification of this Individual person , whether he have the foresaid life or not ; I am apt to think it my duty , to judge the best till I know the worst ; and to hope well ( though with much fear ) where some think they see no ground of hopes . I confess it seems to me but cold charity , that can afford men our good thoughts so far , as to take them for visible Church members ; but can find no room for a hope of their being in a state of Salvation . I have hopes of the Salvation of many thousands , that I perceive some others have no such thoughts of . 

2.  more particularly , I cannot yet see , that I can be excused or disobliged from having a positive Hope ( taking Hope in the vulgar sense ) of the saving estate of that man that professeth seriously and soberly , that he truly Repenteth , and Believeth in Christ , and hath not yet utterly forfeited the Credit of his word . Charity thinketh no evil , believeth all things , hopeth all things : 1 Cor. 13.5 , 7.  I think , the very Maxims of Nature , cleared , and enforced by Christ in the Gospel , do teach me to believe , that my brother is not a Liar , till I see convincing evidence of the contrary . I confess , I judge myself to own this charitable construction and judgement of his serious Profession , especially in so so great a cause , to my Neighbour who hath not evidently disobliged me , even as much as I owe my bread to the hungry , and clothes to the naked , yea , or the liberty of the common Air or earth , if it were in my power to restrain it . 

3.  And I do not find myself ( at least ordinarily and easily ) capable of suspending my judgement of the truth or falsehood of a man's Profession , and being wholly neutral in it . 

4.  Yea , I perceive , that it is the judgement of this Reverend Brother , that we should no● be Neutral , nor suspend our judgement about the Truth of the Profession which we require ; but that we should seek after that which he calleth a Moral Sincerity herein , yea , and sometime delay and try them further , who offer a suspicious Profession . 

5.  And I must confess , that I take it for a great sin , to censure my Brother positively to be a Liar , and to be a child of the Devil , ●nd in a state of Damnation , without clear convincing Evidence . 

6.  And it seems to me a thing utterly Improbable , if not certainly untrue , that God should require any man as sine qua non , to his Church-entrance or admittance , that he profess true Faith and Repentance to the Minister and Church , ( as before them , ) and yet that both Minister and people are bound to receive this Profession abstractively as to the Faith and Repentance so professed . God knoweth the heart without Profession : it is therefore because of us that know not men's hearts , that profession is required : And must we then receive such a profession abstractively from the thing professed ? Every word i● ordained to be a sign of the mind : and a profession is formally a Relative Being . The Matter of the Sign , viz. The Word , or the like , a Bruit , a Parrot may possibl● have : And if the very Essence of a profession , qua talis , contain its Relation to the thing professed , and the mind of the Professor , then is it destructive to the very ends and Use of a Profession , to abstract the material Sign from the thing professed . If you s●y that it is not Regeneration which they are supposed to profess : I answer , it is true Repentance , and Faith in Christ which they are supposed to profess ; and that is Regeneration , or the principal part of it , in sensu passivo . To what purpose should we imagine , that men should be obliged by God to make so solemn a profession , which none of the hearers are in the least obliged to believe to be true ? 

7.  We are certainly bound to believe a sober , credible person of proved fidelity in other things , when he solemnly professeth to Repent and believe ; ( else we must deny credit to that which beareth plain Evidence of Credibility : ) therefore we must believe all others according to the proportion of their Credibility , and not deny them credit without just cause . 

8.  I never yet heard any assign any other cause why God should require an open profession , than the revealing of the thing professed , and the consequents thereof : therefore , till we hear a proof of some other Reason , we have cause to adhere to this . 

9  All men are bound to judge , that God would have no man to tell a lie : therefore they are bound to judge that God would have no man to profess that he Repenteth , when he doth not : therefore , he that is to judge my Profession to be by Gods commanding and approving Will , is also to judge it to be a true Profession : But the Ministers and the Church are ( judicio charitatis , & fide humana ) to judge , that the Profession of the person is such as God doth require and accept ( as to the main substance , ) before they baptise him , and receive him into Communion , upon the account of that Profession . 

10.  I conceive , that this Reverend Brother granteth in effect the thing which I dispute for , while he affirmeth , that such a Moral Sincerity may be looked after , as that [ All Circumstances considered by which Ingenuity is estimate among men , there appears no reason why the man may not , and ought not to be esteemed , as to the matter to think and purpose as he speaketh . ] For I pled for no more than this . Object . But this is nothing to the Principle that it proceedeth from ; special or common Grace . Answ. A true Repentance , and saving faith , can come from none but a supernatural Principle of special Grace : and therefore he that professeth this Repentance and Faith , doth thereby profess that supernatural Principle : therefore , if am bound to believe , that he speaks as he thinks , than I am bound to believe that he is a truly penitent Believer , if he know his own heart : and he is liker to know it better than I  

Moreover he saith , that [ To ground a positive Act of Judgement , that a man is Regenerate , in foro exteriori , there is requisite some seemingness of spiritual sincerity that is , that he doth it from a spiritual principle , motives , etc. ] To which I say , that a serious Profession of Faith and Repentance , is a Credible seemingness of Faith and Repentance . And he that professeth true Faith and Repentance , must needs profess them as from a spiritual Principle , and Motives , and to a spiritual End : for they cannot be from any other principle or motives ( principally ) nor to any other ultimate End.  

I am therefore forced to descent from the main reason of this Reverend Brother's judgement herein , viz. [ That there cannot be had a positive probable Evidence of this , ordinarily , without observation of a m●ns' way after Profession , for a time , etc. ] For though confess , this is fuller Evidence which he pleadeth for ▪ yet still I judge , that a sober ▪ serious Profession is a credible Evidence of the thing professed , till the person have quite forfeited the Credit of his word . And outward Reformation may be forced or sergeant , as well ( though not easily ) a● words . 〈◊〉 it was a saving faith and Repentance which Peter invited the I●ws to , Act. 2 and Paul the Jailor , Act 16. etc.  So doubt not , but they took the following profession of these men as a credible Evidence of the same saving Faith which they professed . 

Argum. 4.  That which hath Evidence of Credibility , aught to be believed . But the profession of men , or their bare words who have not forfeited the Credit of their word● , hath Evidence of Credibility : therefore they ought to be believed . 

The Major is undeniable , taking the measure of belief to be according to the measure of that Evidence . 

The M●nor I prove . 1.  From the ordination of nature . 2.  From the consent of the world , and certain experience 1.  Nature hath not given one man an inspection into the breast of another ; nor hath God made any Minister a searcher of hearts , and beholder of men's thoughts . 2.  God hath made man capable of knowing in his own thoughts : though its true , that the heart is so deceitful , that there is a great difficulty of knowing them of ourselves ; yet the meaning of that Text , Jer. 17 , 9 , 10. is concerning others , [ who can know it ? ] that is , [ who can know another's heart ? ] But yet for all the deceitfulness , a certain measure of knowledge may be had . For , 3.  Man hath a certain knowledge of the Evil of lying , and so a certain credibility naturally , or by the light of nature : as the examples of the very Heathens can witness . 4.  The tongue was created to be the Index of the mind . Though man's actual language be acquired , yet his tongue was made for that use . All this set together , shows , ex natura rei , that though the Evidence be imperfect , yet an Evidence it is . 

Moreover , if there be such a thing as fides humana due among men , than there is such a thing as Evidence of Credibility . But the Antecedent is true : Therefore so is the Consequent . He that denyeth the Antecedent , 1.  I suppose will consent that no man believes him . 2.  And would not sure have any more converse used in the world . 3.  And I would put it to the consideration of the contrary-minded , whether , if ordinarily there be no Evidence of Credibility in men's word , and Professions be not to be taken as signs of the thing professed , it were not best , either to cut out men's tongues , or else forbear teaching our children to speak , and so let language perish from the earth . For , if it be ordinarily understood as mere lying , it would seem the best way to extirpate it by this means . 

2.  And I have also the consent and experience of the world on my side , of the Credibility of the words even of common men in general . 1.  All Societies are established on the credit of men's words . Princes and people enter their Covenants upon the credit and confidence in each others words . 2.  All affairs are managed on this Supposition . The freest men in England do hold all their Estates and Lives upon the credit of the words , and common fidelity , that it is even in unregenerate men . They are sufficient Witnesses at any Bar. Two of these by a false oath , might put a man to death ; and yet how seldom are such things done ? 

Moreover , how much doth all History depend upon the word of of man ? Yea , how much of human credit do we make use of , to assure us , that these which we now have are the same Scriptures that the Apostles written ; and that they are uncorrupted ? and how far ? and that these only are Canonical , etc.  

Argum. 5.  It is most suitable to the End of Baptism , that the Adult should be Baptised upon a bare Profession . For Baptism is to be the Sign and means of their solemn Entrance into the Church , and reception of a Sealed pardon of sin , etc.  Now , if you would stay till men prove their sincerity by their holy lives , you will have them grow before they are well planted ; and give you full Evidence of Church membership , before they are rightly entered Members : And sure this is not like to be a regular course . 

Argum. 6.  My last Argument is , from the continued Custom of the Church of God ( which with Paul was somewhat . ) I confess , the Churches after the Apostles days did for diverse ages prepare men long before they baptised them : True , they were Catechumeni before they were fideles , or baptised , But 1.  That was not that they might have experience of the sanctity of their lives , as the necessary qualification of the persons to be baptised , but it was that they might instruct them in the Christian Faith , that they might know what they did , and be fit to make an acceptable Profession : and then , when they were prepared for such a Profession , they took the bare Profession itself as the evidence of the truth of the thing professed ; still supposing , that it was such a Profession as is before described , and were not invalidate by contradiction , or the like : and therefore they did indeed expect , that those that lived in notorious scandalous sins should stop their course , and forbear the committing of them , as well as profess Repentance for them : because that it would have nullified their Profession , if they had committed the sin , even when they professed to repent of it . Therefore Austin in his Tractate de fide & operibus , on that subject , would have none baptised that were guilty of living with Concubines in fornication , unless they would actually put them away : and then promise to forsake them for the time to come : but he did not advice , that they should after all this , delay yet longer , to see whether they would make good that promise by their performance . I conclude therefore , that the Apostles , and all the Church having so long accepted of a bare verbal Profession , we must do so too . 

Objection 1.  If we shall believe the Professions of all or most men , we shall believe that to be true which is not true ; and we shall believe more Lies than Truths ; for there are more that make false Profession than a true and moreover , we shall administer the Ordinances of God upon the credit of a Lie , which seemeth a profaning them . 

Answ. 1.  A known Lie you may not , you cannot believe : and should you administer the Ordinances upon a Profession which is notorious false , you should profane them 2.  But if I believe a Liar when I cannot prove him such , that 's none of my sin , nay its m● duty . God made men's tongues to show their minds : and so I am to take their words : but if they will abuse them to lying , that 's their own sin , and not mine . 3.  If you would believe no man , till you are sure that he saith true , than you must believe no man in the world : For though you may know the thing to be true by other Evidence , yet believing him can give you no certainly of th● truth : for belief dependeth on the credit of the speaker . Your Argument therefore tendeth to the destroying of all human faith , which is not to be endured . 4.  It is but with a human faith that we believe them : and therefore , we believe them but as deceitful fallible men who may possibly deceive us . It is not with such a faith as we owe to God , wherein we conclude the thing revealed to be so unquestionably true , as that it cannot possibly be false , because God cannot Lie : yea it is with a diverse degree of Faith , that we believe diverse persons , who are to us of diverse degrees of Credibility . And if after all this , we be deceived in the most , the sin is only in the deceiver . And as for us ; 1.  We proceeded upon that evidence which Nature itself directeth us to take : even a man's words , as the sign of his mind . 2.  And upon that Evidence which the holy Examples of the Apostles of Christ have directed us to take ; who were not rashly venturous nor prophaners of God's Ordinances . 3.  And if we be indeed deceived in the most , or in many , it 's rather a sign that we are in God's way , than out of it ; for as Charity believeth all things ( credible ) so Christ hath told us , that the tares and wheat must grow together , and that many are called and few chosen : and that in the end he will take out of his Kingdom all things that offend , and them that work Iniquity : therefore such there will be . 

Object . 2.  But it is now the custom of the Country , and a matter of credit , to be Christians in Name ; and therefore all will be so ; and if you ask them whether they Repent or Believe , they will say , Yea : Therefore this is no credible Profession ; though theirs was in the days of the Apostles , when it hazarded their lives . 

Answ. 1.  The hazard that attendeth a man's words is not necessary to make them simply credible , though , as to the Degrees , it makes them more credible : else we must believe no man but he that speaks to the hazard of his life . 2.  The Prosperity of the Gospel will not warrant us to alter the Rule of Nature and Scripture ; else the Church must Incur greater difficulties in prosperity than in Adversity , if prosperity forfeit all men's credit : and so men should be kept out in prosperity who may be admitted in adversity : when the Church had peace and were edified , Act 9 31. the Apostles altered not their practice . 3.  We have great cause to rejoice when Christianity is in so good credit , as that all profess it ; and so , respectively , we may be glad when there are so many Hypocrites ; that is , when persecutors befriend the truth which they persecuted , and when the Gospel is in so much honour . And though I am not of their mind that think it the first prescribed End of the Institution , that Sacraments and Church-state should be the means of Conversion ; yet I doubt not but God , foreknowing that many hypocrites would unjustly Intrude , hath so fitted his Ordinances as to be advantageous to their Conversion when they have Intruded . He calleth not any to come into his Church without saving Faith and Repentance , nor is he consenting to any man's lying Profession , nor unworthy approach to Baptism or the Lord's Supper ; but yet they that do come unworthily and unwarrantably , do find that there , which tendeth to their Conversion , and frequently effecteth it : and this , I think , is the true mean between their Doctrine who maintain , that the Sacrament is prescribed as a converting Ordinance , and the unconverted are called to it ; and theirs that say simply , it is not a converting Ordinance . 

Object . 3.  This is the way to fill the Church with hypocrites , and ungodly ones ; and that breeds all our stir , while they scandadalize their Profession , and will not be ruled . 

Answ. 1.  It is God's way , and then no Inconvenience will disgrace it . 2.  We are foretold ( as is said ) that many are called , and few chosen , and the Church will have many unfound Professors to the end of the world . 3.  When they are in the Church , they are under teaching , and Discipline to inform them : or if they be obstinate in gross evil , to reject them . 4.  God will have a wide difference between the Church in heaven , and on earth . 

Object . 4.  then we must admit a drunkard or whoremonger that still lieth in his sin , if a bare Verbal Profession will serve the turn . 

Answ. No. You must see , that with his Profession of Repentance , he do forsake the sin repent of : or else he contradicteth and invalidateth his Profession . If a man in his drunkenness come to be baptised , and profess to hate drunkenness , he actually giveth his tongue the Lye. If a man swear that he hates swearing , he contradicteth himself ; and we have no reason to believe him . If a Whoremonger keep his Concubine while he professeth to repent , he doth one thing , and saith another : so that this doth not follow . 

Object . 5.  It was believing with all the heart that Philip required of the Eunuch ; and such a believing a● had the Promise of Salvation , as Paul and Silas required of the Jailor . 

Answ. True : and it 's such that we require . But Philip and Paul took a bare present Profession as the Evidence of that faith which they must accept : and so must we . 

Object . 6.  But then we shall apply the Seal to a Blank . 

Answ. By a Blank , if you mean , One that you ought not to apply it to , and that hath no right in foro Ecclesiae , I deny it : but , if you mean , one that is not actually the subject of God's promise , and to whom God is not actually obliged , ( but conditionally , as he is to Heathens , ) and one that hath no proper right coram Deo , or Deo judice , as shall justify his claim and receiving before God , so I grant that we set the seal to a Blank . But that 's not our sin , but his . 

And here I desire the Objectors carefully to note , that it is God's design in the Gospel , so to order things , that the actual Application shall first be the act of the sinner himself . God by his Ministers indeed will be the first offerer ; and the Spirit in the Elect shall be the first Exciter : But the first actual apprehender must be the sinner , and then the Ministers application , by the seals , is in order to come after men's own application . For man is to be the chooser or refuser of his own salvation , ( which Clemens Alexandrinus giveth as a reason , why in those times of the Church , [ When some , as the custom is , have divided the Eucharist , they permit every one of the people to take his own part : For every man's own conscience is best fitted to the act of choosing or refusing . ] Stromat . lib , 1. pag. 2. ) so that we are but to follow them with the seal ; and therefore the applying or refusing act must be first theirs : and theirs as professed , is the Director of ours . And therefore as it is their sin , and not ours , if they reject Christ ; and their faith , and not ours , by which he is chosen to be theirs ; so it is their sin , and not ours , if a misapplication be made of the External Ordinance by them ; and so we take not an invalid profession , we are bound to follow their profession ; for God never appointed heart searchers to administer his seals . 

Object . 7.  But wicked men know not their own hearts , and therefore are uncapable of making a credible profession . 

Answ. They may know them better them I can . The Intellect hath naturally a power of knowing itself & the will : though its true that the wicked have many difficulties in the way . 2.  They profess now that they are not wicked , but converted : therefore you must not take it for granted that they are wicked , because they were so unless you can prove it ; and if you prove them wicked , when they profess the contrary , then indeed you invalidate their profession , but not by proving that they were formerly wicked . 

Object . 8.  But though all this hold of Heathens or Infidels newly pretending to be converted , and so coming for Baptism , yet it will not hold of professing Parents that bring their children to Baptism , or of such as come to the Lords Supper . For such have been long in the Church already , and therefore must follow the truth of their Profession by a holy conversation . 

Answ. I grant this : and withal that the Pastor should be as diligent as he can to know the conversations of his people . But withal I still say , 1.  That , as it was sufficient at his first admittance that he made a verbal Profession ; so the same Obligation lieth on the Minister and people to believe his word still , till he forfeit his Credit , as it did at the first . A Verbal profession is still as Obligatory to us for belief , though more be required in him to second it . 2.  And therefore I say , that if a Minister through the numero usness of his flock , or want of ability , or opportunity , or other causes ( yea culpable in himself ) shall be ignorant of the lives of his people , he is to credit their Profession , and not on that account to deny them Gods Ordinances . 3.  They therefore that will exclude any , for want of a holy life , must bring a certain Proof of his unholiness of life ; for they can require no more Proof from him of his holiness , but that he professeth it : And so I grant that as he professed Repentance and Faith at first entrance , so he is now to profess that he continueth therein , and walketh holy before God. And if he do but say that he doth this , no man can reject him till he first disprove him , supposing him to be a member of his pastoral charge , or otherwise obliged to administer it to him , if fit . Those therefore that will have any man's children kept from baptism , for their parent's unholiness , or persons kept from the Supper , must not expect that men bring proof to them of their holiness beyond their profession of it , but must deal by them as by other notorious offenders , even admonish them of their unholy Carriages ; and if he hear not , take witness , and then call the Church ; and if he hear not the Church , than he must he rejected ; and not denied the Communion of the Church upon every man's uncharitable presumptions , or so heavily punished before he be judged or heard . 4.  And they must know that it is heinous evils indeed that will prove a Professor certainly ungodly ; and therefore they must look well to the validity of their proof . 

Obj. 9  But they have forfeited the Credit of their words , by their Covenant-breaking and wicked lives . 

Answ. It must be a breach of the Covenant as owned by themselves at age , that must be sufficient to prove that . 2.  And that more than once . For once failing doth not forfeit the Credit of a man's word . 3.  And these violations must be proved , and not barely affirmed . 4.  Yea it must be proved that he doth at the present , or hath of late lived in violation of former covenants . Otherwise Repentance manifested by Reformation repaireth his Reputation . 

Obj. 10.  The text cited in the following Disputation proveth that the Apostles took all the members of the Church to be Saints , Adopted , Justified , etc.  But we cannot think thus of all that now Profess themselves Christians , without being unreasonable . 

Answ. Sometimes the Apostles denominate the whole Church from the better part , as we call that a cornfield which hath many tares . And sometimes , being not heart-searchers , nor knowing the falsehood of Particular man's Professions , they speak of them according to their Profession , which the Law of nature and of Christ commands us to believe , though only with such a human faith , as may be mixed with much jealousy and fear of the contrary , concerning many of them , which the same Apostles also frequently manifested . But yet as they must believe charitably , so must they speak charitably , of the Professors of true Christianity . 

Besides those Objections , many particular Texts are urged by some to prove that it is only the Regenerate and such as shall be saved , that are to be added to the Church ; which I shall not now stand to answer particularly ; but only give this general answer to them all : If they mean only such as are Really sanctified and sincere , or elect , than we must admit none , because we know not one man to be such ; but if they mean only those that seem to be such I have proved already , that their own Profession of what is in their hearts , out of our sight , is to be taken for such a seeming , and doth qualify them to be visible members of the Church For as the Matter of the Church as Invisible , is true Beleivers and Saints ; so the Matter of the Church as visible , is the Professors of that faith and holiness and their seed . 

Besides what hath been said in general Arguments to prove the Proposition , I had thought to have gone over many particular Arguments from several Texts of Scripture , partly giving us examples of such as by God's approbation have taken Professions as credible Evidences of the things Professed ; and partly in precepts requiring a charitable credulity towards our brethren ; but because I conceive the last so plan as to need no more , I w●ll forbear this till I hear that it seemeth necessary . 

But yet there 's one other Objection to be met with . Those that feel this Proposition pull down the Principles of schism or unjust separation , which they are engaged in , or inclined to , do Object , that if a bare Profession may admit to baptism , than it may admit to the Lords Supper , and to the Privileges of church-members ; and so Church-ordinances , and Privileges shall be dispensed upon bare words and formalities , and so made nothing of . To which I answer ; Are you able to search and know the heart ? can you discern sincerity by an infallible judgement ? I know none but Mr. Trask that pretended to it . And if you cannot , and know you cannot , than you must be found to take up with fallible signs yourselves . And those signs you may as well call mere formalities , as you do this in question . 2.  And if we must needs take up with fallible signs , is it not better to follow the Scripture examples proposed to our imitation ▪ then to frame a new way of our own : especially when the Law of nature and nations doth consent with Scripture , and the contrary opinion proceedeth from a dividing principle , and tendeth to division . 3.  Make as diligent search as you can after the sincerity of your flock , as to their more profitable use of Ordinances , but make no other conditions of their Right , than God hath made . 4.  It is only a Profession that 's serious , voluntary , not contradicted prevalently by word or life , which you must take , as is before described . And do you take it to be so unreasonable a matter to believe a man fide humana , who speaks of his own heart which another cannot see , when you can bring no evidence to disprove his words ? If you know any thing by his life that certainly proves his Profession false , admonish him of it in the order that Christ hath directed you to , till he either hear the Church , or be rejected by the Church , or at least , by not hearing the Church , do give you cause to take him as a Heathen or Publican : but be not so much against the Scripture , and 2.  All discipline that ever the Church hath used . And against common justice and reason as to do this by men on your own private judgement , without evidence , and a just trial , and once hearing them speak for themselves , and many do that will unchurch a whole Parish , and gather a new one , on supposition of the invalidity of a bare Profession , and on supposition that most are ignorant and ungodly , before they have ever once accused them particularly , or dealt with , or excluded any of them in the way that Christ appoints . If I certainly knew that in this Parish there were 4000 unregenerate persons , and not 400 or 100 truly regenerate , and yet knew not particularly which the unregenerate persons were , I ought not to cast out one man from the Church upon any such account . 

Object . But with what comfort can the Godly have communion with the societies that are so mixed with multitudes of the ungodly ? 

Answ. If they do not their duty in admoishing the offenders , and labouring to heal the diseased members , and to reform the Church in Christ's appointed way , Mat. 18.17 . then you may well ask [ With what comfort can such Professors live in the sinful neglect of their own duty ? ] But if they faithfully do their own part , how should the sins of others ●e their burden , unless by way of common compassion ? And how have God's servant in all ages of the Church to this day received comfort in such mixed Communion ? These Objectors show that they seek more of their comfort in men then is meet ; or that they discomfort themselves with their own fancies , when they have no cause of discomfort given them from without , but what must be born to the end of the world by all that will walk in the ways of Christ.  

Object . But it is the Communion of Saints , that we believe and must endeavour . 

Answ. True internal spiritual Communion with hearty Saints ; and External communion with professed Saints For real Saints in heart are unknown to us . 

Ob. But the greater part do not so much as Profess to be Saints . 

Answ. They that profess to believe in God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , and to renounce the world , the Flesh and the Devil , do profess to be Saints : so do they that profess to repent of all sin , and to be willing to live according to the word of God : But I meet but with very few that will not profess all this . 

Object . They will say these words indeed , but in the mean time they will scorn at godliness , or disclaim it by their lives . 

Answ. Those that do so , must be dealt with in Christ's way as Church-members , till either they hear the Church , or be rejected for their impenitency ; but you must not dare upon this account to unchurch whole Parishes , nor ordinarily any one Person that hath not been dealt with in the order that Christ hath appointed . 

To conclude this Disputation : I find that the two things before mentioned , are great occasions of the proneness of many godly people to schism . 

The one is , because they do not understand that Christ hath so contrived in it the Gospel , that every man shall be either the Introducter of himself by Profession , or the Excluder of himself by the rejection of Christianity . And so that all Church admissions or rejections shall be but the consequents of his own choice that the chief comfort , or the blame may be upon himself : And this is partly from the admirable freedom and extensiveness of Gospel Grace , which the sons of Grace should glorify and rejoice in , and not murmur at , and dishonour ; and partly from the wise dispensations of our Legislator , that he may deal with men on clear grounds in their absolution , or condemnation , before all the world . 

2.  The other cause of the schismatical inclination of some godly people , is , the great mistake of too many in confining all the fruits of Christ's death , and the mercies or graces of God to the Elect ; and so not considering the difference that there ever was and will be between the visible Church of Professors , and the invisible Church of true Believers . Alas brethren , ( in the name of Christ let me speak it to your hearts ) do you grudge a few common Privileges , to common Professors , when you have the best and choicest part yourselves ! you have Christ himself , and do you grudge them the name of Christians , or the bare symbol or signs of his body and blood ? You have sincerity of faith and Repentance , and answerably you have true Remission and Reconciliation : They have the profession of Faith and Repentance , and do you grudge them the empty signs of a Remission which they have lost by their hypocrisy and Unbelief ? You have Inward communion with Christ in the Spirit , as you have Inward faith : Do you grudge an Extern●l communion with the Church to them that have the External profession of Faith ? OH Remember that the Net of the Gospel bringeth good and bad to the shore , and the tares must grow with the wheat till harvest , and then is the time that you shall have your desire . 

The second Disputation . Quest. Whether Ministers must or may Baptise the Children of those that Profess not saving faith , upon the Profession of any other faith that comes short of it ? IT may seem strange that after 1625. year's use of Christian Baptism , the Ministers of the Gospel should be yet unresolved to whom it doth belong ; yet so it is . And I observe that it is a Question that they are now very solicitous about . And I cannot blame them ; it being not only about a matter of Divine appointment : but a practical of such concernment to the Church . I shall upon this present occasion , give you my thoughts of it , as briefly as I can ; which contain nothing that I know of which is new or singular , but the Explication and Vindication of the commonly received truth . 

We here suppose that Baptism is still a needful Ordinance of Christ , and that Infants are to be Baptised , and that Ministers are the persons that should Baptise them : so that it is none of our work at this time either to defend the Ordinance itself against the Seekers , nor the subjects [ as to their age ] against the Anabaptiss : nor the Agents against the Papists or others . Nor are we now to inquire who are those Ministers that are authorised hereto , or what is necessary to their calling and authority . But supposing these matters already determined , our present business is to inquire what that faith is that qualifieth persons to be the just subjects of Baptism , or to be such , whose Children may receive it upon the account of their faith or Profession ? I shall not needlessly spend time in seeking to make plain those terms that are already as plain as I can make them . 

1.  What Professing is , I have showed in another Determination of the like nature , and I think all understand that it is as much as palam vel publicè fateor . 

2.  By [ Faith ] we mean not the Object of faith , the doctrine believed only or primarily , but the persons own Belief of the doctrine , and reception o● Christ.  

3.  By [ saving ] faith , we mean not to intimate that any faith of its own nature can procure our salvation : nor that it doth of its own nature ( in specie ) as the nearest reason , justify a sinner , nor is any way a proper efficient cause , natural , or political , instrumental , or meritorious , or any other , of a sinner's justification , but that it is that which the Donor of Christ and Life , hath made the condition of our participation of his free-gift , and so doth morally qualify the subject to be an apt recipient . 

4.  Because there are many other Competitors : we comprehend them all under the next words [ upon the Profession of any other faith that comes short of it ] . 

5.  We inquire whether we either [ must ] or [ may ] Baptise such , and suppose that the [ licet ] and the [ oportet ] do here go together , so that what we may do , we must do , supposing our own call : as no doubt what we must do , we may do . 

But yet that I be not mistaken ( which is a danger not easily escaped when I have done the best I can to be understood ) I shall further tell you what I mean by saving faith , that is , what I take it to be . 2.  What I mean by profession , and what I take that to be . 3.  What are those other sorts that stand up in Competition with this , as a sufficient qualification . 4.  And then I shall adjoyn some necessary distinctions . 5.  And so lay down my thoughts in some propositions . 6.  And then prove that which determineth the question . 7.  And lastly I shall answer the Arguments that are brought against it , and for the contrary Claim . 

And note through the whole , that if I do at any time call this profession a Ttile , it is in compliance with other men's language , it being my own sense , that neither the ●aith nor the profession is properly a Title , which is fundamentum juris , and so an efficient cause , but only a condition of a Title . 2.  That if I say it [ giveth ] Right or Title , I mean not efficiently , as if we could give a Right to ourselves , but only that it is the condition which performed by us , doth morally qualify us to receive it as freely given . 

1.  By saving Faith , I mean , an unfeigned Belief of the truth of the Gospel , with an unfeigned acceptance of Christ , who is there offered to be our sufficient and only Saviour , from the guilt of sin by his blood and merits , and from the power of it by his spirit also , and to bring us to glory in the fruition of God. Or it is a sinners assent to the truth of the Gospel in the essentials , and a sincere consent that God be immediately our only God , and Christ our only Saviour , and the Holy Ghost our only Sanctifier , and we his people in these Relations . I say immediately , that is , at present because if it be only a consent to be such hereafter , it is not saving . Or as the Assembly say , it is the embracing of Jesus Christ freely offered to us in the Gospel ; Or it is a saving grace , whereby we receive and rest upon Jesus Christ alone for salvation , as he is offered to us in the Gospel . It is in those respects that are essential to the Office oh the Redeemer and Saviour . 

2.  By Profession I mean in the proper sense that which hath something present for its Object or subject professed ; and difference it from a Promise which is only of something future For it is a present Assent and consent that is to be professed though withal the object of this professed consent must be both the present and future relation to Christ ; viz , that he be our Saviour and we his saved people from this time forth and for ever . So that a certain Promise de futuro ( in the strength of grace ) may be said to be made , in that a man must profess his consent both de present et de futuro . But still though it be to a future Relation to Christ as well as a present , yet is it ever to a preesent as well as a future : It is a present consent , that Christ be presently my only Saviour , or a present acceptance of him to be presently my only Saviour that I must Profess . 

Note also that it is not a Profession that this faith of mine is indeed sincere justifying or saving faith , that I speak of : but it is a Profession of such a faith as indeed is justifying : For many a thousand Profess that faith which is justifying , and yet know it not to be justifying while they Profess it , nor know not that they do with a saving sincerity believe . Not one Godly person I think of ten thousand , would deny consent that Christ shall be presently their Saviour , and yet most of them know not that this consent is saving . If you ask them , [ Are you heartily willing to have Christ to save you both from the guilt and reign of sin , and to glorify you ? ] and they will say yea withal their hearts ? or at least , [ yea , if I know my own heart . ] And yet at the same time may doubt whether they be true believers . But as it is the having of saving faith that is necessary to salvation , and not the knowledge that we have it ; so a man may Profess that faith which is saving , and yet not Profess that he knows it to be saving : and it is not the latter , but the former that the Minister must expect from people in Baptism . 

3.  We are next to consider , what are the Competitors which we now exclude ? There are diverse qualifications that are pleadded as necessary to those that must be Baptised : and our question is , which of all these is it indeed that may warrant a claim , or warrant our Practice ? 1.  The condition that some require in all that must be baptised , is Assurance or firm persuasion that they are true Believers , or have their sins pardoned by Christ , by his promise , which they now come to have sealed . 2.  Another condition pretended as necessary is not such Assurance itself , because we know it not , but a Profession of such Assurance to the Church . These are both so groundlessly pleaded , and by so few ( that are near us ) that I think it not meet to trouble you with them any more . 

3.  A condition pretended to be necessary , is , A true Justifying faith . This also is a mistake : but yet how far it is necessary to a true Right , I shall open anon ; none of these three are meant by us in the question : for these are not short of saving faith , though we exclude the necessity of these , as is said . 

4.  Another qualification pleaded necessary and sufficient to the ends expressed in the question , is , [ A Profession of a saving Faith ] which is it that we are to defend . 

5.  A fifth claim is laid upon the pretended sufficiency of a Faith short of Justifying . But you will perhaps say , what faith is that ? Those words tell us what Faith it is not , viz. It is not justifying faith , but they tell us not what faith ●t is . ] To which I must say , I know not myself , nor can I learn of all the writings of those that go that way , so perplexed and confounded , or uncertain are they , saying sometime one thing , and sometime another . But I shall have a fitter opportunity to inquire further into their mind or words anon . 

6.  Another claim is laid upon the pretended sufficiency of the Profession of a faith short of that by which we are justified . I say , the Profession as distinct from that faith itself , which the former claim made mention of . Some other there are , that yet go lower , and think we may Baptise any that consent to be Baptised , though they profess no faith at all , nor their Parents , nor pro-parents neither . And there have been so some foolish as to think that it is a work of charity to catch them and Baptise them , whether they will or not . But it is not our present business to deal with these . 

The great adversary that we have here to deal with , is the Papists : And I shall in few words show you part of their doctrine which we are now to oppose . 

Their great Fundamental error on which they build their tottering Babel and tyrannical usurpation , is this : that the Catholic church is one Political society , united in one visible head , and governed by those that hold their power from him , or at least are ruled by him , and are conjoined under these overseers in one Profession of faith and use of Sacraments . Bellarmine's words are these ( De Eccles. lib. 3. ) Nostra autem sententia est ecclesiam unam tantum esse , non duas ; et illam unam et veram esse coetum hominum ejusdem Christianae fidei Professione , et eorundem sacramentorum communione colligatum , sub regimine legitimorum Pastorum , ao praecipue unius Christi in terris vicarii , Romani Pontificis . And he addeth afterwards [ Hoc interest inter sententiam nostram et alias omnes , quod omnes aliae requirunt internas virtutes ad constituendum aliquem in ecclesia , et propterea ecclesiam veram invisibilem faciunt : nos autem et credimus in ecclesia inu●niri omnes virtutes , fidem , spem , charitatem , et caeteras : tamen ut aliquis aliquo modo dicipossit pars verae ecclesiae , de qua scripturae loquuntur , non putamus requiri ullam internam virtutem , sed tantum externam professionem fidei et sacramentorum communionem , quae sensu ipso percipitur . Ecclesia enim est coetus hominum ita visibilis , palpabilis , ut est coetus populi Romani , vel Regnum Galliae , aut respublica Venetorum . ] Yet other Papists be not so strict with us , but that they will distinguish between the professing Church and the true believing Church . And Bellarmine in the next words citeth a passage as Augustine's , which he commendeth ; which maketh Faith , Hope and Charity to be the soul of the Church ; and the external profession of faith and use of sacraments to be the Body of it ; and some persons to be in it in one respect only , some in the other only , and some in both . They confess indeed that of duty , men should be found Believers at the first ; but ordinarily they say , that is not to be expected and therefore they are first to be entered into the Church ( this visible Church ) by Baptism , that this may be a means to bring them higher : and by this entrance they are put under right guides , and into the true body , and so are fed with true ordinances , yea , with Christ's body and blood ; and so are in the way to a true spiritual state . The terms on which they must be admitted they say , into this Political Church ( which is not the holiest of all ) is a Profession of faith , and a consent to be a member of the society , and to be under those Pastors , and use those ordinances in order to further growth : so that these they suppose to have a true faith , and to be such as have right to this Church state ; but yet to be but in the way to a special saving faith . for theirs is but fides informis , or mere faith , which is only Assent ( say they ) joined with the foresaid consent to live in a Church state : but when Love is added , than it is fides charitate formata ; and then they are become of the true spiritual society , and have part in the soul as well as in the body of the Church , so that though they desire fidem formatam in all , yet it is not to be expected that so much as a Profession of it be exacted of those that enter into the first order by Baptism ; but when they enter into a retired monastical life , than it must be expected ; and it is found in all that are fully justified . For , say they , Baptism which entereth men into the visible Church , doth put away their original sin , and justify them ( that is , change them ) in tantum , viz. from Heathenism , or infidelity , if they lay in it before ; but it doth not justify them from their more spiritual latent sins , such as lie in the heart , and keep out the power of Grace , but it is the work of special Grace ( which is given upon the good use of their Church state and Ordinances ) that doth this by giving them fidem formatam , with charity and hope . Among all this there is some truth and some error : we confess that the Church is one Political society or Republic ; but not headed by men , but only by Christ , the several particular Churches being as so many distinct corporations that all make up this one Republic ; and are conjoined internally by faith , love and obedience to the same Lord and laws , and externally by the use of the same confession , worship . etc. and holding correspondency and brotherly communion as far as occasion and natural capacity shall enable them : but not united in one visible frame of policy , so as to be under the same Governors , some as subordinate , and one person or a General council being the supreme . no more than all the schools in England or in the world must have such a Political constitution , and Government by combinations of schoolmasters . We confess also that the Church is but one as well as they , & that they are to make the same profession and use the same worship , in regard of which they are called visible members , and the Church a visible Church ; as by reason of their faith and the spirit within them , it is called invisible : as if we should distinguish a man into visible and invisible in respect to his body and soul ; which make not two men : we confess also that there is an ineffectual faith of assent that goeth without a hearty consent : and that many are to be admitted by us into the visible Church by Baptism ( by solemnisation ) upon a bare Profession , who have not faith either of one sort or other . And we confess that such as so remain in the Church , do live under those benefits and means which have a special tendence to their true conversion . But yet we very much d●ffer in this . The Papists make the Primary sense of the word Church , to be of the visible Church as the samosius significatum , and therefore they say that to be entered by Baptism , 1.  Into a Profession of assent , 2.  Into communion in Ordinances , and 3.  Under one and the same Government , or external policy , is all that is requisite to make a Church-member . But we say that the first and famosius significatum is the whole multitude of true Believers that have the spirit of God , and his saving Grace ; and that it is one and the same Church that is called first mystical , as being called out of the world to Christ by true faith : and then visible , because of their Profession of that same faith : and therefore if any Profess that faith who are without it , these are members but secundum quid , or equivocally , as the hair and the nails are members of the body , which indeed are no members in the proper and first sense : or as a wooden leg is a member , or as a body without a soul is a man : or as the pease or chaff and straw are corn : The body may be said to be part of the man , when it is animated : but a corpse or body that never was animated is not properly a part : the straw and chaff are called part of the cornfield ( though indeed but appurtenances to the corn ) but if there were no corn , they should have no such title , and when they are separable they shall lose it . Moreover , 't is not a Profession of the same faith that the Papists and we maintain to be necessary to Church entrance . For they require as necessary , only a Profession of the Dogmatical or Historical faith of Assent aforesaid , with a consent to subjection and use of Ordinances : But we require a Profession of that faith which hath the promise of pardon and salvation : They take their Church-entrance to be a step towards saving conversion , and form faith : we take it quoad primam intention●m Christi ordinantis , to be an entrance among the number of the converted true Believers : and that it is accidental through their failing and hypocrisy , that any ungodly are in the Church and so enjoy its external privileges : and that if we could know them to be such , they should not be there , it being the work of the Gathering Ministry to bring men to true faith and repentance , and of the Edifying perfecting ministry to build them up and bring them on . And the Papists themselves having received by Tradition a form of words to be used in Baptism which are sounder than their doctrine , and which in the true sense do hold forth all that we say , are put to their shifts by palpable misinterpretation to deprave their own form . They do themselves require of the Baptised a Profession that he believe in the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost : and when we prove that this is justifying faith and that to [ believe in ] doth signify Affiance ; the Papists say it is but a naked Assent or Historical faith : and when themselves require the baptised to ●enounce the Devil , the world and the flesh , they say that this signifies no more but that at present they profess so far to renounce them as to enter into the visible Church , as the way to a future saving abrenunciation . And when themselves do dedicated the person to Christ , they say it is but directly to his Church ( that is , to leave the world of Infidels , and be numbered with the visible Church ) as the means to a saving sanctification . And these notions they have filled and form more exactly of late than heretofore , to make the snare more apt to catch the simple ; still magnifying to the uttermost the visible Church-state as the only way to a state of justification and salvation . But yet as our Divines have observed against him , Bellarmine himself , when he hath superficially pleaded his own cause , doth frequently , in the pleading it , let fall such words at unawares that do destroy it , and grant what we say . As lib , 3. de Eccles. cap. 10. he saith [ Verissime etiam dici potuisse ecclesiam fidelium , id est , eorum qui veram fidem habent in cord , unam esse : ecclesia enim praecipuè & ex intention sideles tantum colligit ; cum autem adm●scentur aliqui ficti , & qui vere non credunt , id accidit praeter intentionem ecclesiae . Si enim eos nôsse posset , nunquam admitteret , aut casu admissos continuò excluderet . ] yet I confess it is but his nudus ascensus or fides informis that he seemeth here too mean. I pray you read over especially his 9  Chap. ibid. There ( pag. 227 ) he answereth one of our Objections thus [ Ad ultimum dico , malos non esse membra viva Corporis Christi ; & hoc significari illis scriptures . Ad id quod addebatur igitur sunt aequivocè membra etc. ] a multis solet concedi , malos non esse membra vera , nec simpliciter corporis ecclesiae sed tantum secundum quid & aequivocè . Ita Johan . Turrecremata , l. 1.57 . ubi id probat ex Alex. de Alice , Hugone , & D. Thoma : idem etiam docent Petrus à Soto , Melchior Canus , & alii●qui tamen etsi dicant malos non esse membra vera , dicunt nihilominus verè esse in eeclesia , sive in corpore ecclesiae , & esse simpliciter sideles sen Christianos' : neque enim solae membra sunt in corpore sed etiam humores , dentes , pili , & alia quae non sunt membra . Neque sideles aut Christiani dicuntur tales à charitate , sed à side sive ù fidei profes●ione . ] It appeareth then that the Papists are put of late to refine this fundamental doctrine of theirs , from the soundness that it formerly had among themselves and to fit it more to their own turns . And I blame them not , because their whole kingdom lieth on it ; and would be subverted utterly , if the foresaid exposition hold ( which is so much like to ours . ) it 's a cutting objection which turned Bellarmine out of his road . [ At si ita est , sequitur pontificem malum non esse c●put ecclesiae ; & alios episcopos , si m●li sunt , non esse capita suarum ecclesiarum : Caput enim non est humour , aut pilus , sed membrum & quidem praecipuum . ] This put him on distinguishing : and yet at last he could bring it but to this , [ Dico episcopum malum , presbyterum malum , Doctorem malum , esse membra mortua , & perinde non vera corporis Christi , quantum attinet ad rationem membri , ut est pars quaedam vivi corporis , tamen esse verissima membra in ratione instrumenti , id est , pap●m & episcopos esse vera capita , etc. & ratio est , quia membra viva constituuntur per charitatem ; qua imp●i carent : at instrumenta operativa constituuntur per potestatem sive ordinis sive jurisdictionis . ] And what is this more than the wooden leg , or silver teeth , which our Divines compare them to ? But the new Papists , since Bellarmine , do see a necessity of a further distinguishing the Church as a visible political society , from the Church as truly sanctified : But that which we and all the ancients do make to be but the Profession distinct from the thing professed , the body distinct from the soul ; the chaff distinct from the wheat ; the shell distinct from the kernel ; they make to be as the lower order which is the way to a higher , as the Alphabet or lower Rudiments , which are the way to Grammar ; as an apprenticeship to a trade ; I mean as a state of preparation , to a state of infallible salvation . And because it favoureth their main design , they seem to draw near to the same conceit which they were wont falsely to fasten on the protestants , viz. that there are two church's , one Political and visible , the other regenerate & Invisible . And Bellarmine confesseth that some of them were of this mind in his time . And all this stir is , that they may advance their visible Church in the estimation of men , & thereby the more easily keep the rule in their own hands , and exalt themselves above Scripture , and draw as many as may be into their society : and therefore they drive the poor ignorant Americans by hundred to be baptised , as we drive our beasts to watering , or our sheep to be washed ; and in stead of staying till they make Profession of a saving faith with any seeming seriousness , they make Baptism an entrance into the state of the Catechumeni , which was wont to be the passage thence into the state of Christians : that per fas aut nefas they may engage people to themselves under pretence of engaging them to Christ ; therefore it is that they so over extol the visible Political state of the Church , as Dr. Prideaux saith , Lect. the visibil . eccles . pag. 128.  [ Experti demum perciperunt , externam ecclesiae pompam , & speciosoes titulos apud instabiles , plus lucrari , quam non lectam , vel saltem non intellectam scripturae 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Hinc ecclesiam ad ravint usque crepant Catholicam ; quam admissam , statim restringunt ad Romae synagogam , suco quidem veteratorio , sed conspicuo satis , & ridiculo , ut ex conficta ecclesia formeiur doctrina , & non ex veritate doctrinae reformetur & firmetur ecclesia ] 

The chief adversaries therefore we have here to deal with , are the Papists , who over-magnifie the visible face of the Church , & make the faith of men unjustified , to be true faith , though not formatacharitate , and make Hypocrites , and and wicked Professors , to be truly and properly fideles and members of the Church , whom the protestants affirm to be but secundum quid , materially , analogically , yea equivocally called members or fideles ; and therefore they make Baptism to be an appointed means to admit men into this visible Political Church , as into the ordinary way and passage to the state of saving grace , or justification ; but not ordinarily into the present possession of it : And therefore in conformity to all this they maintain that we must admit persons to Baptism , upon the bare Profession of faith , that is , Assent , with consent to be under the Government of the Church and the use of ordinances in order to be a better state . For saith Bellarmine , it is not Charity but Faith which makes a Christian : which our divines admit as true in our sense of the word Faith which includeth the will , and is proper to the truly regenerate ; but they deny it in his sense of it , who maketh faith to be the only Assent of the intellect . Against this adversary therefore I shall principally bend the force of my Arguments , though to my great trouble , I must be forced to deal also with a Reverend Brother of our own ; especially in answering his many fallacious arguments which he hath lately heaped up for that part which I must oppose . 

4.  Before I can positively answer the question in hand , I must premise these few necessary Distinctions . 1.  We must distinguish between a Profession of faith according to the Ministers sense of the words ; and a Profession according to the speakers sense . 2.  Between the Children of those that profess not saving faith , as theirs , and claiming Baptism on the account of some lower Profession ; and the same Children as owned by some other that do profess saving faith . 3.  Between the unlawfulness of Baptising , and the Nullity of the Baptism . Those distinctions that are necessary for the answering of the objections , will come in their places . Upon these few I answer the question negatively , explained in the following Propositions . 

1.  It is not a Profession of saving Faith in the real intention of the Professor that we affirm necessary ; but in the Apprehension of the Minister judging of the words according to their common use and acception : For we know not the heart of the Professor , and therefore know not certainly whether he intent those words as a Profession or not . I do not mean , whether he be sincere in his Profession , and intent the thing Professed ▪ for that 's no part of the Profession itself : but I mean whether he use the words which he speaks in the sense which they seem to us to import , and which they are used in by those that best understand their common signification . For example : a Papist presenteth a Child to be Baptised , Professing to believe in God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost : I know that these words according to the Scripture use of them ▪ signify a true saving fa●th ; but I am not sure whether the speaker do understand any more by them then a lower faith of mere Assent . If I knew he meant no more , I would require him to express a saving faith , before I would Baptise his Child , on his account : but if I know it not , nor have just reason to question it , I must take the words as they are commonly used , and seem to be intended by him and so if it appear to me to be a Profession of saving faith , though I err and my error be innocent , it is my duty to Baptise the Child . I have known a man of eighty years of age that took God the Son , to be the sun in the firmament : If , before I had understood him , this man had professed to believe in God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , and presented his child to baptism with this profession ( and I had no ground before to suspect his error , or to examine him about his faith ) it had been my duty to baptise his child . For though in the intended sense of the speaker , here was not so much as the Profession of an Historical faith , much lesle of a saving faith , yet I know not his heart , and the common use of those words as to another signification than he intended ; and therefore I was Innocent in being deceived . 

2.  I meddle not here with the claim that is laid upon the account of the Ancestors , Adopters , or undertakers that profess saving faith ; but only with the claim laid on the account of Parents , or any others that profess not saving faith . 

3.  When I assert the unlawfulness , I do not intend thereby to assert the Nullity of all such baptism , when performed , though unlawfully : For though it may be Dorid or vain as to the special uses and benefits , yet it followeth not that therefore it is Dorid as to the true form and being of the external Ordinance ; nor that this is to be reiterated . And with these explications I affirm that Ministers may not Baptise the children of those that Profess not saving faith , upon the Profession of any other faith that comes short of it . And here you must remember that our question supposeth the determination of the controversy [ whether the same faith that is necessary in the aged themselves if they were to be baptised , be necessary to their children's baptism on their account ] For it seems strange to me , that any should imagine that a lower belief in the Parent will help his child to a Title , than that which is necessary to his own baptism . But if any will insist on such a conceit , because we will not now make more controversies , then that in hand , let such all along suppose our dispute to be about the aged themselves , whether we might baptise the aged upon the Profession of any faith short of saving . And I thus prove the contrary . 

Argum. 1.  If we must not baptise any who profess not true Repentance , then must we not baptise any that profess not saving faith . But the Antecedent is true ( speaking of the Adult . Concerning whom as the more noble subject we shall carry on the Argumentation for brevity : still implying the l●ke necessity of their professing saving faith , for their children's baptism as for their own ) therefore etc.  

The Consequence of the Major , I prove thus . 1.  True repentance and saving faith are inseparable ; therefore if one be of necessity , so is the other , and the profession of true Repentance cannot be separated from the profession of saving faith ; therefore if one be necessary , so is the other . Some learned Divines take repentance and faith to be all one ; some take repentance to be part of faith : but all take it to be as inseparable from it . It were easy by describing the requisite Professions of both to show that they are so interwoven , that no man can profess the one without the other : but I think it is needless , because few will deny it . By Repentance here I mean that true Evangelical Repentance which is a special grace of God accompanying salvation ; and not any common preparatory Repentance . 

The Antecedent is easily proved from Scripture : and I know not whether any Protestant deny it : many Papists indeed distinguish of Repentance and Faith , and say , that it is only a profession of a preparatory Repentance and sides informis , a faith without love , that is necessarily to be expected from them . ( before Baptism ) . But I prove the contrary . 1.  That Repentance . 2.  And such as is proper to the effectually called , is necessary to be professed by all that we may Baptise . I will join the proof of both together . Argum. 1.  If John Baptist required the Profession of true Repentance in men before he would baptise them , than so must we . But John did so : therefore . 

the Consequence is clear . 1.  For either Johns Baptism and Christ's were the same , as most of our Divines against the Papists do maintain ; ( though Zanchy and some few more follow the Judgement of the ancient Doctors in this ) or as Calvin Institut . saith , the difference seems to be but this , that John baptised them into the Messiah to come , and the Apostles into the name of the Messiah already come . 2.  Or if the difference be greater , we may argue à fortiori ; If John's Baptism required a Profession of Repentance , then much more Christ's : for certainly Christ required not lesle than John , nor did he take the impenitent into his Kingdom whom John excluded . 

The Antecedent I prove . 1.  From Mark 1 , 34.  He preached 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ] And doubtless that Repentance which is in Remissionem peccatorum , is true special Repentance . One of our Divines , and many of the Papists have found out another evasion : that is , that John did engage them to repent , but not requiring a Profession or Repentance as foregoing baptism . But 1. this is against the whole current of expositors , ancient and modern , and 2. against the plain scope of the text . The words in Mat. 3.6 . are , [ They were baptised of him in Jordan , confessing their sins ] This confession was with , yea before their baptism : and this Confession was the Profession of the Repentance that John required . Maldonate on the text , having first railed at Calvin and slandered him , as turning baptism into preaching ( as if he had expounded John's baptising , not of waterbaptism but preaching , when he only shows that both should go together ) doth tell the protestants that they cannot prove by this text that confession went before baptism , because it is named after : but that he might not seem utterly impudent , he confesseth that the thing is true , and that it is the sense of the text and that this he confesseth because he must rather be a faithful expositor , than a subtle adversary . And if any should say that it 's only confession that 's required , which is no certain sign of true Repentance : I answer : when John saith [ If we confess our sins , he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins ] he took that confession to be a sign of true Repentance . And our Expositors and the Ancients before them agree ; that it was such a confession as was conjunct with a detestation and renouncing of the sin . And it is expounded by that of Acts 19.18 . as Grotius noteth , to have a special detestation of the sin accompaneing it , where to the word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 is added 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . And it may sufficy that the baptism to which this Confession was required , is the baptism of Repentance . But it is objected that in the 11. vers . of Mat. 3. it is said by john [ I Baptise you with water to Repentance ] therefore it is but an engagement of them to it for the future . Answ. Our expositors have fully showed that this signifieth no more , but [ I baptise you upon your present Profession of Repentance , to newness of life . ] For that this Profession did go before , is proved already , and then the rest can be no more than the continuance of Repentance and exercise of it in newness of life , which they are engaged to for the future . Only if any falsely profess it at present , his own confession is an engagement to it as a duty . Grotiu● saith that [ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 potest non incommode exponi hoc modo , B●ptizo vos super professione poenitentiae quam facitis ] The plain meaning it is in a word [ I do by baptism initiate you into the state of Repentance , or of Penitents ; but Christ shall give the Holy-ghost ( as it was poured forth . ) And so ( as Pelargus speaks on Mat. 3. against Salmeron ) we maintain John's baptism to be ●ffectual , being the baptism of Repentance to Remission of sin . And that it was true Repentance that he required , appeareth further by the fruits of it tha● he calls for from the Pharisees , Mat. 3.6 , 7 , 8 , 9 Lastly , I shall prove anon that God hath not appointed us to baptise any upon a promise of Repentance or faith , before they profess actual faith and Repentance , nor are they fit for such a covenant . 

Argum. 2 , For the proof of the necessity of a Profession of Repentance before baptism , is this : If Jesus Christ hath by Scripture precept and example directed us to baptise those that profess true Repentance , and no other ; then we must baptise them , and no other : But the Antecedent it true : therefore so is the consequent . 

All that requireth proof is the Antecedent ; which I prove from an enumeration of those texts that do afford us this direction ( besides the forementioned . ) 

1.  Jesus Christ himself did by preaching Repentance prepare men for baptism , and for his kingdom , as John before began to do , Matth. 4.17 . so Mar. 1.15 . The Kingdom of God is at hand ; Repent ye and believe the Gospel . And to that end he sent his Apostles and other preachers , Mar. 6.12 . Acts 17 , 30.  Luke 24.47 . Repentance and Remission is to be preached to all Nations in his name : And baptism which is for the obsignation of Remission of sin according to the appointed order , comes after Repentance . 

And when it is said by John [ I baptise you with water to Repentance , but he shall baptise you with the Holy Ghost ] Mat. 3.11 . Mar. 1.8 . Luk. 3.16 . It implieth that Christ's baptism comprehended Johns and somewhat more in Act. 2.37 , 38. when the Jews were pricked in their heart ( which was a preparatory Repentance ) and said to Peter and the rest of the Apostles , [ men and brethren what shall we do ? ] Peter saith to them , Repent and be baptised every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins ] so that we must require and expect true Evangelical Repentance to be professed before baptism ; for ver . 41. it 's added , [ than they that gladly received his word were baptised ] so that he baptised none that to outward appearance did not gladly receive that word which could not be without a profession of that Repentance . And he that here persuadeth them to repent and be baptised for remission , doth in the next chapter , ver . 19 require them to repent , and be converted , that their sins may be blotted out , showing what kind of Repentance it is that he meaneth . And as the work of General Preachers to the unbelieving world is sometime called a discipling of Nations , which goeth before baptising them , Mat. 28.19 , 20.  So is it in other places called a Preaching of Repentance , and commanding all men everywhere to Repent , Acts 17.30 . An opening of men's eyes and turning them from darkness to light , and from the power of Satan unto God , that they may receive Remission ( obsigned in baptism ) Act. 26.18 . to repent and turn to God , ver . 20.  And it was the sum of Paul's preaching to the unbaptised [ Repentance towards God , and faith towards the Lord Jesus Christ ] Act. 20.21 . So that it is apparent that they took the profession or appearance of both Faith and Repentance , as pre-requisite to baptism . And still this same repentance is it that hath the remission of sin connexed , Act. 5.31 . Luk. 24 47.  it 's repentance unto life . Act. 11.18 . And when the Apostles compare John's baptism with Christ's , they still acknowledge Johns to be the baptism of Repentance , Act. 13.24 and 19.4 . and when the Apostle doth purposely recite the principles of our religion , he doth it in this order , Heb. 6.1 , 2.  [ The foundation of repentance from dead works , and Faith towards God , the doctrine of Baptism etc.  

Argum. 3.  They that before they are baptised must renounce the world , the flesh and the devil , must profess true Evangelical Repentance ( I mean still such as hath a promise of pardon and salvation ) but all that are baptised , must ( by themselves or others ) renounce the world , flesh and devil , of which we shall have occasion to say more anon . 

Argum. 4.  They that profess to be buried with Christ in baptism and to rise again , do profess true Repentance : but all that are baptised , must profess to be buried with him , and rise again ; therefore etc.  The Major is proved , in that to be buried and risen with Christ , signifieth . A being dead to sin , and alive to God and newness of life : and it is not only ( as is feigned by the Opposers ) an engagement to th●ss for the future , but a profession of it also at the present . This with the rest we thus prove , Col. 2.11 , 12.13 . In whom ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands , in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh , by the circumcision of Christ , buried with him in baptism , wherein also you are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God , who hath raised him from the dead , and you being dead in your sins & the uncircumcision of your flesh , hath he quickened together with him , having forgiven you all trespasses , ] where note 1. that this is spoken to all the Church of the Colossians ; & therefore they are presumed to be what they profess and appear to be . 2. that the putting of the body under the water did signify our burial with Christ , and the death or putting off of our sins : And although we now use a lesle quantity of water , yet it is to signify the same thing , or else we should destroy the being of the Sacrament : so also our rising out of the water , signifieth our rising and being quickened together with him . 3.  Note also that it is not only an engagement to this hereafter , but a thing presently done . They were in baptism buried with Christ ; and put off the body of sin , and were quickened with him : and this doth also suppose their own present Profession to put off the body of sin , and their consent to be baptised on these terms . 

The like we have in Rom. 6. chap. 4.5 . Know ye not that so many of us as were baptised into Jesus Christ , were baptised into his death ? therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death , that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the Glory of the father , even so we also should walk in newness of life : for if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death , we shall be also into the likeness of his resurrection . Here also it is evident , 1.  That all the members of the visible Church are supposed to be baptised into Christ and into his Death , and so to be buried with him by baptism into death , and planted together into the likeness of his death . 2.  And that this is not supposed to be only an Engagement for the future , but a present entrance into the state of Mortification and Vivification , wherein they were to proceed by newness of life : And therefore ver . 5.6 , 7 , 8 , 11.  They are supposed to have the old man crucified with Christ , that the body of sin might be destroyed ; And that henceforth they should not serve sin : And that they are so dead as to be freed from sin , as to the servitude thereof : And that they must reckon themselves dead to sin , but alive to God ; He that Readeth the whole Chapter with judgement and Impartiality , will soon discern that true Repentance and Abrenunciation of the service of sin , was to be professed by all that would be Baptised ; And that hereupon they Sealed their own Profession and Covenant by the reception of Baptism , as Christ Sealed his part by the actual baptising them ; and that hereupon they are by the Apostle all called and supposed such as they professed themselves to be . 

Argum. 5.  If it be the very nature and use of baptism to signify and Seal both the present putting off the body of sin , and present putting on Christ , than the profession of true Repentance must needs precede or concur with baptism : but the former is certain : of which more anon . 

I conclude then that both Scripture , and the very signs themselves , and the common consent of the Church ( of which more after ) do show that true Repentance , and present Repentance must be professed by all those that we may baptise , or whose children we may baptise on their account : And consequently that true saving faith which is Inseparable from it ( and some think is the same thing ) must needs be Professed too ; and not only Promised . 

We should before we leave this Argument hear what the Opposers say against it : but they are all in pieces ( the Papists I mean ) among themselves about it , some of them confessing what we pled for , and others of them ( Especially the New ones ) contradicting it , but by such reasons as I think not worth the while now to discuss . 

There are two Reverend men of our own , whose unhappy owning the cause that we argue against , doth call us to a more respectful Consideration of their Answers ; viz. Dr. Sam ▪ Ward , and Mr. Thomas Blake . The former saith , Concedo neminem Adultorum ad Baptismum admitti debere absque Professione fidei & Poenitentiae : Concedo iterum solidam poenitentiam conjunctam cum vera & viuâ fide in mediatorem obtinere praesentaneam peccatorum remissionem apud Deum ( You see how much of my Argument is here yielded . Sed nego poenitentiam aut fidem Initialem , qua judicio Apostolorum sufficiebat ad dandum Baptisma desiderantibus semper eorum judicio aut praesumptione suffecisse ad tales ponendos in statu adeptae reconciliationis , remissionis peccatorum , regenerationis , aut Salutis , etc.  The sum is , that there are two sorts of Repentance and Faith ; one Initial , which the Apostles thought a sufficient Title to Baptism ; and the other saving or connexed to Justification ; And this they did not expect a Profession of , or suppose , but put them in the way to it . 

Answ. To this I shall return Mr. Gatakers answer , Contra Wardum , pag. 71.  [ Ego quaenam sit sides illa ac poenitentia Initialis , non intelligo , qua prae●itum quis ausit ad Baptismum admittere , quem tamen vera vivaque in Mediatorem fide imbu●um nondum credat . Philippus certè Aethiopi baptismum poscenti ] Si credas , inquit , ex toto cord , licet , Act. 8.38 . Quasi non baptizaturus , nisi id ille profiteretur , ipseque Charitatis saltem judicio , ità credere credat . [ Non vult ●um baptizare nifis credat ] Inquit Lutherus in Gen. 48.  Nec fidem tantùm Initialem illam volebat , qui ex toto cord poscit ut credat . Et de An●nia Calvinus ad . Act. 22.16 [ Verae fidei expertem non baptizasset ] ea nempe imbutum praesumpsisse vult : Et ex Christo ipso id didicisse videtur , Act. 9.11 . See the rest . I add only the saying of Peter Martyr which be concludeth with , ( in Rom. 3.  Vnam esse verae poenitentiae rationem , quae à baptizandis adultis exigatur ] It is ( mil●i Impress . TIGUR . 1559. pag. 148.  Where he reprehendeth some Papists , quòd sibi singunt in Baptismo poenitentiam non requiri , and confuteth them : so he doth also in c. 11.864 . and the repentance that he requireth is described pawn 143. sed quicquid illi ( Colonienses ) dicunt , una est ratio verae poenitentiae , ut ex animo doleamus admissa peccatae , quae Deum à nobis abalienaverunt : Cui dolori adjungitur desiderium condonationis , & preces , ut eam obtineamus , cum certo proposito non amplius incurrendi in eadem peccata , & voluntate mortificandi veterem , & induendi novum ; quae omnia fide niti oportet , quae sine illa constare non possunt ; Much out of this Author we shall produce anon . 

But I have spoken to this of Dr. Wards already in the Appendix to my Treatise of Baptism . 1.  To which of mine Mr. Blake taking exceptions , and publishing them , I published my Defence , and among many more used this Argument from the Necessity of Repentance : but Mr. Blake found it easier to say that of almost forty Arguments few were to the question , and so to pass them by , than to give us a satisfactory answer to them . But yet I find him upon the Point against another Pag. 107 , 108.  And there I find this Question , Did they ( the Apostles ) so require it ( Repentance ) as in reality to precede Baptism , Or were Satisfied with a Profession of it ? I answer ; If that you yield the last , it is enough to the main Point of difference . Pag. 108.  He saith [ Faith takes Christ to give Repentance ] Answ. Only saving faith is properly called a Taking Christ : And that takes Christ to give more Repentance , but not to give the first Repentance : For Christ gives the first Faith and Repentance , ( ut Amesius in medulla . l●b . 1. de Vocat . ) before faith take him . But if it were otherwise , yet both are to go before baptism according to the Intention of the Institutor , or the Profession of both . 

To that Mat. 3.  [ They confessed their sins , 1.  He saith , some will have it to imply no verbal Confession but virtual , etc. which gloss carrieth a strong Probability , etc. ] Answ. 1.  Such presumptuous glozing contradicting the Text upon such inconsiderable reasons ( as is the multitude of the baptised ) deserves no answer . 

2.  It is so much the stronger against him , if Baptism be in the very reception a virtual Confession : then no man can be Baptised without it . 2.  He addeth , [ I require more , an Engagement to leave sin , which their taking on them the name of Christ doth Imply ] Answ. If the Engagement be only for some distance of time , it is such as God accepteth not , nor must we : If it be an Engagement to forsake sin from that present time forward , it is withal a plain Profession of present true Repentance or conversion , and consent to leave it , yea renunciation of it , & resolution to take it up no more . more to this purpose followeth , which I think contains nothing that requireth any more than what is said already to disable it . 

Argum. 2.  My first Argument was from the Necessity of a Profession of true Repentance . the second shall be from the Equipollent terms , or Description to the thing Described : Thus.  

We must baptise no man that first professeth not to believe in God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost : To believe in God the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost , is saving Faith ( if sincerely done ) therefore we must Baptise no man that first professeth not saving faith . 

The Major is proved from Mat. 28.19 . Where this is made the form of the words in baptism , or at least the End , and that which we must insist on . Calvin on the words yields the Anabaptists that faith is put justly before baptism , Nam alioqui Mendax esset , figuraque remissionem peccatorum & Spiritûs donum offeret incredulis , qui nondum essent Christi membra . And that non abs re patris , filii & spiritûs expressa hic fit mentio , quia aliter baptismi vis apprehendi non potest quam si à gratuita Patris misericordia initium fiat , qui nos per filium sibi reconciliat , deinde in medium prodeat Christus ipse cum mortis suae sacrificio : Et tandem accedat etiam spiritus sanctus , per quem nos abluit & regenerate ; Denique svorum omnium bonorum consortes faciat . It appeareth by comparing Mat. 28.19 . with Rom. 6 3. and 1 Cor. 1.13 , 14 , 15 & 10.2 . that to be baptised into the name of the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , is not only to be baptised by their Authority , but also to be thus Initiated into the Relation which the Church standeth in to them , and to be consecrated to the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , as Musculus , Diodate , the Assembly of Divines Annotations , and the generality of Expositors do express . See Dr. Hammond Pract. Catech. l. 6.  § . 2.  And especially on Mat. 28.19 . Grotius at large ; and that it comprehendeth or presupposeth a Profession of believing in the Father , Son & Holy Ghost . For no man can devote himself solemnly by our Ministry to the holy Trinity that doth not first Profess to believe in them . Therefore the Church ever taught the C●techu●●eni the Creed first in which they profess to believe in God the Father , Son & Holy Ghost . And before they actually baptised them , they asked them whether they believed in God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost ? To which they must answer affirmatively , or not be baptised . 

And for the Minor , that this believing in the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , is saving faith , if sincerity done as it is professed , is proved , 1.  In that to believe in God , in Christ , in the Holy Ghost , signifieth not only the act of the understanding barely assenting , but also the consent and Assiance of the William 2.  True saving faith is so expressed in Scripture : and the promise of eternal life is added to it , Joh. 14.1 . ye believe in God , believe also in me . Joh. 1.12 . To as many as received him , he gave power to become the sons of God , even to them that believe in his name : where believing in his name is made equivalent with Receiving him , and hath Adoption immediately annexed to it : And all that are baptised must first Profess to believe in his name , and so receive him , and not only promise to do it hereafter , Joh. 3.14 15 , 16.  Whosoever believeth in him shall not perish , but have eternal life . But all that are Baptised , must Profess to believe in him , Joh. 3.36 . He that believeth on the son hath everlasting life ; and he that believeth not the son , shall not see life , but the wrath of God abideth on him . He that will distinguish now , and say , that it is not this believing on the Son here mentioned which must be Professed by all that will be baptised , but another believing on him , which leaveth him among those that shall not see life , but the wrath of God abideth on him , must prove and explain his distinction better than those that have undertaken it have done . Joh. 5.24 . [ Verily , verily I say unto you , he that heareth my words , and believeth on him that sent me , hath everlasting life , and shall not come into condemnation , but is passed from death to life . ] If any words of Christ can put us out of doubt , that believing in the Father and Son is saving faith , these asseverations and plain expressions may do it , especially , being a thing so oft rehearsed . So Joh 6.35 . He that cometh to me shall never hunger ; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst , Verse 40.  And this is the will of him that sent me , that every one that seeth the Son and believeth on him , may have everlasting life , and I will raise him up at the last day . Ver. 17.  Verily verily I say unto you , He that believeth on me hath everlasting life . So John 7.38 . and 11.25 , 26. and 12.44 , 46 , and 14.12 . Acts 10.43 . To him give all the Prophet's witness , that through his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins , Rom. 3.20 . That he might be just , and the Justifier of him that believeth on Jesus , [ Rom. 45.  To him that works not , but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly , his faith is counted for righteousness . ] Rom. 9 33.  Whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed . So 10 , 11. 1  Pet. 2.6 . 1 Joh. 5.10 . Tit. 3.8 with many the like . From all which it is evident , that Believing on or in God , the Father , Son , and holy Ghost , is saving faith , having more frequent and as express promises of life , as anything whatsoever . And it is believing in God , the Father ▪ Son and holy Ghost : that we must profess in baptism . 

To this I suppose it will be answered ( for I know not what else can ) , that there are two sorts of believing in or on God the Father , Son and holy Ghost : and the Texts mentioned speak of one sort , which is saving , and that which we must necessarily profess in Baptism is another sort , that is , a faith not joined with Charity , or a mere dogmatical faith . To which I answer , 1.  Let them that thus distinguish , first clearly explain to us the branches of the distinction , and show us the difference between the two faiths , and prove it from Scripture , and then prove that it is the last only that must needs be professed in Baptism ; and then they have done somewhat . 2.  It will be found no ordinary thing for Scripture , to call any common faith , a believing on or in Christ. 3.  That faith which is said to be in the ungodly , though in respect of sides in genere , it be really faith , yet in respect of sides evangelica in Christum Mediatorem , in specie , required in the Gospel , it is but Equivocally called faith , or because that term to Mr. Blake is so abominable , let it be Analogically a while , till I come to the proof , that it is but equivocally such . The faith that God requireth and maketh his promises on , is only the Faith called Justifying , or Saving ; and the other is as a Mole to a Child , or a Monster to a Man , which is so far defective ex errore naturae , non ex intention generantis , that it doth differ tota specie from a true man : and so doth this Faith differ in sp●cie morali from Evangelical Faith. 4.  When Faith is mentioned in a preceptive or promising way , the nature of the thing and the course of Scripture showeth , that we must understand it of that faith which God owneth by precept or promise , and not of that which is but Analogically called faith , and ex errore credentis is so monstrous that God never owned such by precept or promise : I can find where this Monster is ascribed to many , as to Simon Magus , and others ; but let any show us where it is in hac specie commanded by God , or hath any Promise made to it , in his word . 5.  However , it will not I hope be denied , but that saving faith is the famosius analogatum vel significatum , and therefore the Analogum per se positum , must be understood of it , and not of the Analogical Monstrous faith . And therefore when in baptism we must profess ●o Believe in the Father , Son and holy-ghost it must be understood of saving belief , till we have a limiting Exposition proved . 6.  Yea further , the nature of the Ordinance commands us this exposition : For when God hath so frequently promised pardon to believers in or on Christ , and then ordained baptism to be the seal of this promise , and required that the person to be baptised , profess to believe in Christ , it plainly followeth , that we must understand him to speak of the same faith in the promise , and about the seal , and not of diverse sorts , unless he had so declared himself , which he no where hath done . 

2.  For the further proof of the Minor , I add that the same faith that is mentioned in the ordinary Creed of the Church , i● meant in the baptismal profession , and to be required before baptism : this will be confessed , 1. because the Creed itself hath been this 1300 years at least professed before baptism . 2. because the Creed itself is but the 3. fundamental baptismal Articles mentioned Mat. 28.19 . enlarged and explained on subsequent occasions ( as Sandford & Parker de descenju , have learnedly and largely proved , and Grotius in Mat. 28.19 . proves out of Tertullian , etc. that the creed was not then in the form of words as now , though the same doctrine was used in other words to the same uses . But ( I assume ) it is saving faith that is meant in the common Creed by the phrases of believing in God the Father & in Jesus Christ , & in the holy Ghost . This our divines do so copiously prove against the Papists , that with most protestants I may take it for granted . 

saith Mr. Perkins on the Creed , Pag. 128.  [ To believe is one thing , and to believe in this or that , is another thing , and is contains in it three Points or Actions of a Believer . 1.  To know a thing . 2. to acknowledge the same . 3.  To put trust and confidence in it . And in this order must these three actions of faith be applied to every Article following , which concerns any of the persons in the Trinity . And this must be marked as a matter of speceal moment . For always by adding them to the words following , we do apply the Article to ourselves , in a very comfortable manner . As , I believe in the Father ; and do believe that he is my father , and therefore I put my whole trust in him : and so of the rest . ] So far Perkins . 

And it 's worthy to be observed which Peter Martyr saith Loc. Commun . Ch. 2. in expofit . Symboli , pag. 421. ] Age , sigillatim videamus , quid propriè hoc sibi velit , Credo in Deum — eum esse agnoscendum uti Deum i e. Deum esse aeternum — bonum ex quo bonum aliud quodvis oritur : Vnde , patet eum , qui quippiam tanti aut pluris faciat quam Deum ipsum , dicere verè non posse , Credo in Deum . Si enim eum ut summum bonum agnoscat , nihil ei unquam anteposueris . Neque etiam is hoc rectè credat , qui usquam alibi spem suam collocet : quum spes non sit nisi boni cujusdam ; si ergò Deus sit bonum unde quodvis bonum defluat , quicunque aliunde boni quidp●am expectârit , in eum verè non crediderit . Praeterea qui bona quibus fruuntur , suae justitiae , industriae , factis ▪ sibi denique ipsis accepta ferunt , sensum verúmque ( ut sic dicam ) gustum hujus primae nostrae sidei capitis non habent — proculdubio ejusmodi homines non Deum propriè , sed Dei loco phantasmata & sui cerebri inventa colunt . Res ( mihi crede ) maximi momenti est verum Deum modo suo habere . ] 

Ursine ( & Paraeus ) Chatech . Q. ●6 . p. 140 , 141.  [ Diff●runt Credo Deum , & Credo in Deum : Illud declarat fidem historiae , hoc fiduciam . Nam credo Deum est credo quòd sit Deus , & quòd sit talis , qualem se in verbo patefecit , viz etc.  Credo in deum , est credo quòd mihi sit Deus ; hoc est , quod quicquid est & habet , sit & habeat ad meam salutem . Et p. 360.  Credere in Deum , non est tantum Deum agnoscere , sed etiam in Deo fiduciam habere . Alinqui etiam Diabolus habet Notitiam Dei & promissionum ejus : sed non habet fiduciam : Ideò Notitia ejus non est fides Justificans , sed Historica . And p. 191.  Quid est Credo in Jesum silium Dei unigenitum ? Resp. Credo Jesun esse silium Dei — sed hoc non est satìs , nam etiam Di●boli hoc credunt — Itaque addendum . 2.  Credo mihi , hoc est , in meam salutem eum esse filium Dei. p. 213 Credere in Christum Dominun nostrum ; hoc est ita crede Christum Dominun nostrum , ut in eo fiduciam collocemus . Cum igitur dicimus nos credere in Dominum nostrum , credimus — Filium Dei mihi quoque esse Dominum , & me quoque esse ejus subditum h. e. me quoque ejus sanguine esse redemptum & servari perpetuò , ac proinde me obligatum ei esse ad gratitudinem ; Dominium ejus mihi esse salutare ; me servari ab eo tanquam possessionem charissimam — Pag. 229.  Quid est credere in Christum crucifixum ? est credere Christum pro me factum esse maledictioni obnoxium , ut me ab ea liberaret . So Pag. 240. to the Question , Quid est credere in Christum mortuum● he gives more largely the like Answer . And pag 268. he gives the like answer to the Question , Quid est credere in Jesum Cristum , qui ascendit in coelum ? ] I am loath to weary myself & others with citing Testimonies in a known case . it 's well known that this or to this purpose is the common Exposition of the protestants of the Creed and Baptismal Profession , and that they maintain it against the Papists , to be true saving faith that is meant in the words , ( I believe in God the Father , in Jesus Christ , in the holy Ghost ) I doubt not to cite forty & forty more to prove this ▪ when any shall show me that it will be worth the labour . Yet I must say , that I approve not fully of some of their descriptions of justifying or saving faith which they hereupon give in : but yet they truly maintain that it meaneth saving faith I believe ; and if they had but put the Wills Consent to the several Articles and Relations and works of God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , and our Affiance instead of a persuasion that they are ours etc.  I should have yielded to their descriptions . I conclude then , that believing in or on God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , is an Act of the Will , as well as of the Understanding , and is saving faith : And therefore all that profess this , profess saving faith : But all that will be baptised , must profess this , therefore . 

3.  It is agreed by all Divines that I know , protestants and Papists , that to believe in the Trinity , is not only to believe in God's Essence , or the three persons , but also the Relations and great operations of each person for us : As to believe in God the Father , is to believe in him as our Creator and Sovereign Lord and chief Good. To believe in Jesus Christ , Is to believe in him as Redeemer and Saviour . To believe in the Holy Ghost , is to believe in him as a Sanctifier ( and as the great Witness and Agent of Christ. ) Now it is most certain , that to Profess , Assent and consent that God be my God , Christ my Saviour , the Holy Ghost my Sanctifier , is to profess Saving Faith. And bare Assent is not meant in the words [ believing in or on God ] as is proved by our Divines at large . And if present consent be expressed , saving Faith is expressed ; for no wicked man can truly consent that God shall be his God and chief good , and Christ his Saviour to save him from sin itself , as well as from punishment , and the Holy Ghost his Sanctifier . I may truly say ( according to that of Peter Martyr , before cited ) that never any but a true believer that had Justifying Faith , did truly say , I believe in God ; but speak falsely in so saying . To take God for his God , is a thing that no man can truly do , but those that are called effectually by his Saving Grace . 

Argum. 3.  The foregoing Argument was taken from the prerequisite Profession ; the next shall be taken from the very work itself , viz. the Presenting and offering ourselves to be baptised , and willingly receiving baptism : Thus , 

If it be the very Nature or appointed Use of the external part of Baptism itself ( yea , essential to it ) to signify and profess ( among other things ) the saving faith and Repentance of the Baptised ( being at age ; ) then true Baptism cannot go without such a Profession . But the former is true : Ergo , so is the later . 

The Antecedent ( which only requireth proof ) I prove thus : 1.  It is of the Instituted Nature of Baptism to be in general , a Professing sign , as well as an Engaging sign de futuro : this I promise , as granted by all Christians that I know of , that have written of Baptism . And then let us consider of the several parts of the sign or external Ordinance , with the signification of each . That it is essential to it to be significant , and Obligatory on our part , as well as on God's part , is commonly confessed . And 1.  The Minister doth baptise him into the name of the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost ; and the party doth ( by himself or Parent ) consent thereto ; 1.  Voluntarily offering himself to be so baptised ; and then 2.  Voluntarily Receiving that Baptism . And his offer of himself hereto , goeth before the Ministers baptising him ; and his Reception of that Baptism is Essential to it : so that Baptism essentially containeth on his part a Signal Profession of consent to that which is meant in the form used by the Minister [ I baptise thee into the name of the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost : ] And that is , that God the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost be mine , and I be theirs , in the Relations in which they are offered in the Gospel to Mankind : For all confess that it is a Covenant that is here Sealed , and so a mutual consent which the Signs are Instituted by Christ to signify . Christ offereth himself to be Related to me , as my Jesus Christ ; and by offering myself to Baptism . and by voluntarily receiving it , I do actually profess my Acceptance of his Offer , that is , of himself so offered . God the Father offereth himself to be my God reconciled in Christ , and so my chief good ; and by voluntary receiving Baptism , I do signally profess my Acceptance of him so offered . The Holy Ghost is offered to be my Sanctifier and Guide ; and by voluntary Reception of baptism into his Name , I do signally profess my Acceptance of him so offered ( Of all which I shall say more anon : ) And if this be not the Faith which is Justifying and saving , than I know not what is ; yea , I may boldly say , then there is none such : so that it it a most clear case , that baptism as baptism , according to it 's Instituted Nature and use , doth contain the persons actual signal Profession of present Assent to the truth of the Gospel , and Acceptance of God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost as therein offered . And it containeth ( as our Divines commonly maintain ) an actual signal Profession that we there presently consecrate , or Devote , or dedicate ourselves to God , the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost , in the foresaid Relations . 

2.  Another part of Baptism , is , the Ministers washing the Person , and the Person first offering himself to be washed , and after actually receiving it , doth thereby signally profess his consent . Now this washing doth essentially signify our washing from our former filth of sin , together with the guilt ; our putting off the old man which is corrupt , according to the deceitful lusts of the flesh . He that signally professeth his present Consent to be washed by the blood of Christ from his former filthiness and guilt , and to lay by the filthiness of Flesh and Spirit , doth eo nomine profess saving faith and Repentance ; But all that are baptised with the baptism of Christ's Institution , do by the very voluntary Reception of Baptism , so profess ; therefore they do thereby profess saving Faith and Repentance . 

3.  Quo ad modum ; it 's commonly confessed by us to the Anabaptiss ( as our Commentators declare ) that in the Apostles times the Baptised were dipped over head in the water , and that this signified their Profession , both of believing the Burial and Resurrection of Christ ; and of their own present renouncing the World and Flesh , or dying to sin and living to Christ , or rising again to newness of Life , or being buried and risen again with Christ , as the Apostle expoundeth in the forecited Texts , of Col. 3.  & Rom. 6.  And though ( as is before said ) we have thought it lawful to disuse the manner of Dipping , and to use lesle water , yet we presume not to change the use and signification of it ; so then , He that signally professeth to die and rise again in baptism with Christ , doth signally profess Saving Faith and Repentance . But this do all that are baptised according to the Apostolical practice : therefore , etc.  

Object . about Nullity . But it will be objected , that this Argument goeth so high , that it will prove that all men's baptism is a Nullity , who do not profess Saving Faith and Repentance , and so that they must be baptised again . 

Answ. 1.  This concerneth the Opponents to answer , more than me . 

2.  There are no such persons , that I know of , and therefore they are not to be rebaptised . We distinguish between the secret Intention of Professing and the signal Interpretative Professing , which the Church is bound to take as really intended : And so I say , that when Christ hath Instituted baptism for such a signification , if any man seek and receive that baptism , he doth thereby Interpretatively profess to seek and receive it as such , to the use and Ends to which it was Instituted : seeing then all the baptised do apparently ( as far as the Church can judge ) profess Saving Faith and Repentance , even by receiving baptism , there is no room for the conclusion of this Objection . When they bring us forth one baptised Person , who did not make such a signal Profession than we shall give them a further answer . 

3.  If they did by word of mouth say , that they believe with a saving Faith , these words are but signs of their minds ; and whether sergeant or not , the Church cannot tell . And the same may be said of the Baptismal Action and Reception . 

4.  Therefore the Church must not take the external Sacrament for a Nullity , every time a man's secret Intentions agree not with his signal Profession ; for than we should not know whether ever we baptise any one . But when it is discovered after , that he had other Intentions , that which was wanting must be yet done , ( viz. his sincere Intentions , or saving faith ) and not that which was not wanting be done again , viz. The external Administration and Reception of Baptism . 

5.  It is confessed to be essential to the Sacrament , that the Receiving of the washing by Water , doth signify the receiving of the souls washing by the Blood of Christ. Now suppose I can prove it of abundance of Parents , that when they presented their Children to Baptism , they did not understand that the water signified the blood of Christ , or the washing our cleansing by it from sin , and therefore had no such Intention in Baptism ; would the Opponents baptise all these again ? Let them answer this for themselves , and they shall answer for us ? Or if the Case of Infant-baptism be quarrelled at , let them suppose that it were the Person himself that had been so baptised ; though I am satisfied , that its all one . 

Argum. 4.  If we must baptise none that profess not their Consent to enter themselves presently into the Covenant of Grace , with God in Christ , than we must baptise none that profess not saving faith . But the former is true ; therefore etc.  

Also , if the very Reception of Baptism be a Profession of present entering into the Gospel-covenant with Christ , then is it a Profession of saving faith . But so it is ; therefore , etc.  

This Argument was employed in the former : but the Medium that I now use , is , the Identity of this covenanting and the profession of saving Faith , supposing the Identity of Heart-covenanting and saving faith itself . 

The Antecedent I think will be granted by many of the Papists , and it is the common doctrine of the protestants ; and therefore , as to them , I need not prove it ; I confess , some of the Anabaptiss , and some few others , do question whether Baptism be a Seal of the covenant of Grace : But the quarrel is mostly , if not only , about the bare word [ Seal ] ; for they confess that in sense , which we mean by sealing , and particularly , they confess that we do in Baptism enter into the covenant of God , and that it is a professing and engaging sign on our part , as well as an exhibiting , notifying , confirming sign on God's part . 

The consequence is thus proved : He that doth o'er tenus , or by profession , enter into the covenant of God , doth profess saving faith ; therefore if we must not baptise them without a professed entering into covenant , then nether must we baptise them without a profession of saving Faith. Only the Antecedent requireth proof : And if I prove either the Identity of professed covenanting and professed true believing , or else the inseparableness of them , I prove the Antecedent . But I shall prove the Identity or the inseparability ; yea , I doubt not of the first , which is the most full proof . And here we must first consider what the Covenant is we are to enter . 1.  And it is confessed it is the covenant of Grace , and that there is but one covenant of Grace : This Mr. Blake aknowledgeth , for all the mention of an outward covenant . 2.  It is also a confessed thing on all hands , that it is God that is the first Author and Offerer of the covenant ; that it is he that redeemed us , who made the promise or covenant of Grace upon the ground of Redemption : and that this is frequently called a covenant in Scripture , as it is a divine Law or constitution , without respect to man's consent , ( as Grotius hath proved in the preface to his Annotations on the Evangelists ) . Much more ( out of doubt ) it is , that it is called a covenant before man consenteth , as it is a covenant offered , and not yet mutually entered . In the former sense the word is taken properly , but in another sense , and for another thing then in the later . But in the later it is taken Tropically , viz. Synecdochically , it being but a covenant drawn up and consented to by God conditionally , and offered to us for our consent . 3.  It is this same Covenant that is offered to us , and not another , that we are called to consent to or enter in . And we cannot be truly said to enter into the covenant of God , if we make a new one of our own , and lay by his ; for that 's none of the Covenant of God : he never offered it , nor will he ever enter it . 4.  It is confessed by all , that there is an internal covenanting with God by the heart , and an External covenanting , or engaging ourselves by words or other outward signs ; and that this last is the Profession of the former . 5.  And it is confessed by all the world , that internal Covenanting is an Act of the Will , and never of the understanding only or chiefly . 6.  And this Act of the Will is commonly by the custom of Nations called [ consent ] : so that consenting to Gods offered Covenant , is the very formal Act or our Internal covenanting with him ; and professing this consent , is the Signal or External Covenanting with him . 7.  We are I hope agreed what the Covenant of Grace is , as offered on God's part ( or else its great pity ) viz. that on the Title of Creation first , and Redemption after , we being absolutely his own , it is offered to us , that God will be our God ( our chief Good and Reconciled Father in Christ , ) that Christ will be our Saviour , ( by Propitiation , Teaching and Ruling us , ) even from the guilt and filth or power of sin ; that the Holy Ghost will be our indwelling Sanctifier ; if we heartily , or sincerely accept the Gift and Offer , That God will consent to be our God , Christ to be our Jesus Christ , and the Holy Ghost to be our indwelling Sanctifier , if we will but consent . This is no doubt , the Gift or Covenant as offered . 

These things being premised , I come to prove not only the inseparability , ( which is enough to my purpose ) but even the Identity of Heart-covenanting and saving faith , and of signal external covenanting , and the Profession of saving faith . 

To enter the Covenant of God unfeignedly in heart , is to accept God for my God , Jesus Christ for my Saviour , and the Holy Ghost for my Sanctifier , upon the Gospel offer : To believe savingly , is to accept of God for my God , Jesus Christ for my Saviour , and the Holy Ghost for my sanctifier upon the Gospel offer : therefore to enter the Covenant of God heartily , and to believe savingly , are the same . 

Moreover , to Covenant with God Externally , is to profess our Consent , that God be our God , Christ our Saviour , and the Holy Ghost our Sanctifier , on the Gospel offer . To profess saving faith is to profess the same consent : therefore external entering into the Covenant , and profession of saving faith , are the same thing . 

That this is the only true Covenant-entrance with God , is proved thus . It is only this Covenant of Grace that God calleth us to consent to , and offereth himself to enter with us : therefore it is only this covenant of Grace , whose acceptance or consent to it , is our entrance into the Covenant of God. There can be no covenanting in the present sense , but by two parties : But God doth not offer himself to us in any other Covenant but this , nor offer his consent to any other . And it 's confessed , that God is the leading Party , prescribing to man and imposing on him the terms of the Covenant , or Conditions which he must perform . There is no possibility therefore of our entering into God's covenant , when it is none of his Covenant , or when it is against his Will , or without his consent . 

And that this is the nature of saving faith , is manifest : For 1.  It is not a mere act of the Intellect . Though Assent be the Initial Act ( from which it hath oft its name ) yet it is not the whole , nor the perfecting Act : Our Divines most commonly consent ( except Camero and some few more ) that faith is in the Will as well as the Understanding : And its first Act in the Will must needs be velle Christum oblatum or a consent to the Gospel-offer of God , Christ , and the Holy Ghost : or an Acceptance of the Redeeming Trinity in the Relation as they are offered to to be ours in the Gospel : After which followeth Affiance , as Assent precedes it . Our Assembly of Divines in their Catechisms say , That Faith in Jesus Christ is a saving Grace , whereby we receive and rest upon him alone for salvation , as he is offered to us in the Gospel . Or , as elsewhere [ to embrace Jesus Christ freely offered to us in the Gospel ] Andrea the Wills receiving is by Accepting or Consenting . Dr. Preston hath at large showed in many of his writings ( as I have elsewhere showed ) that Faith and Heart-covenanting with Christ is all one . The Scripture calleth Saving faith A receiving Christ Jesus the Lord , John 1.12 . Col. 2.5 , 6 This therefore with almost all Protestant Writers is past controversy . But if any will yet be stiff in it , that Faith is only in the Intellect , ( upon that common poor reason , that one Grace cannot be in two faculties ) it may suffice to them , that I prove the Inseparability of saving faith and sincere Heart-covenanting , and so of the profession of each , though I had not proved the Identity . And these same men do most earnestly pled for the Inseparability themselves , maintaining at large , that Assent ( which only they call Faith ) if true , is Inseparable from true consent , which is the Heart-covenanting . Of which you may see Dr. Downame in his Treatise of Justification , and in his Appendix against Mr. Pemble , at large . 

But here we are quite off with the Papists ; for they stiffly maintain , that Faith is only the Understandings Assent ; only the Schoolmen and others of them confess , that it is a willing Assent : but it is one thing to will the Assent , and another thing to will or Accept the Good that is contained in the promise which we Assent to . This last is the thing in Question : And they tell us , that this is not Faith , but Love. To which Maccovius and Chamier answer them , that Faith and Love to Christ are all one ; though Faith and Love to a distinct object , be not so . 

2.  Hereupon we proceed to a further difference , which is , that the Papists say , that Faith may be separated from Love ; that Faith without Love doth not Justify ; but only that Faith which is informed by Love. How far this supposed great disagreement is merely Verbal , or Real , I leave to the judicious Reader to judge , when he hath considered , that what we call Faith simply , they call Fides formata Charitate : That the Act of Faith which is in the Will , the Papists call by the name of Love , and not of Faith , yet both agree de re ipsa , that this is the thing which is necessary to Justification ; and we confess as well as they , that mere Assent ( of some sort ) is separable from Love. But then the mischief is , that the Papists by false wording or naming these Graces , are carried to the misinterpreting of many Scriptures , if not to many erroneous Doctrines also . And when they read of Faith simply , they commonly take it for mere Assent . And so they are led into error in the present controversy . For when they find that he that Believeth must be Baptised ; they conclude presently with Bellarmine , that sides , non charitas facit Christianum : he that assenteth is a Believer , & therefore may be baptised . But our Divines have so frequently and so voluminously confuted this conceit , and proved against them that faith is in the Will as well as the understanding , and that [ to Believe in ] signifieth to Accept , or rest upon , or have Affiance in , and that Faith and Love are inseparable , ( yea true and through Assent , ) that I shall not needlessly stand to do again a work so oft and fully done . And themselves confess , that when Faith is mentioned as Justifying , it includeth the act of the Will , ( which they call Charity : ) And sure we have oft proved against them , that this is the faith that is meant in God's Covenant , and in our Baptismal Profession and Covenant with him , and in the Creed . 

In a word , that Faith which is meant by God in the Covenant offered , must be meant by us in our profession of Accepting this offer . But it is a true saving Faith , which hath a promise of Remission , which is meant by God in the Covenant offered ; therefore this must be meant by us , etc.  The Major is clear ; because else we do but Equivocate with God , and we do not Accept the same thing that he offereth . The Minor is clear : in that the Covenant of Grace is but one , and that one Covenant offereth Christ and Life to all that will accept him : so that the Acceptance puts us into a participation of Christ and Life , The Covenant offereth pardon of sin to all that Believe or Receive Christ ; therefore it is a saving faith that it means , because it annexeth saving special Benefits . 

To these I add another Argument : which is this : 

The hearty Acceptance of the Gift , is the first and principal part of our Heart-covenanting with God : The hearty Acceptance of that same Gift , is saving faith ; therefore the first and principal part of our Heart-covenanting with God , is the same thing as saving Faith. The like I say of the Professions of each . Or thus : Our Heart-covenanting is the principal condition of the Promise ( or God's part of the Covenant : ) Our saving Faith is the principal condition of the Promise ; Therefore our Heart-covenanting and our saving faith are the same . The Major I prove by the Medium of the foregoing Argument . Our hearty Acceptance of the Gift , is the Principal condition of the Promise . But this hearty Acceptance of the Gift , is the first and principal part of our Heart-covenanting : therefore our Heart-covenanting is the principal condition of the Promise ( or the first and chief part of that covenating at least ) . The Major is proved , 1.  In that it is a free Gift : And our Divines , against the Doctrine of Justification by Works , or Merit , have fully proved , that it 's so free , that Acceptance is the condition of our Interest . 2.  And the free Offers of the Gospel fully confirm it , Isa. 55 1 , 2.3 . rev. 22.17 . etc. The main point that is necessary for me to insist on , is the proof of the Minor , which yet is so plain from what is said , and the very nature of the Gospel offer , that one would think it should need no more to be said to it : But that I perceive some few do misapprehend the nature of our covenanting with God , as if it were only an Agreement or Covenant to do somewhat for the future , that God may do somewhat for us for the future : And this gross mistake ( gross indeed , in the very point of the Gospel promise , which is our only tenure of our Title to Life ) , doth animate abundance of dark confused quarrelsome contradictions and oppositions , which I have had on this point . It is a matter of very sad consideration , that any Preacher of the Gospel had need to be persuaded , that the first and great part of the Covenant of Grace offered by God , and accepted by us , doth consist in present Giving and Receiving , not only in mutual Promises for hereafter . The Gospel is a most free Deed of Gift : some of its benefits it actually giveth , on condition of mere Acceptance to be presently possessed ; and some of them , on condition too , but in a waiting obediential way , to be hereafter possessed . In respect to the presently given benefits , the Gospel is a Deed of Gift presently entitling us to them , and our present acceptance is the condition . But in regard of the future Benefits , the Gospel is also a Deed of Gift , but giveth not present Title , or at least not so full , and therefore requireth future conditions , as it gives future Benefits . At the present in the New Covenant , God giveth himself to be our God , Christ to be our Saviour , Head and Husband , the Holy Ghost to be our Sanctifier ; and also the present actual pardon of our sins ; the Justification of our persons ; the Adoption of Sons ; the indwelling Spirit ; a Right to a beneficial use of the Creature ; and a Right to the Inheritance of Everlasting life , so far , that if we should die that hour , we should be saved . All these God offered us at the present on condition of our Accptance , or consent . This consent is our Heart-covenanting ; so that this first and great part of the Covenant consisteth but in the present Giving and taking of all these Benefits : which in a word the Apostle expresseth 1 John 5.11 , 12 , by the words [ Christ and eternal Life ] God hath given us eternal life , and this life is in his Son : He that hath the Son hath life , and he that hath not the Son hath not life ] . The remaining part of the Benefits are our future helps of Grace , Pardons , Protections , final Absolution at Judgement , and eternal Glory . All these we have a right to at our first Justification , but it is a right to be continued only on some future conditions , that is , on the condition of our continuance in the Faith which we begun , and of our renewed faith and Repentance , and sincere Gospel-obedience , which is to be performed in a receiving way . Now its true , that as to these future conditions , we do not actually perform them in our covenating , but promise them : as God doth not then actually give us the very Blessings now mentioned , but promise them . But as to all the first expressed great Benefits , as God did before our Consents but promise and offer them , but in our covenanting or consent doth actually give them ; so we do by our covenanting in heart ( which is nothing but our consenting or accepting ) perform the conditions of God's promise ; and thus our very covenanting with God is the same thing as our fulfiling the conditions of the Covenant , that is , of God's conditional Deed of Gift , which before gave us Christ and Life if we would accept them , and now giveth them actually upon our acceptance . And I should hope that few protestants think that our actual Justification and Adoption , our Interest in God , Christ , and the Holy Ghost , are suspended upon any future condition , which in our covenanting with God we must promise to perform . I think I have made it plain now that our Heart covenanting with God is principally our present consent that Christ and Life shall be ours ; God , Christ , and the Holy Ghost ours ; and that this is nothing else but Justifying faith ; and therefore that they are all one ; and therefore the Profession of each of them is all one : and so that where one is required , the other is so , being indeed not another . 

Argum. 5.  We must not baptise any without the profession of that faith and Repentance which are made the condition of Remission of sins . But only the faith called justifying or saving , and the concomitant true Repentance , are made the condition of Remission of sins : therefore we must baptise none without the profession of that justifying faith , etc.  

The Minor needeth no proof . And the Mayor I prove thus . If we must not baptise any but intentionally for present Remission of sin , then must we not baptise any without a profession of that faith and Repentance which is the condition of Remission . But the former is true : therefore so is the later . 

The consequence is passed all doubt : for else we should Imagine that men may have present Actual pardon without that Faith and Repentance which are the condition of it ; which subverteth much of the Gospel . The Antecedent I prove thus ; If God hath Instituted no Baptism but what is Intentionally for the present Remission of sin , than we must not baptise any but Intentionally for the present Remission of sin : But the former is true ; therefore so is the later . I say [ intentionally ] in contradistinction from [ Eventually , or certainly and Infallibly attaining that end . ] Where further note , That I speak not of God's absolute Decrees , as if his Intention in that sense could be frustrate ; but of his ends as Legislator , speaking of him after the manner of men . but principally of the Instituted ends of his Ordinances ; that is , the Ends which he requireth the Minister and people to use them for ; and so it is Our Intention principally that I mention . As the Gospel itself is said to be Intentionally to save men ; and though it condemn most , that is besides the first Intention , and but by Accident . And though this be principally to be spoken of the prescribed , imposed Intentions of their Conversion and Salvation ; yet Christ is pleased in the Word to ascribe such Intentions to himself as attain not their ends : as professing that he came not into the world to condemn the world , but that the world through him might be saved : that is , To condemn them is not his direct principal Intent , but only on supposition of their wilful final rejecting of him : And this he speaks partly in the habit of a Rector or Promiser , and partly as man , or after the manner of men : And of the intention imposed on us , there is no doubt . 

Now I shall prove the Antecedent ( for the consequence is past doubt ) And first we are confirmed in this truth , because the Opponent ( whom it concerneth ) hath not proved any other Baptism instituted by God , but what is for present Remission of sins . If they can show us one Text of Scripture that speaketh of any other , we shall give up all the Cause ; but yet they have not done it that I know of . In the mean time we shall prove the contrary . God hath instituted but One Baptism : that one Baptism is for the present Remission of sins ; therefore God hath instituted no Baptism but what is for present Remission . The Major is proved from Eph. 4.5 . There is one Baptism . In the Minor we take the words [ for Remission ] not to speak of somewhat accidental , or to be intended only by the Administrator , uncertainly , or but sometime . And I prove it from Scripture , Acts 2.38 . Repent and be Baptised every one of you in in the name of Jesus Christ for the Remission of sins , and ye shall Receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost . ] As Remission is here made the end of Baptism , so it is present Remission : For. 1.  It is such as is the consequent of the Repentance which Peter exhorteth them to ; but that was present Remission . 2.  It was to precede the giving of the Holy Ghost , in the sense there mentioned ; therefore it was present Remission . The great Reasons that are brought to the contrary I shall answer afterwards , and more fully then prove the vanity and foul consequents of their opinion , that make a future Remission to be the intended end of our Administration of Baptism : and therefore I must desire the Reader to suspend his expectations of my further Reasons à Natura rei , till their due place . Beza in loc . saith [ in nomen Christi ] it est , dans Christo nomen , cujus mortis , sepulturae ac resurrectionis simus in Baptismo participes , cum peccatorum Remissione . Nec enim hoc declarat formulam Baptismi , sed finem & scopum : ] So Deodate , [ In the name ] viz. Not only for a Mark of our Profession of the Gospel , but also to participate of his spiritual virtue in the washing away of your sins , with which he accompanieth and ratifyeth the external Ceremony in those who are his : ] Bullinger in loc . saith , [ Baptizari in nomine Domini Jesus Christi , est Baptismatis signo testari se Christo credere ad Remissionem peccatorum . 1.  Mark , it is not only an engagement to Believe hereafter , but the Profession of a present Faith. 2.  And that not a common faith , but that which hath Remission of sin . 3.  And this was not an accidental separable use of Baptism : but he makes this the very exposition of Baptizari in nomine Jesus Christi . And next addeth , [ Vel est in Baptismo per Christum recipi in gratiam . ] Mark then , that even Baptism into the name of Christ itself doth signify that we are received into God's favour by Christ : And thus he expoundeth the Covenant in the next words : [ Est enim Baptismus pactum seu foedus gratiae , quod init inter baptizandum nobiscum Christus . ] And that it is a Professing sign of our true Repentance , he shows before [ Et rectissimè conjungitur Poenitentia & Baptismus , quia Baptismus Poenitentiae signum est : ] 

Marlorate in loc . goes further , and shows that Remission doth in order go before Baptism , and multitudes of our Divines say the like , as may be seen in the abundant citations of them by Mr. Gataker against Doctor Ward and Bishop Davenant [ Tametsi in contexu verborum Baptismus Remissionem hìc praecedit , ordine tamen sequitur : quia nihil aliud est ( Mark nihil aliud ) quam bonorum quae per Christum consequimur obsignatio , ut in conscientiis nostris data sint . ] The words are Calvins in loc . owned by Marlorate . 

The same Cal. in loc . to show that Remission of sin goeth before baptism , addeth Caeterùm longa expositione non indiget , quòd baptizari jubet in remissionem ●eccatorum : Tametsi enim semel homines sibi reconciliau●t Deus in Christo , non imputando illis peccata , 2 Cor. 5 19 & nunc hujus reconciliationis fidem cordibus nostris per spiritum suum imprimit ; quia tamen Baptismus sigillum est , quo hoc benefic●un nobis confirmat , adeoque arrka & pignus adoptionis nost●ae , meritò dari nobis in remissionem peccatorum dicitur . Nam quia fide percipimus Christi dona , fidei autem confirmandae & augendae Baptismus adminiculum est , illi tanqua inferiori medio remissio pecc●t●●un , quae fidei est effectus , annectitur . ] I hope I need not stand to show what Calvin here supposeth the use of Christ's Baptism to be or what faith it presupposeth . And that you may see what he takes to enter the very Definition of Baptism he addeth , [ Porrò non est sumenda ex hoc loco Definitio Baptismi , quia ejus partem duntaxat Petrus attingit . Per Baptismum ( ut Paulus docet ) crucifigitur vetus homo noster , ut in vitae novitatem resurgamus , Rome 6.4 , 8.  Item induimus Christum ipsum , Gal. 3.27 . 1 Cor. 12. & passim docet Scriptura esse Poenitentiae quoque symbolum . ] Indeed Calvin doth often fall upon the Papists , that make baptism to have no force against any sin but those before Baptism : But 1.  He makes actual Baptism ever to be first for washing away our past & present sin & not then to pardon future sin , but to put the person into an estate wherein he hath a remedy for future sin , at hand , and certain : 2.  And he intendeth , that Baptism ( as reviewed by faith ) afterwards may be useful to confirm our Belief of Forgiveness of renewed sin : which made Bellarmine fall upon him and other protestants , as holding that the very remembrance of Baptism is effectual for pardon of sin . 

Also , on the same 38. verse Calvin takes special notice of the order of Peter's words , and gives it us as the sum of Christianity [ Primò hortatus fuerit Judaeos ad poenitentiam : Deinde eroxerit eos veniae fiducia : nam peccatorum remissionem illis remisit . 3.  Quia non reconciliamur Deo , nisi intercedente Christi morte , nec aliter quam ejus sanguine peccata nostra expiantur & delentur , ideò neminatim Petrus ad ipsum nos revocat . Quarto loco , baptismum ponit tanquam figillum quo gratiae promissio confirmatur . Quare in his paucis verbis totam ferè habemus Christianismi summam . Nempe , ut homo sibi renuncians & mundo , totum se Deo addicat : Deinde ut gratuita peccatorum remissione à reatu mortis liberetur , adeóque adoptetur inter filios Dei.  

Piscator in loc . saith , [ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ] Id est in Testimonium Remissionis peccatorum : ut habentes scilicét Testimonium Divinum quòd Deus vobis remiserit peccata vestra propter Jesum Christum in quem creditis : Non autem ad consequendam Remissionem peccatorum per hoc medium sive instrumentum . [ Baptismus est medium sen instrumentum quo Spiritus sanctus utitur , ad fidem confimandun . ] Vid. ultr . 

The next Text we shall cite is Act. 22.16 : [ Arise and be baptised , and wash away thy sins , calling on the name of the Lord ] Though the Papists vainly would hence gather , that Baptism doth wash away sin ex opere operato ; yet we may well gather , 1.  That it washeth it away by Confirmation and Obsignation . 2.  And this is the instituted use of Baptism , and not to signify what may or will be done hereafter . Calvin on this Text saith , [ non dubium est , quin fideliter rudimentis Pietatis Paulum imbuerit Ananias : neque enim verae fidei expertem baptizasset . ] After he shows , that it was a confirmation of the pardon that Paul had before . 

Joh. 3.5 Except a man be born of water and of the spirit , he shall not enter into the kingdom of God. Though we are agreed against the Papists , that Christ intendeth not here to place the same necessity in Baptism , as there is in or of the New birth by the spirit ; yet it is by most acknowledged , that Christ doth here speak of the New Birth , as signified by Baptism ; and so hath respect to Baptism as the ordinary confirming sign . And so the text fully showeth us , that Baptism is instituted to be the sign of our present Regeneration ; Or else it could not be said , that we must be born [ of water and the spirit . ] And that Remission of sin is here included , I have said somewhat to prove in a Treat . against infidelity , Part. 4. initio . Calvin saith , most are of Chrysostoms' mind , who took it to be meant of Baptism . ( And so did the generality of ancient Expositors ) And though himself and some more think otherwise ; yet as long as they take it to be a Metonymical expression , the sign being put for the thing Signified , it doth as well acquaint us with the use of Baptism , as if it were a proper speech . 

Bullinger in loc . saith [ H●nc Christi sententiam omnes penè de Baptismo interpretantur . ] Beza believeth , that the Text speaks of Baptism , either Christ's , or some other , but rather Christ's . Piscator on the text hath these words . [ Nam ipsa Baptismi perceptione salutem consequimur : quum non sit institutus nisi ad Remissionem peccatorum sanguine Christi partam , itemque Regenerationem spiritus testandam . — Baptismus additur fidei , non quòd parem rationem ac vim hab●at , sed quòd ad fidem testandam & confirmandam adhibeatur . Ita hìc Baptismus additur spiritui , quod forès testetur id quod spiritus intus peragit ] though he rather interpret the Text as Calvin . 

I have showed before from Mar. 1.4 . and other places , that John's Baptism was for Remission of sins ; that is , ( saith Gataker ) to seal us the pardon which we have received . And if the very Scripture description of it was [ The Baptism of Repentance for Remission of sins ] than it was not an accidental or separable use , as to the Intention which the Administrator and Receiver are bound to . And justly doth Beza in Mat. 1.4 . fall upon Erasmus sharply , for saying [ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . [ In Praepositio Praeparationem significat non effectum ; because Repentance and Remission ( saith Beza ) cannot be separated ; so that he took it not to be a common preparatory Repentance , or Baptism . 

Piscator on Mar. 1.4 . saith , it 's called the Baptism of Repentance for Remission of sin , because John preached Remission of sin to the penitent and believers ; praecipiebatque ut in hujus rei testimonium atque professionem baptizarentur . And that it 's called 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , id est , Qui resipiscentiae testificandae atque profitendae adhibebatur . Neque enim baptizabat nisi eos qui confession pecatorum edita , resipiscentiam suam testatam reddebant : ] Caeterum nomine Resipiscentiae per Synecdochë membri simul intelligenda est fides in Christum ; ] And he expounds the words [ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ] thus , Id est , praed cabat baptisma resipiscentiae quod ad Remissionem peccatorum pertinet , seu destinatum est , ut Act. 2.38 . sed hoc est rectè intelligendum : viz ad Remissionem peccatorum testificandam sive obsignandam : non autem ad illam consequendam hoc opere . [ Andrea on Mal. 3.11 . Observe he shows that Christ's Baptism and Johns are the same , in that both have the same end and use , viz. Obsignatio Remissionis peccatorum & Resipiscentiae , that is , as already extant , as his Judgement is oft delivered . As in his Scholar on ver . 11. he expressly saith [ In resipiscenti●m , id est , in testimonium Resipiscentiae , ut nimirum susceptione baptismi testatum faciatis vos resipuisse , & indies magis ac magis resipiscere velle : sed simul hìc intelligendum , Joannem baptizasse quoque in remissionem peccatorum , hoc est , in remissionem peccatorum , ut nimirum nomine Dei testatum faceret resipiscentibus & in Christum credentibus peccata ipsis remissa esse propter Christum agnum Dei. — ] 

And I pray mark his observation on Mat. 3.6 , 8 , 10. concluding our present Question : [ Baptismus nulli adulto conferendus est , nisi prius ediderit confessionem peccatorum & fidei in Christum , ac praeterea promissionem sanctae vitae ; ] which he proves . And as he shows that it is Saving Faith and Repentance that he means , which hath the promise of remission ; so the promise of a holy Life cannot be sincerely made by any till he have a Regenerate heart . See Doctor Hammond on Mark 1.4 . 

Calvin on Mat. 3.6 . saith , ergò ut se ritè ad Baptismum offerant homines , peccatorum [ Confessio ab illis requiritur ; alioqui enim quam inane esset ludicrum tota actio ! ] If I had charged the guilty so , of making the whole work of Baptism ludicrous , they would have been highly offended : Calvin shows his judgement , that it is a true special Repentance which he would require this Confession to manifest : And he addeth , [ Notandum est de adultis hic verba fieri , quos scimus non promiscuè in Ecclesiam esse admittendos , nec Baptismo initiandos esse in corpus Christi nisi examine prius habito , ] viz. about the said Repentance and Faith.  

Paraeus on Mat. 3.5 . shows that the order was that Confession as a testimony of true Repentance go first , and then Baptism for Remission of sins [ confessio post ponitur ; sed 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 constructionis — Confesii baptizabantur : pro , Cum confessi essent peccata , baptismum accipiebant Sacramentum remissionis peccatorum . Non prius baptizabantur , postea confitebantur — Auditores igitur primò in testimonium Resip●scentiae confitebantur sua peccata , deinde baptizabantur : tertiò , fide Baptismi fructum suscipiebant Remissionem peccatorum . Docet hic locus varia . 1.  Quod Baptismus sit sacramentum Remissionis peccatorum , ex parte Dei ; spondet enim Deus ceu jurejurando , baptizatis remissionem gratuitam peccatorum propter Christum . 2.  Quod sit etiam sacramentum Resipiscentiae , ex parte nostra . Restipulamur enim Deo fidem & poenitentiam pro tanto beneficio . ( That is , both profess it at present , and engage to continue in it ; answering the interrogation Credis ? with a Credo , and not only a Credam . ) 3.  Ad Sacramenta non esse admittendos Impenitents ; ( He speaks of the Repentance which had the promise of Remission ) — Hoc enim damus ( Anabaptistis ) in Ecclesiam suscipiendos & baptizandos non esse , nisi praevia confession Fidei & Poenitentiae ( by the adult : ) quem morem & vetus servavit Ecclesia & nostrae hodie observant , si vel Judaeus vel Turca adultus baptismo sit ini●i indus . 

And on verse 7. he saith ( which will be harsh to our Opponents ) Ex concione ipsa datur intelligi , multos illerum simulata poenitentia etiam baptismum petivisse : Horum hypocrisin cum non ignoraret , non passus eos later in turba , nec ad baptismum indignos admisit sed acri objurgatione , hortatione , & comminatione ad seriam resipiscentiam extimulat & ad baptismum praeparat . ( where he goeth three steps beyond our Opposers ; who 1. will not have us require as necessary so much as a show of this Repentance . 2.  Much lesle the sincerity of it ; 3. nor to deny them Baptism as unworthy till they are prepared . ) After he shows , that Hypocrites will creep in among the good : partly such as we cannot discern , and those are to be left to the judgement of God ; partim manifesti , quos Pastorss admittere non debent sine examine , nè Sacramenta prost●tuant , sibi & Ecclesiae reatum attrahant , ( How little do our confident opposers fear this ! ) — Facite fructus dignos Poenitentiae . Pro , Cavete , mihi , vel Deo hypocrisi illudere , sed videte ut veram poenitentiam agatis , ab erroribus & peccatis vestris , & si● baptismum Novae Ecclesiae sacramentum suscipiatis . Fructus poenitentiae vocat , ut palam erroribus , sectis & vitiis suis renuncient , & emendatione vitae se novos homines deinceps testentur . Non enim satis est foris poenitentiam simulare , quod etiam hypocritae solent , etc.  [ Andrea p. 56. against Maldonate , he proveth the Baptism of Christ and John all one ; and when Maldonate saith that John baptised [ in poenitentium baptismus praecedebat , & poenitentia sequebatur ] ( confessing , that in Christ's Baptism Repentance precedes , ) he answereth , [ that it is false ; Nam etiam in Joannis baptismo praecedebat poenitentia , sequebatur baptismus . ] 

If then it be certain that John's Baptism was for present Remission of sins , even the obsignation of a Remission already conferred by the promise , it will be at least as evident that Christ's Baptism is so to , and accordingly to be administered . 

Hence it is , that the Faith which the Apostles before they baptised men did persuade them to , was still a Justifying Faith , ( as Act. 13.38 , 39 & passim ) as that which they were to annex the Seal of Baptism to , ( or to God's promise on men's believing . ) 

2 Pet. 1.9 It is said of the barren ungodly Professor , [ that he hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins ; ] where I take it for a clear case that it is the Baptismal Washing which the Apostle there intendeth , wherein all profess to put off the Old Man , and to be washed from their former filthiness . For I suppose we shall be loath to yield that it was an actual cleansing , either of Remission or Mortification , which the Apostle meaneth , left we grant that men may fall from such a state : And therefore it must be a Sacramental washing or Cleansing , wherein the matter was appearingly and sacramentally transacted . From whence it is plain , that the Apostle took it for granted , that as all the Baptised were visibly Church-members , so were they all visibly washed from their old sins ; which showeth both what was their own Profession , and what was the stated end and use of the Ordinance . The Apostle saith not that [ he hath forgotten that he promised or engaged to be purged from his old sins , ] but that [ he was purged ] from them . Pareus in loc . saith , [ A veteribus peccatis purgatum , h. e. se esse baptizatum : seu se accepisse in Baptismo purgationis signaculum . Omnes enim baptizati debent purgari à peccatis , sicut dicuntur endure Christum , Gal. 3. mori cum Christo , Rom. 6. sensus est : Qui se volutant in sceleribus , non recordantur se baptizatos esse : Abnegant ergo Baptismum suum . ] CITIZEN Cor. 6 11.  The Apostle saith of the visible Church of Corinth , [ such were some of you ; but ye are washed , but ye are sanctified , but ye are justified , etc. ] where it is evident , that all the visible members of the Church are visibly washed , sanctified , justified , ( of which Text I shall speak more anon . ) And I thik it is clear , that by Washing here he hath some respect to their Baptism . 

I shall not stand now to add any more texts , because we shall have occasion anon to do it ; but may hence conclude , that till one text of Scripture be produced from whence it may be proved , that Christ did institute such a thing as Baptism , which was not for the present signal Remission of sin , we must take the contrary for granted , because we have so many texts that tell us that his Baptism was for Remission of sin . 

I shall only here add , that the very sign itself which is the washing of the body by water , doth plainly show that the washing of the soul by the blood of Christ , is the thing signified ; and the present actual use of the sign is to signify the presence and actuality of the thing signified . So that I conclude , that there is no Baptism to be administered without a Profession of saving faith and Repentance foregoing , because there is no Baptism that ever Christ appointed but what is for the obsignation of Remission of sin which is the consequent . 

Mr. Blake page 171. reciteth some words of mine containing this Argument , thus : that faith to which the promise of Remission and justification is made , must also be sealed to : Or that faith which is the condition of the promise , is the condition in foro Dei of the Title to the seal : But it is only solid true faith that is the condition of the promise of Remission : therefore it is that which gives Right in foro Dei to the seal ] Who would think now but Mr. Blake had given some substantial answer to this and other Arguments , when himself and some others are so confident of the sufficiency of them ? His answer is this [ To this I have answered , faith is not sealed to but Remission of sins or salvation upon condition of faith ; and when I come to speak of the sealing of Sacraments , I shall God willing make this more evident , that the sacrament , quâ seal , immediately respects our privileges not duties ] Reply . 1.  Is here one word of answer to any real part of the Argument ? Is not this answer as little to the matter as if he had talked of another subject . I think it my Duty to say that Ministers of the Gospel do but proclaim to the Church the matter of our common lamentation , and the enemy's joy , when some confidently publish such kind of Disputations , and others are satisfied with them . And I must say , if all were such , they should never more be angered with one word of mine , in opposition to their assertions , though they would maintain that the Crow is white . 

2.  To that useless touch that he hath on a word ( whose following explication might have spared him his labour ) I may say that our Divines have ordinarily maintained hitherto that there is a mutual covenanting between God and us ( and no man more than Mr. Blake ) and that in the Sacrament there is a mutual sealing ; the receiving being our seal , as the Act is Gods.  

Arg 6.  If Baptism be instituted to be a seal of the Righteousness of that faith which we have being yet unbaptised , then must we Baptise none that profess not a justifying faith ( and their seed ) But the Antecedent is true ; therefore so is the consequent . 

The reason of the consequence is evident in that we must use Baptism only according to its nature , and to it 's instituted ends . 

The Antecedent is proved thus : Circumcision was instituted to be a seal of the righteousness of that faith which they had being yet uncircumcised : therefore Baptism is instituted to be a seal of the righteousness of that faith which we have yet unbaptised ; the consequence will not be denied by them whom we now deal with : Because they confess that Baptism succeedeth Circumcision . The Antecedent is evident in Rom. 4.11 . It being so expressly said of Abraham , to whom circumcision was first given . I cannot imagine what they will say , unless it be by recourse to the Anabaptiss shift , to say , that Circumcision was instituted to this end indeed , to Abraham himself , and others that were sincere , but not to all that had right to it . But God here tells us , the established use and end of his Ordinance ; and in such Relations , the end is inseparable . And as God hath not made many sorts of Baptisms or Circumcisions , so neither many nearer inconsistent ends , ( or separable . ) And we are likest to know the true end of the institution , where the institution and first example are reported to us . 

Calvin in loc saith [ Hic porrò habemus insignem locum de commum sacramentorum usu : sunt enim ( teste Paulo ) sigilla , quibus & Dei promissiones cordibus nostris quodammodo imprimuntur , & sancitur gratiae certitudo , — Quare maneat hoc fixum , sacra symbola esse ●l est monia quibus gratiam suam Deus cordibus nostris — obsignat . Gratuita Reconciliatio in Deo in signo illo inclusa fuit — Duae deniq●e ut Baptismi hodie sunt , ità olim Circumcisionis erant parts ; nempe tam vitae novitatem quam peccatorum Remissionem testari : ] But he shows next , that all the circumcised had not Justice ; ( that is actual faith and sanctity ) first giving instance in Isaac an Infant . 

saith Aritius in loc . Hanc Justitiam obsignavit hoc est , illum certum reddidit de faedere inito & acceptatione gratuita . 

saith Piscator in loc . Sicut olim Circumcisio signum fuit federis gratiae , & sigillum quo credentibus obsignata fuit Justitia fidei , hoc est quo illi certiores sunt redditi , sibi remiss esse peccata prepter futuram satisfactionem Christi , ac proinde se habere Deum prepitum ac saventeme ; it●●ctera quoque sacramenta , etc. similiter & finis seu scopus omnium sacramentorum unus idemque est , viz. Obsignatio justitiae Fidei , quae vulgo dicitur fidei confirmatio . ] 

Paraeus in loc . saith , [ Ita signum fuit dantis & accipientis respectu , etc. ] Et [ justitia fid●i est Remissio peccatorum fide accepta propter redemptionem Christi ] Et [ sic sacramenta non sunt instituta justificandis , sed justificatis , h. e. non infidelibus , sed conversis . Non igitur nisi conversione & fide sumi debent ; secus sigilla justitiae esse cessant . Quid enim non hathentibus fidem & justitiam obsignarem ? ] Yet following Calvin , he next showeth , that sometime Righteousness doth follow after and not precede , instancing in Isaac , which none denieth . For Infants are baptised on the account of their Parent's faith , and not their own ; and the adult oft profess the faith which they have not . 

Note also here , besides Paraeus his express decision of the main controversy , how he takes the converted justified and believers for the same ; and the unconverted , unjustified , and Infidels , for the same . Ragerus a little quarrels with Paraeus , and ( as many Lutherans do ) would make Abraham's example no standing Rule ; that the Sacrament begets not the first Grace ; [ sed non sequitur , in hoc subjecto Circumcisio non habuit virtutem operativam gratiae primitus conferendae : ergò in nullo habuit : imò vero aliis gratiae divinae adhuc destitutis medium esse potuit gratiae primitus conferendae . ] so others of that way . But as we distinguish between what God may do by Baptism , and what he hath Instituted it to do ; so the very judgement of these Lutherans and many Papists , who will have Sacraments to confer Grace where it is not , is against the opinion that we now resist . For it is not any lower effect only , but saving Justification or Remission , which these make to be the present effect of it . 

Dr. Willet in loc . saith [ Circumcision than did not confer upon him that Grace which he had not , but did confirm and establish him in the grace and faith received , the Sacraments than non Instituta sunt justificandis , sed justificatis , are not Instituted for those which are to be justified , but for them which are already justified . Parae . ] 

Peter Martyr is larger , and makes these words of Paul to be the definition of a Sacrament , to be a Seal of the Righteousness of faith . Much out of them might be cited for the cause in hand , but that I must avoid prolixity . So much shall serve for that Argument . 

Argum. 7.  We must Baptise none but those that are first professed Disciples of Christ ( and their children , who are also Disciples ) but none are professed Disciples of Christ that profess not saving faith in Christ ; therefore we may not Baptise any that profess not saving faith in Christ.  

The Major is proved from Matth 38.19 . Go Disciple me all Nations , batizing them . ] As for those that say , they are Discipled by baptising , and not before baptising . 1.  They speak not the sense of that Text. 2.  Nor that which is true or rational , if they mean it absolutely as so spoken ; else why should one be baptised more than another . 3.  But if they mean that by heart-covenant , or God's Acceptance and promise they are Disciples before , but not so completely till the covenant be sealed and solemnised , as a soldier is not so signally a soldier till he be listed , nor a King till he be crowned so fully a King , or a man or woman so fully married till it be solemnised in the Congregation ; in this sense they say the same that I am proving : Men must be first Disciples by the professed consent , before they are declared such by the Seals or public sacramental solemnisation . 

And that only the professors of saving Faith and their Infants are Disciples , may appear by a perusal of the Texts of Scripture that use this word ; and it w●ll not only be found that this which I maintain is the ordinary use of the Word ( which should make it so also with us ) but that no Text can be cited where any others are called the Disciples of Christ. For the Major and Minor both observe Piscator's Definition of Baptism ( on Mat. 28.19 . ) Baptismus est sacramentum novi Testamenti , quo homines ad Ecclesiam pertinentes ex mandato Christi cultui veri Dei , qui est Pater , Filius & Spiritus Sanctus , per ministros verbi consecrantur , & in fide Remissionis peccatorum , & spe vitae aeternae confirmantur . ] And he proveth this Description per parts : 1.  That its a Sacrament . 2.  That it belongeth to those that pertain to that Church , and that they only must be baptised qui ecclesiam fuerint ingressi , ac fidem evangeliis professi , which he proveth from Mark 16.16 . he that believeth and is baptised shall be saved . Vult Ergò ( saith he ) ut prius constet de alicuius fide quam baptizetur ] Under Acts 8.  Philippus Evangelista non prius baptizare voluit Eunuchum illum Aethiopem quam is professus esset fidem Christi ] And by the proof from Mar. 16.16 . It is apparent that he speaks of saving faith . then he proves the last part of his description [ Postremo per Baptismum homines in fide & spe confirmari liquet ex verbis , Qui crediderit & baptizatus fuerit salvabitur ; & sic Petrus , Act 2.38 . resipiscentes Judaeos jubet baptizari in remissionem pe●catorum , hoc est , ad confirmandam fidem remissionie peccatorum . Item , Act. 22.16 . Ananias dicit Paulo recens converso , Baptizare & ablue peccata tua , hoc est , Baptizare ad confirmandam fidem remissionis peccatorum , quod abluta sint peccata tua sanguine Christi . ] 

Calvin in loc . saith [ Baptizari jubet Christus eos qui nomen evangelio dederint , seque professi fuerint Discipulos , p●rtim ut illis Baptismus sit vitae aeternae tessera coram Deo ; partim apud homines externum fidei signum . Scimus enim Deum nobis testari Adoptionis suae gratiam hoc signo ; quia nos inserit in corpus filii sui , ut nos in grege suo censeat : Ideo & spirituale nostrum lavacrum , quo nos sibi reconciliat , ut nova justitia illic representatur . Sed quemadmodum gratiam suam Deus hoc sigillo nobis confirmat , ita quicunque se ad Baptismum offerunt , vicissim , quasi data syngrapha , obstringunt suam fidem . ] And after [ verum quia docere prius jubet Christus quam baptizare , & tantum credentes ad Baptismum vult recipi , videtur non ritè administrari baptismus , nisi fides precesserit . ] On this pretence he shows that the Anabaptists oppose Infant-baptism ; To which he answers , not by receding from what is said before but by showing that [ eos qui fide in ecclesiam Dei ingressi sunt , videmus cum sua sobole censeri in Christi membris , & in salutis haereditatem simul vocari . Nec vero separatur hoc modo Baptismus à fide vel doctrina ; quia licèt pueri infants nondam per aetatem side percipiant Dei gratiam , Deus tamen eorum parents compellans ipsus etiam complectitur . ] So that it is Calvins judgement , that this very Text which is the most notable Copy of the Apostolical commission for the Baptising of the discipled Nations , doth appoint that saving faith be professed , before men be baptised ; and lie makes these to be the Disciples with their Infants ; and that it is Reconciliation , Adoption , and the Inheritance of salvation that are sealed up to Parents and children by Baptism . 

Paraeus in loc . saith [ Cum Baptismus sit signum faederis testificans baptizatos recipi a Deo in gratiam , haud dubiè Pater , filius & spiritus sanctus sunt unus verus Deus , baptizatos in gratiam & foedus recipiens . ] And he expoundeth this from Mar. 16.16 . showing that as the order is credere & baptizari ; so that this is a true saving faith . [ l●st autem credere Evangelio non solum assentiri doctrinae quod vera sit , sed fiducia certa sibi applicare promissionem gratiae ; nos recipi in gratiam : nobis remissa esse peccata propter Christum . Commendat vero nobis fidem & baptismum duabus rationibus : una ab utili : salvabitur , h. e. vitam aeternam consequetur . ] For my own part , I have before entered my dissent to such descriptions of justifying faith as make it to be a Believing that our sins are pardoned ; but yet I agree with him and the rest in the main that it must be an Act of the will ( embracing or accepting an offered Christ ) as well as of the understanding , and that the Profession of it must go before Baptism . 

But I shall further prove the Minor from some other Texts of Scripture , viz. that they are not Christ's Disciples that Profess not saving faith ( or are not the Infants of such . ) 

Luke 14.26 , 27 , 33.  If any man come to me and hate not his Father and Mother , and Wife and Children , and Brothers and Sisters , yea and his own life also , he cannot be my Disciple : and whosoever doth not bear his Cross and come after me , cannot be my Disciple : whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath , cannot be my Disciple . This is spoken of true Disciples in heart ( the first significatum ) by him that knew the heart : From whence I argue thus , ( If none are Christ's Disciples in heart , nor can be , but those that value him above all , and will forsake all for him if he require it : then none can be his Disciples by external Profession , but those that Profess to esteem him above all , and to be willing to forsake all rather than forsake him : But the former is proved by the Text : The consequence is clear , in that the world hath hitherto been acquainted but with two sorts of Christians , or Disciples of Christ : the one such sincerely in heart ; and the other such by Profession : and the latter are so called because they profess to be what the other are indeed , and what themselves are if they sincerely so profess . And it is the same thing Professed which makes a man a Professed Christian , which being found in the heart doth make a man a hearty Christian. Of these two sorts of Disciples & people of God , I spoke as plain as I could speak , pag. 4. of the Saints Rest : But Mr. Blake never sticks when he meets with such passages to persuade the world that they are my self-contradictions , and that they make for him : as if it were all one to Profess a saving faith , even the Acceptance of Christ , and to Profess a faith short of saving . But I perceive by this how he is like to use other Authors that cannot speak for themselves , that would persuade men that I speak for him , even where I expressly speak for the same cause which I now maintain against him . 

John 13.35 . [ By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples , if ye love one another . ] Here Christ giveth a certain badge by which his true Disciples may be known . If only those that love one another , are true Disciples in heart ; then only those that Profess to love one another , are Disciples by Profession : But , etc.  And that this Love is a special Grace , and Inseparable concomitant of saving faith , is manifest in that [ By this we know that we are translated from death to life , because we love the brethren , 1 Joh. 3.14 . Joh. 8.31 . If ye continue in my word , then are ye ( that is , you will approve yourselves ) my Disciples indeed ] If only those are Christ's Disciples indeed , as to the heart , that have the Resolution of perseverance ( and those only his Practical conquering Disciples who actually persevere ) then only those are his Professed Disciples that Profess a Resolution to persevere . But ; etc. Ergo , etc.  

All this that I have said , is no more than we have ever practised , when in Baptism we renounced the World , Flesh , and Devil , and promised to fight under Christ's Banner , to our lives end . saith Piscator on John 13.35 . Si pro Christianis , id est , Christ's discipulis haberi volumus , oportet ut nos mutuò quam ardentissimè diligamus , etc.  

Object . Joh. 6.  ●0 , 61 , 66.  Those are called his Disciples that were offended at his word and went back . Answ. 1.  that 's none of our question , whether Professed Disciples may not forsake Christ : we easily acknowledge it : But let it be proved that these did not before Profess a saving faith . 2.  This makes as much against the Opponent as me : for it was the very want of a Dogmatical faith that they here manifested ; being offended that Christ should tell them that they must eat his flesh . 

Object . Act. 19.1 . They are called Disciples that had not heard whether there be a Holy Ghost or not . Answ. If they had not heard , than it was not an article of necessity to their Justification . They had been baptised , and professed that faith which was saving when John baptised . 2.  This is spoken only of that extraordinary gift of the Holy Ghost . 

Obj. Any one is a Disciple that is willing to learn of Christ. Answ. no such matter : In an improper sense you may so call them , but not in Scripture sense ; where 1.  A Disciple and a Christian are all one , Acts 11.26 . But every one that is willing to learn of Christ is not a Christian ; therefore not a disciple . 2.  A Disciple of Christ is one that will take him for the great Prophet of the Church ( which whosoever heareth not shall be cut off from God's people ) and will learn of him as of the Christ. But so will not all that will learn of him : for a man that taketh Christ but for a common wise man as Socrates or Plato , may be willing to learn of him : and so may be his Disciple in another sense , but not in the Christian sense , as a Christian. 3.  He that is sincerely a Disciple of Christ in heart , doth take him for one that by redemption also hath Propitiated the offended Majesty , and as King hath authority to rule him ; and submitteth to him in his whole office as he is the Christ : For he cannot be truly a Christian that taketh not Christ as Christ , and believeth not in him in all that is essential to his office , and so to the object of our faith . As he that believeth that Christ is God only , or Man only , is no Christian , so he that believeth in him as a Teacher only ; for that is no more than to believe in him as in Moses or Elias : 4.  He that is sincerely a Disciple in heart , must take Christ for his only Teacher in the way to everlasting life , renouncing all other except as they stand under him ; and must be willing to be taught and guided by him in all things : therefore he that is a professed Disciple , must profess all this : And that is to profess saving Faith. For without saving faith no man can so believe in him , or be heartily willing to be taught by him . 

The lessons that they are to learn of him are self-denial , and the contempt of this world , and the love of one another , and to be meek and lowly in heart that they may find rest to their souls , Mat. 11.27 , 28.  And these he proclaimeth when he inviteth men to his school . But no ungodly man is willing to learn any of these : and therefore unwilling are they to be his Disciples . 

Argum. 8.  We ought not to baptise those persons ( or their Infants as theirs ) who are visible members of the Kingdom of the Devil ( and his children ) or that do not so much as profess their forsaking of the childhood and Kingdom of the devil , But such are all that profess not a saving faith ; Ergo.  

The Major is proved thus . If we must Baptise none but for present admission into the Kingdom of Christ , than we must baptise none but those that profess a present departure from the Kingdom of the devil . But the former is true : therefore so is the latter . The Antecedent is granted by those that I have to do with . The reason of the consequence is evident , in that all the world is divided into these two Kingdoms , and they are so opposite that there is no passing into one but from the other . 

The Minor of the first Argument I prove thus . All they are visibly in the Kingdom of the Devil , or not so much as by Profession removed out of it who Profess not a removal from that condition● in which the wrath of God abideth on them , and they are excluded by the Gospel from everlasting life . But such are all that profess not a justifying faith . Therefore I express the Major two ways disjunctively , lest any should run to instances of men that are converted & have not yet had a call or opportunity to profess it . If such are not visibly in the Kingdom of the Devil , at least they are not visibly out of it . The Major is proved , in that it is the condition of the covenant of grace performed that differenceth the members of Christ's Kingdom from Satan's : and so it is that condition professed to be performed that visibly differenceth them before men . It is the promise of grace that bringeth them out of Satan's Kingdom : therefore it is only done invisibly to those that profess the performance of the condition . Moreover to be out of Satan's Kingdom visibly , is to be visibly from under his Government ; but those that profess not saving faith , are not visibly from under his Government . Lastly to be visibly out of Satan's Kingdom , is to be visibly freed from his power as the Executioner of God's eternal vengeance : But so are none that profess not saving faith . 

The Minor is proved from John 3.36 . He that believeth on the Son , hath everlasting life ; and he that believeth not the Son , ( or obeyeth not ) shall not see life ; but the wrath of God abideth on him ; where it is plain . 1.  That the unbelief spoken of , is that which is opposed to saving faith , even to that faith which hath here the promise of everlasting life . 2.  And that this leaves them visibly under the wrath of God.  

So in Mar. 16.16 . compared with Mat. 28.19 . In the later Christ bids them make him Disciples ; and in the former he describeth those that are such , and those that remain still in the Kingdom of Satan [ He that blieveth and is Baptised shall be saved , and he that believeth not shall be damned ] Hear it is evident that the unbelief threatened is that which is contrary to ( and even the privation of ) the faith that Salvation is expressly promised to : and that all that profess not this saving fa●th , are not so much as professedly escaped a state of Damnation : and that this is the differencing Character of Christ's Disciples to be baptised ( of which yet more afterwards ) , so Acts 26.18 . It is the opening of men's eyes and the turning them from darkness to light , and the power of Satan to God , that they may receive Remission of sins , etc. which is the true state of them that are Christians in heart : and the Profession of this that proveth them professed Christians : and they that do not profess to be thus enlightened and converted , do not profess to be brought from under the power of Satan ; for that is here made the terminus à quo . 

So Col. 1.13 . Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness , and translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son. ] Here the passing into the Kingdom of Christ is by passing from the Kingdom of darkness , so that he is not Cordially in one that is Cordially in the other ; and consequently he is not by Profession in the one , who is not by Profession passed from the other : He that professeth not such a faith as proveth men in Christ's Kingdom , professeth not so much as may prove him out of Satan's . And expressly it is said , 1 John 3.8 10.  He that committeth sin , is of the Devil . In this the Children of God are manifest & the Children of the Devil ; he that doth not righteousness is not of God , etc. ] These passages will be further touched when we come to the Argument from the true visible Church . 

Argum. 9  If it be the appointed use of all Christian Baptism to solemnize our marriage with Christ , or to seal or confirm our union with him , or engraffing into him than must we baptise none that profess not justifying faith . ( Because this is necessarily prerequisite , and no others can protend to union , marriage or engraffing into Christ ) But the Antecedent is true . Both Antecedent and consequence are evident in Gal. 3.27 , 28 , 29.  For as many of you as have been baptised into Chr●st , have put on Chr●st — ye are all one in Christ Jesus . And if ye be Chr●sts' , then are ye Abraham's seed , and heirs acccoding to promise . ] Hear 1 We see that it is not an accidental or separable thing for baptism to be our visible entrance into Christ our putting him on , our admittance ( by solemnisation ) into the state of God's Children , and heirs according to promise ] For this is affirmed of all he baptised with true Christian Baptism ; If we be truly baptised , we are baptised into Christ. If we we are baptised into Christ , then are we Christ's and have put on Christ , and are all one in Christ , and are Abraham's seed , and heirs according to promise . If any object that the Apostle speaks this but of some of them , even of the Regenerate , because he saith [ as many of you ] I answer , it is manifest that he speaks of all , 1 Because it was all of them that were baptised into Christ. 2.  He expressly saith as much in the next foregoing words [ vers . 26.  For ye are all the Children of God by faith in Christ Jesus . ] To which the words following are annexed as the proof . [ For as many of you as have been baptised into Christ , have put on Christ. ] The assumption is implied [ But you have all been baptised into Christ ] therefore ye have all put on Christ , and so in him are all the Children of God. 2.  Note that they are the special gifts of saving grace that are here ascribed to all the Baptised . 3.  Note also that all this is said and proved to be by faith . 4.  Note also that it is expressly said to be a ●ustifying faith : before vers 24.  [ That we we might be justified by faith . ] 

Indeed this Text affordeth us diverse Arguments . 1.  The Apostle supposeth all the Baptised to profess a justifying faith , among the Galathians : therefore so must we suppose of others , and expect that they do it . The Antecedent is proved from vers . 24 , 25. and 27. compared . 

2.  All the Baptised are said to have put on Christ , therefore they are supposed to profess that faith by which Christ is put on : But that is only justifying faith . 3.  All that are duly Baptised are baptised into Christ : therefore they are supposed to profess that faith by which men are united or ingraffed into Christ ; but that is only justifying faith . But the rest of the Arguments here will be further touched on anon . 

Mr. Blake saith pawn 152.  [ Whether all union with Christ imply Regeneration , let John 15.2 . be consulted , where an union with Christ is clearly held out : Yet Mr. Baxter brings that text among , others to prove that there are some saints that shall never be saved ] Answ. 1.  But I told you that by Saints I meant only those that profess an Acceptance of Christ , and not your Saints that only profess a lower faith . In this you do by me as you use . 1.  Union with Christ in the primary and proper sense is proper to the sound believer ; or else no Title or benefit on earth is proper to him . But as those are believers in profession that are not so in heart , so those are united to or ingraffed into the Church , and so to Christ , by an outward Profession , who are not so in heart . And this is called a Union , because they profess that inward Union which they have not , which is the famosius significatum . Whether these be only equivocally said to be united to Christ , we shall inquire in season . But tell me where any man was ever said in scripture to be united to Christ without saving faith , or the Profession of it ? 3.  I suppose you know how many of our Divines do expound john 15 , of a saving Union , and take the cautions about unfruitfulness and Apostasy to be de rebus nunquam futuris , purposely given that they might not be future : But this I stick not on . 

Next he citeth Mr. Cobbet , Mr. Hudson , and Mr. Ames , to show that Christ is the head of the visible Church , and hath many unfruitful members , etc.  Answ. As pertinent as most Citations that I there have met with , that is , utterly impertinent . it 's yielded that as they have a Profession of saving faith , so by profession they are members of the visible Church . But prove if you can that ever any are such visible members , but the professors of a saving faith , and their Children . 

I conclude then ▪ that Christ hath appointed no Baptism but what is for a visible marriage of the soul to himself ( as the protestants ordinarily confess ) therefore he hath appointed no Baptism but for those that profess to take Jesus Christ for their Husband , and to give up themselves to him as his Espouse . But this is a Profession of Justifying faith . For heartily to take Christ for our Head and Husband , is true saving faith , and proper to his own Regenerate people , if any thing in the world be so . And no man can profess to be married to Christ that doth no● profess to take him for a Husband . Therefore for my part , I never intent to baptise any without profession of saving faith . As for Mr. Blakes answer that [ we are oftener said here to be espoused to Christ , then married ] I think that this and many hundred such passages , do need no answer : But yet I shall say , 1.  Either will serve my turn . no unregenerate man is truly espoused to Christ. 2.  Though the whole Church in one , be solemnly to be married to Christ at judgement , that is , presented perfect , justified and glorified ; yet that particular believers are married to Christ here , I am resolved by God's assistance to believe while I believe Isa. 54.5 . Eph. 5. and many other Texts of scripture . 

Arg. 10.  If Paul accounted all the Baptised , Saints , or sanctified men , dead with Christ and risen with him , such as have put on Christ , sons of God by Adoption , Abraham seed , Heirs according to promise , and justified , then did they all profess a true justifying faith . But the Antecedent is certain , ergò so is the consequent . 

The Antecedent Mr. Blake confesseth . And I shall prove it by parts . The consequence is that which lieth chiefly on me to prove ; and I shall do both together . 

The Apostle in the beginning of his Epistle to the Corinthians and in may other places calls the whole Church Saints , 1 Cor 6.11 . He saith to them , [ But ye are washed , ye are sanctified , etc , ] That part of the Antecedent than is certain . The consequence I prove thus . There are none called Saints in all the new Testament , but only such as where in heart Devoted to Christ by a saving faith ; or Professed so much : therefore the word Saints in this case must signify only such . If any will prove a third sort of Saints , viz. such as profess a faith not saving , they must do that which I never yet saw done . 

2.  The first and most famous signification of the word Saints or Sanctified in the new Testament , is only of them that are in heart devoted to Christ by true faith : therefore the borrowed or Analogical , or lesle proper signification ( call it what you list ) must be of that which hath the likeness or appearance of this ; and that is only the profession of it , and not the profession of another thing . 

3.  Let us peruse the texts , and see whether it be not a special Saint-ship which Paul ascribeth to these , and therefore as to appearance and Profession , they had ! 1 Cor. 6.11 . [ such were some of you ; but ye are washed , ye are sanctified , ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus and by the spirit of our God ] and that sanctification wh●ch is joined with justification , which is wrought by the spirit of God cleansing men from their former reigning sins , which else would have kept them out of the Kingdom of God , and which was in them that must judge Angels . ver . 3. was a special saving sanctification . But such did this seem to Paul which he speaketh of , as is expressed in the Text : therefore there must needs be at least a Profession of this . 

And because Mr. Blake tells me pag. 14● . how well I know that he hath proved his assertion , I shall peruse all those Texts which he citeth to that end , in his Book of the Covenants , p●g . 207 208.  And first we must observe , that the persons that he there himself speaketh of , are [ Visible Professors ] as distinct from the [ Elect and Regenerate , ] yea from those that [ are really Saints , and shall be for heaven : ] And he calleth them [ men separate for God and Dedicated to him . ] But this is unedifying slippery dealing to confound two distinct causes together . He that is professedly Dedicated to God , is a Professor of saving Faith. He that is really and heartily Dedicated to ●od , shall certainly be saved . Here Mr. Blake pleadeth the cause that I do maintain , and not that which he hath undertaken against me and the common truth . I confess as well as he , that Profession maketh Saints visible , or by profession , as hearty Dedication to God by faith maketh real or heart-saints . But how angry is he himself afterwards at this distinction of [ Real and Professed Saints ] as if that none but the justified were real Saints . But what is all this to a Saint-ship consisting in the Profession of a faith short of that which is Justifying ? I shall take these last to be Mr. Blake's Saints , and no Scripture Saints , ( I mean Saints of his denomination . ) till he have better proved that ever Scripture so calleth them . The Texts cited by him are these : First , Psal. 16.3 . [ Saints on earth . ] And I yield to him that there are Saints on earth . then 1 Cor. 16.1 . & Heb. 16.10 . where we read of [ Collections for the Saints , ] and [ Administration to the Saints ] By these ( I doubt not ) but he may prove that more than the heart-saints are called Saints ▪ but that is because they profess and seem to be heart-saints . These Texts are far from proving that there are any Saints that profess not saving sanctity . I shall anon tell Mr. Blake who they were that Calvin and other protestants do expound the word [ Saints ] of , in such Passages as these ; though he hath already told us , that he [ abhorreth ] the Doctrine which they maintain . 

But this is a Practical case that Mr. Blake hath here put us upon ; the Communion of Saints doth not only consist in Conjunction in God's Worship , but also in mutual relief , and free communication of outward things , as the Text which he here citeth doth declare . Those therefore that are of his mind must communicate as well to the Professors of a common Faith , as of a saving Faith. But hear who they be that Pareus supposeth Paul to mean [ in loc . Docemur vero ad 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 sanctorum quam credimus , etiam huc pertinere , ut necessitatibus fratrum mutuò tangamur , & pro virili succurramus prompt & fideliter ; sumus enim unius Corporis membra , etc.  Nam Fidei & charitatis unitas omnes in Christo Capite conjungit ] It is then the Members of Christ united in him and joined in Faith and Love : And those that Profess to be such , are so to us . 

Acts 26.10 . Acts 9.2 . [ When Paul shut up many of the Saints in prison , and did much evil against them , he knew no other way of distinction than an outward Profession , etc. ] saith Mr. Blake . 

Answ. Nor do we know means hearts ; nor think that Paul knew them . But the Question is , What they professed ? Whether saving Sanctity or a common Sanctity and Faith short of it ? 

He addeth , [ We read of Churches of the Saints , 1 Cor. 14.33 . and they were taken in to be Church-members as soon as they made profession , as they ceased to be Jews or Pagans' , and took them to the way of Christianity , as we see Act. 2.  Act. 8.12 , 13 , 38. ] Ans. 1.  They renounced the way of ungodliness and wickedness in general by a Profession of repentance , as well as the way of Paganism and Judaiism , in particular . There were no Christians that Professed not Repentance towards God ; from dead works . 2.  We believe that there were Churches of the Saints ; and therefore that none should be of the Church that Profess not to be true Saints . But prove if you can that there was ever either Church or Church-member called Saints in Scripture , that had no either special Sanctity or a Profession of it . You say nothing to prove that any were called Saints upon the Profession of a Faith short of saving Faith.  

Emphaticum est ( saith Calvin in loc . ) quod exprimit sanctorum acsi Ecclesias rite compositas à sinistra nota subduceret . ] Of which see him fully on 1 Cor. 1.2 . And as for those Acts 8. you cannot prove that any of them were either called Saints or Baptised without a Profession of a Justifying faith : as shall further be showed afterwards . 

M. Blake addeth [ The Epistles wrote to particular visible Churches are inscribed to Saints ; among which , what some are , read both the Epistles to the Corinthians ; yea , what almost all are in some Churches , read the Epistle to the Church of Sardis . Answ. 1.  no man in any of these Churches is called a Saint upon the Profession of any lower kind of faith , but only on the presence or profession of saving faith . 2.  I have not heard a proof that the worst of these Church●ss had many members , ( if any ) that were impenitent and obstinate in any error or sin after admonition , and so that were visibly destitute of the saving Sanctity which they did Profess . 3.  If such there were , the Churches are commanded to cast them out , and then they will be no longer numbered with the Saints . 4.  The Apostles may well call the whole Society Saints when part are really so in heart , and the rest Profess it . We commonly tell both Papists and Separatists , that the Scripture thus denominateth the whole from the better part ; as a field is called a Cornfield , though theree be more Tares than Corn ; and yet you will not call the Tares Corn : no more will I call the ungodly Saints , when I know them though I will call the Church Saints where they are , and them , while they Profess themselves Saints , and I know not but they are so . 5.  If you can with patience but read what Clavin saith on 1 Cor. 1.2 . and Peter Martyr ( to name no more now ) you will see that Doctrine which you abhor maintained by the protestants , and in what current it is that your opinion floweth . 

Mr. Blake adds [ The Apostle tells us of the faith once delivered to the Saints : Judas 3. the doctrine of Faith as is agreed on all hands , all that profess that Doctrine are Saints . ] Answ. All that cordially entertain that Doctrine are Saints in Heart ; All that profess so to entertain it are Saints by Profession . ( while that Profession hath any validity . ) But all that barely profess to assent to the truth of that Doctrine , and no mo●e , ( unless as that Assent may imply the Consent of the Will ) are not Saints . 

But let us peruse some other Texts besides these that Mr. Blake citeth . The Congregations of the Saints are mentioned in the Old Testament , as Psal. 89 5 , 7. and 149 1.  But what Saints these were , may appear by the Promises made to them . Ps. 149.5 , 9 , 4 & 16.3 . & 37.28 . & 97.10 & 132.9 , 16.  & 145 10.  The Children of Israel , a people near unto him are called Saints , Psal. 148.14 . but it is because they are a part of them , his people in heart , and the rest profess themselves to be his People in a saving sense . And if there were any that did not so , he was not an Israelite by Religion , nor to be of that Commonwealth , but to be cut off from his People . 

Acts 9.13 . The Saints at Jerusalem that Paul persecuted , were such as not only professed saving Faith , but also had the witness of Martyrdom and Persecutions to testify their Sincerity . They that continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship , and breaking bread , and prayers , having all things common , selling their possessions and goods , and parting them to all men as every man had need , praising God etc. did profess more than a Faith and Repentance short of that by which we are saved : But so did the Church at Jerusalem , Act. 2.41 , 42. to the end ; yea , the multitude of them that Believed were of one heart , & one soul , and great grace was upon them all , etc. Acts 4.32 . to 36. so that we may see what Saints the Church at Jerusalem were . And if all were not such , we see evidently that the whole was denominated from such . 

The Church of Rome were all called Saints , Rom. 1.7 . True : But what was meant by that word , and what Saints did they appear to Paul by their Profession to be ? Even such as were [ beloved of God , whose Faith was spoken of throughout the world , that were dead to sin , but alive to God , that had obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine delivered to them , and being made free from sin became the servants of Righteousness and of God , having their fruit to holiness , and the end everlasting life , Rom. 1.7 , 8. and 6 11 , 14 , 17 , 18 , 21. whose obedience was come abroad to all men . Rom. 16.19 . Here is more than the Profession of a common Faith.  

The Corinthians are called Saints ; True : But what is meant by Saints ? such as [ called on the name of the Lord jesus Christ , having much of his grace , enriched by him in all things , coming behind in no Gift , waiting for the coming ●f our Lord jesus Christ , who shall confirm them to the end , that they may be blameless at his coming , 1 Cor. 1.2 . to ver . 10. all was theirs , 1.  Cor. 3.22 , 23.  They were such Saints as were washed , and sanctified , and justified in the name of the Lord jesus , and by the Spirit of God ; and such as were to ●udge the World , and the Angels , Chap. 6.3 , 11. delivered from that unrighteousness that would have kept from Heaven , ver . 9.10 , 11. such as had no temptation but what was common to man , whom the faithful God would not suffer to be tempted above their strength , etc. Chap. 10.13 . such as were not so much as to eat with the notoriously wicked , Chap. 5 11. and therefore doubtless Professed Godliness themselves ; in whom godly sorrow had wrought carefulness , clearing of themselves , zeal , etc.  2 Cor. 7.11 . in whom the Apostle had confidence in all things , ver . 16.  

Object . But Paul saith , they were carnal , and taxeth them with some gross Errors and Sins . 

Answ. 1.  So are all the Regenerate carnal in part , and guilty of too many sins : And it is not Impenitency after admonition that he charges them with . Their sin was no worse to our eye than David's or Solomon's . 

2.  If any were so bad as to be notoriously ungodly , those are not of that number whom he calleth Saints , as they are not of them that have the following Descriptions of Saints which I have cited ; but only were among them , but not of them . 

The Galathians I find not called Saints ; but to call them a Church of Christ , or Believers , is Equipollent . And what Saints were they ? Why they were [ all the Sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus , having been baptised into Christ , and put him on , and were all one in him , and were Abraham's seed , and heirs according to the Promise . ] Gal. 3.26 , 27 , 29.  And [ because they were sons , God sent the Spirit of his Son into their hearts , by which they cried Abba Father , and therefore were no more servants but sons , and if sons , than heirs of God through Christ. ] 

Object . But Paul was afraid of them , lest he bestowed upon them labour in vain . 

Answ. 1.  It appeareth by what is said , that it was not such a fear as made him take them for ungodly . 

2.  This confirmeth what I maintain ; that the Apostles judgement of them proceeded according to the Evidences of probability : He took himself bound to believe their Profession so far as they contradicted it not ; and according to the prevalency of their Errors which were against it , he was jealous of their condition : and if they had proceeded so far as to have declared themselves certainly ungodly , Paul would have denominated them a Church no more . 

The Church of Ephesus are called Saints , Eph. 1.1 . But what Saints ? such as were [ blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ , chosen before the foundation of the world to be holy and without blemish before him in love , predestinated to the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ , according to the good pleasure of his will , to the praise of the glory of his Grace , wherein he made them accepted in the beloved , in whom they had redemption through his blood , the remission of sins , and have obtained an Inheritance , being predestinated , etc.  Who trusted in Christ , and were sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise , which is the earnest of their Inheritance : they were such as believed in the Lord Jesus , and loved all the saints , and were quickened , who had been dead in trespasses and sins , & were raised up together , and made to sit in heavenly places . ] If Mr. Blake , while he abhorreth the name of a Saint or Church equivocally so called , would not make all words equivocal that in Scripture are used to denominate or describe a Church or Saint , we might easily be resolved by such passages as these , what Paul meaneth by a Church or Saint . 

See further Eph. 3.18 . All Saints comprehend what is the breadth , and length , & depth , & height ; and Christ dwelleth in their hearts by faith , and they rooted and grounded in love ] Eph. 3.17 , 18.  But Mr. Blakes Saints do none of this ; therefore they are no Saints in Scripture sense . With this text compare Eph. 2.19 . and see what a Church is and what it is to be fellow-citizens with the Saints , and of the household of God : and Eph. 4.12 . what Saints they were that were to be perfected : and 5 3. what Saints they were that must not so much as name Covetousness , filthiness , etc. And 3.8 . Paul professeth himself lesle than the least of all Saints : But Paul never did nor would profess himself lesle than the least of Mr. Blakes Saints , who are not as much as by profession in a state of salvation , nor from under the curse and wrath of God. He that pronounceth them accursed with Anathema Maranatha , that loved not the Lord Jesus , & bids grace be with them that love him in sincerity , ( CITIZEN Cor. 16.22 . Eph. 6.24 . ) would not have pronounced himself lesle than the least of these excommunicate accursed ones . And were I worthy to be heard , I would advice my Reverend Brother to better consideration before he make such accursed Saints , or Churches , or Believers , at least that are visibly so : and that he would be cautelous of Canonising those on whom Paul pronounceth Anathema Maranatha . 

To proceed , the Church of Philippi are called Saints ; True , but what Saints ? such on whom Paul was [ confident that he which had begun a good work in them , would perform it till the day of Jesus Christ : to whom it was given on behalf of Christ not only to believe but to suffer for his sake : who always obeyed in presence & absence : for God wrought in them to will and to do : they only communicated to Paul in giving & receiving : and they were such as bad cause always to rejoice , Phil. 1.6 , 29. and 2.12 , 13. and 4.15 , 4.  

The Church of the Colossians are called Saints : But what Saints ? such as [ had faith in Christ Jesus , and love to all Saints , and had hope laid up for them in heaven , who were made meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light , being delivered from the power of darkness , and translated into the Kingdom of his dear Son ( that is the Church ) in whom they had redemption through his blood , even the forgiveness of sins , being reconciled by the body of his flesh through death to be presented holy , and unblameable , and unreprovable in his sight , if they continued in the faith , grounded and settled , and were not moved away from the hope of the Gospel , whose ardour and steadfastness of faith in Christ , Paul beheld in the Spirit with joy : who were buried with Christ in baptism , and risen with him through faith ; and being before dead , were quickened with him , and had the forgiveness of all trespasses , having put off the body of the sins of the flesh ; who were dead , and their life was hid with Christ in God , and who shall appear with Christ in Glory when he appeareth . ] Col. 1. and 2. and 3.  

If it shall be replied , that Paul spoke all this of them in the Judgement of Charity , or denominated the whole from the better part , and the Profession of the rest ; I say even so also it is that he calleth them all Saints : the denomination is on the same ground as the description is . I cannot imagine what reasonable evasion can be made from this evidence . 

The Thessalonians are consequentially called Saints , in being called a Church of Christ. And what a Church ? and what Saints ? such as [ had the work of Faith , Labour of Love , and patience of Hope in our Lord Jesus Christ , whose Election Paul knew , who turned to God from Idols , to serve the true and living God , and to wait for his Son from heaven , who delivered them from the wrath to come , & they received the word as the word of God , which effectually worked in them that believed , who followed the Churches in suffering ; who were Paul's joy and glory in the presence of Christ at his coming , whose faith and Charity was so reported to Paul , that he tells them be liveth , if they stand fast : for God had not appointed them to wrath , but to obtain salvation by Jesus Christ. ] 1 Thess. 1 & 2.  & 3  & 5.  They were such Saints whom Christ would come at last to be glorified in , and such Believers in whom he will then be admired , even because the Gospel was believed among them . ] ( therefore say not , To believe the Gospel is a common thing , short of saving Faith. ) 2 Thess. 1.  We see then what the Church and Saints at Thessalonica was . 

The Hebrews ( to whom the Apostle wrote ) are called Saints , Heb. 13.24 . And he doth not groundlessly call them Saints ; for they were such as [ were made a gazingstock by reproaches & afflictions , and became companions of them that were so used , & took joyfully the spoiling of their goods , knowing in themselves that they have in heaven a better and more enduring substance . ] vid. ult . Heb. 10.33 , 34 , 35.  They were such indeed as he saw cause to exhort to perseverance , and warn of the danger of Apostasy ( and the best have need of that ) But yet [ though he so spoke , he was persuaded better things of them , and such as accompany salvation . ] and he gives his reason of it , Heb. 6.9 , 10 , 11.  

And having said so much of the several Churches under the name of Saints , I shall proceed and show you what they are as Churches , though this will after fall in , in another Argument , because it will be fittest for all to lie together , and then I shall refer you hither , when this afterwards falls in . You may see by what is said , what Churches all these were that are already mentioned ; and consequently what a Church is in Scripture-sense ; not a society of men professing a faith short of justifying ; but a society of men professing true saving faith ; yea , so far professing it , as to induce the Apostles to denominate them such , as supposing them such indeed : For as they knew some were such , so did they not know the contrary by any particulars , except those whom they commanded them to cast out , as none of them . 

The Apostle Peter writes to the scattered Jews that professed Christianity : And what kind of Christians or Believers did he take them for ? Why , for such as were [ Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father , through sanctification of the Spirit , unto Obedience , and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. ] And Mr. Blake cannot say that this was a common Election , or common Sanctification , and Obedience , and Sprinkling of Christ's blood : For it is added , that [ God of his abundant mercy had begotten them again to a lively hope , by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead , to an Inheritance incorruptible , and undefiled , that fadeth not away , reserved in heaven for them , and that they are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation , ready to be revealed in the last times , wherein they greatly re●oyced , suffering the trial of their precious faith : and [ having not seen Christ loved him , and believing in him rejoiced with joy unspeakable and full of glory , receiving the end of their faith , the salvation of their souls . ] If all these people had not , or professed and seemed not to have a saving faith , I know not what words can express a saving faith , nor what persons have such a thing . 

The like testimonies the Apostle John gives of them , as may quickly be seen . 

But all the doubt is , Whether the seven reproved Churches in rev. 2. and 3. were such or not ? To which I say , 1.  All of them professed the foresaid saving Faith. 2.  There is no sin charged on them that was visible and inconsistent with true saving Faith. 1.  For the Church of Ephesus , we heard what they were esteemed by Paul a little before ; and here their grace is mentioned ; and the faults expressed are consistent with true grace . 2.  The same I say of the Churches of Pergamus and Thyatyra . And for the Nicolaitans and other Heretics , whom they are blamed for suffering ( as the former is commended for hating them ) they are such as were to be cut off from the Church ; and while they were in it were not of it : Nor are they any where called Believers , Saints , Disciples , or Church-members . 

But it is the Church of Sardis that Mr. Blake takes special notice of . And it is said of her indeed , that she had a Name to live and was dead . But , 1. in that they had a name to live , it seems it was a living faith which they Professed , and not only one short of it . 2.  Their death was not a death in reigning sin , such as is the death of the unsanctified : But a declining condition , comparatively called death , as the children of God do oft complain of deadness . And therefore its next said , [ Be watchful and strengthen the things that remain , that are ready to die . ] And it 's expressed , that their deadness was in that their works were not found perfect before God ; that is , that many or most of them had defiled their garments , ( with some Heresy or vice ) which the rest had not done . 3.  How far this was notorious to others , is of further enquiry . 4.  If they had gone on so far , as by obstinate impenitency after admonition to show themselves void of saving faith , they had been unchurched , as appeareth by the threatening . 

The Church of Philadelphia is so far commended , as that the case is put out of doubt . And the Church of Laodicea , though discommended , hath nothing visible charged upon it inconsistent with sincerity ; and the lukewarmness which is charged on them , they are threatened to be spewed out for , and so to be unchurched . And thus we see what a Church was , and what Saints were , and what Believers and Disciples were supposed to be by the Apostles , and what is the signification of these words in Scripture : for they are all of the same extent . 

Mr. Blake saith [ He is a believer in Scripture , that is a visible Professor , that puts himself in the number of those that expect salvation by Jesus Christ. ] Answ. 1.  A Professor of what ? Of true saving faith . 2.  Not that puts himself among them locally only , for so may an Infidel ; but that becomes one of them as far as to a Profession of it . And if they expect salvation by Christ , either they profess that faith which salvation is annexed to , or else they give God the lie , and contradict both Scripture and themselves even in their very Profession : As if they should say , [ I look to be saved by Christ , but I will not take him for my Saviour , nor be saved from sin by him ] And sure such a Profession makes no m●n a Saint , Believer or Church-member . 

Thus much I have said to prove that all the Baptised are accounted Saints ; and therefore Professed a saving Sanctity . 

The second Title which I mentioned follows , ( of which I shall be more brief . ) All the Baptised are accounted to be dead and risen with Christ , even dead to sin , and risen to newness of life ; therefore they all profess a saving faith . The proof of this is full in the two Texts already cited , Rom. 6. and Col. 2.11 , 12.  

Rom. 6.33 etc. [ How shall we that are dead to sin live any longer therein ? Know ye not , that so many of us as were baptised into Jesus Christ , were baptised into his death ? Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into death , that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father , so we also should walk in newness of Life . For if we have been planted together into the likeness of his Death , we shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection . Knowing this , that our old man is crucified with him , that the body of sin might be destroyed , that hence forth we should not serve sin ; for he that is dead is freed from sin . Now if we be dead with Christ , we believe that we shall also live with him . — Likewise , reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin , but alive unto God through jesus Christ our Lord  

Here is a full Report of the use of Baptism and the Profession of all that are Baptised , and the state that they are supposed to be in : so that I cannot speak it plainlier than the words themselves do . Calu. on the Text saith , [ Extra Controversiam est endure nos Christum in Baptismo , & hâc lege nos baptizari , ut unum cum ipso simus . — Imò docet hanc mortis societatem praecipuè in Baptismo spectandam esse . Neque enim ablutio sola illic , sed mortificatio quoque & veteris hominis interitus proponitur : Vnde palàm fit , ex quo recipimur in Christi gratiam , mortis ejus efficaciam statim emergere . Porro quid valeat hae● cum morte Christi societas , continuo sequitur ; — ut scilicet nobis emortui si amus novi homines : Nam à mortis societate transitum merito facit ad vitae participationem : quia haec duo inter se individuo nexu coherent , veterem hominem Christi morte aboleri , ut ejus resurrectio justitiam instauret , nosque efficient novas creaturas . — Haec autem est Doctrina ; Quod Mors Christi efficax est ad nequitiam carnis nostrae extinguendam ac prostigandam : Resurrectio vero ad suscitandam melioris naturae novitatem : quódque per Baptismum in istius gratiae participationem cooptamur . — In summa ; Qualis sit Baptismi ritè suscepti veritas docet . 

So Col. 2.11 , 12. which I shall not stay to recite , because it is to the same purpose and before cited . 

The third Title mentioned in the Argument , is this : All that are Baptised have Professedly put on Christ : therefore they have professed saving Faith. The Antecedent is expressed , Gal. 3.27 . [ For as many as have been baptised into Christ , have put on Christ. ] The Consequence is proved , in that , to put on Christ heartily , is , to be made true partakers of him , and living members of him : therefore to Profess this is inseparable from the Profession of saving Faith ; yea , by that faith is he truly put on . Putting on Christ is the same with [ Putting on the New man , which after God is created in Righteousness and true holiness , being renewed in the spirit of our minds Ephes. 4.20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24.  Col. 3.10 . It is putting on the New man which is renewed in knowledge according to the Image of him that created him . ] So that this is no common work , if any be proper to the saved . And putting on the Lord jesus Christ , is put for the state of Sanctity , in opposition to a fleshly Life , Rom. 13.13 , 14. saith Calvin on this Text [ Endure Christum hic significat virtute Spiritus ejus undique nos muniri , qua idonei ad omnes Sanctitatis parts reddamur : sic enim instauratur in nobis imago Dei quae unicum est animae ornamentum . Respicit enim Paulus ad vocationis nostrae sinem , quia Deus nos adoptans , in corpus unigeniti silii sui inserit , & quidem hac lege , ut nos abdicantes priore vita , siamus in ipso novi homines . Quare etiam alibi fideles dicit Christum endure in baptismum , Gal. 3.27 . ] and upon Galat. 3.27 . he saith [ Quum dicit , Christum induisse , intelligit Christo sic esse insitos , ut coram Deo nomen ac personam Christi gerant , ac in ipso magis quam in seipsis censeantur . ] And he comes to the objection , How all that are baptised can be said to put on Christ , when Baptism is not effectual with all ? And he answereth in sum , That to Hypocrites it is uneffectual , qui nudis signis superbiunt . But then he saith , that the Apostle speaking of these [ non respicit Dei institutionem , sed impiorum corruptelam . ( But doubtless it is God's institution that we must look to for direction in our administration . ) Quum autem fideles alloquitur , qui rite utuntur , illa tunc conjungit cum sua veritate , quam figurant . Quare ? neque enim fallacem Pompam ostentat in Sacramentis , sed quae externa Ceremonia figurat , exhibit simul reipsa . Hinc sit , ut veritas , secundum Dei institutum , conjuncta sit cum signis . ] To the same purpose say other protestants . 

The next Title mentioned in the Argument was , Sons of God. All that are Baptised are the visible or esteemed Sons of God by faith in Christ : therefore they all profess that justifying faith to which the real or special Sonship is promised . 

The Antecedent is experssed in Gal. 3.16 , 17.  [ For ye are all the Sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus ; ] which he proveth in the next words , [ For as many as have been baptised into Christ , have put on Christ. ] What Sons of God are in Scripture sense , may be seen Joh. 1.12 . Rome 8.14 , 19  Phil. 2.15 . 1 Joh. 3.1 , 2.  Gal. 4 1 , 2 , 5 , 7. and Rom. 8.17 . [ If sons , than heirs , heirs of God , and joint heirs with Christ ] was a good consequence in Paul's judgement . [ In this ( saith John ) the children of God are manifest from the children of the devil : whosoever doth not righteousness is not of God , neither he that loveth not his brother , 1 John 3.10 . therefore Mr. Blake's Saints are not the children of God , but of the Devil . See also John 11.52 . Rom. 8 , 16.21 . 

But Mr. Blake objecteth Rome 9.4 . To them pertained the Adoption ] an Gomarus his Comment . Answ. 1.  Gomarus saith not , that any were in either sense sons of God , without a Profession of saving Faith. 2.  It was not after their unchurching for unbelief , that the Adoption is said to pertain to them , but before : and then let Mr. Blake prove if he can , that any Israelites were adopted without profession of that Faith which was then saving . I doubt not to prove the contrary anon . And 3.  If he could prove that such there were among the Israelites , yet he will never prove that they are called Sons though the Nation were , because the denomination was principally from the true Sons , and next from the professed ones , but never from or to them that professed only a common faith . None are visibly Sons , that be not visibly true Believers . 

The next Title mentioned in the Argument is [ Abraham's Seed ] All that are baptised , are called Abraham's Seed . Gal. 3.17 , 18 , 19 therefore they all profess a justifying Faith. The Consequence is proved , in that none are Abraham's Seed in Scripture Gospel sense , but those cordially that are true Believers , and those appearingly that profess true Faith. This is proved Rom. 9.4 , 6 , 7 , 8.  Rom. 4.11 . [ that he might be the Father of all them that believe , that Righteousness might be imputed to them also . ] This therefore is a justifying faith , and the privilege of the Justified that is here mentioned . it 's added ver . 12 , 13.  [ Andrea the Father of Circumcision to them who are not of the Circumcision , but also walk in the steps of the faith of our Father Abraham yet uncircmucised : for the promise that he should be heir of the world was not to Abraham or his seed by the law , but by the righteousness of faith . — Therefore it is of faith that it might be by grace , to the end the promise's might be sure to all the seed — even to that also which is of the faith of Abraham , the Father of us all . ] 

So Gal. 3.6.7 , 8 , 9  [ Even as Abraham believed God , and it was accounted to him for righteousness : Know ye therefore that they which are of faith , the same are the children of Abraham : and the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify th● heathen by faith preached before the Gospel to Abraham : in thee shall all N●tions be blessed . So then , they which be of Faith are blessed with faithful Abraham . ] So ver . 14.16 . [ That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles , through Jesus Christ , that we might receive the Promise of the Spirit through faith . Now to Abraham and his seed were the Promises made : he saith not , and to seeds , as of many , but as of one ; And to thy seed , which is Christ : and so to those that are in him . 

It is hence most undeniable , That all Abraham's true Seed are Justified and have a Justifying faith ; and all his Professing seed do Profess this faith . 

The next Title mentioned in the Argument is , [ Heirs according to the Promise . ] All the Baptised were Heirs according to the Promise : None that Profess not a Justifying faith are Heirs according to the Promise ( either really or appearingly ; ) therefore none that Profess not a Justifying faith ( or their children ) should be baptised . 

The Major is expressed in Gal. 3.17 , 18 , 19  

The Minor ( of which is all the doubt ) is proved from Rom. 8 17. where there is an express concatenation of [ children , heirs of God , coheirs with Christ , that suffering with him shall be glorified with him ] Gal. 4.1 , 6 , 7.  The heir is Lord of all , and a Son , & therefore hath the spirit of the Son , by which they cry Abba Father . 

So Tit. 3.5 , 6 , 7.  [ According to his mercy he saved us by the washing of Regeneration , and renewing of the Holy Ghost , which he shed on us , etc. that being justified by his Grace , we should he made heirs according to the hope of eternal Life . ] The heirs than are Regenerate , Justified , and have the hope of eternal Life . So Eph. 3.6 . The Gentiles being made fellow-heirs , and of the same body , are partakers of the Promise in Christ by the Gospel , even the unsearchable riches of Christ.  

Heb. 6.17 . The heirs of Promise have their salvation confirmed by God's Oath . And Heb. 1.14 . They are all called the Heirs of salvation . And Heb. 11.6 , 9  It is true Justified Believers that have that Title . And Jam. 25. [ they are called Heirs of the Promised Kingdoms . ] And 1 Pet. 3.7 . they are called [ Coheirs of the same Grace of Life . ] So that to be Heirs in the first and proper notion . is to be Sons that have Title to the Inheritance of Glory : and therefore to be Heirs in the second Analogical notion , ( for I will not yet anger Mr. Blake with the term Equivocal ) is to be such as seem such , by Profession of that faith which hath the promise of that Glory : But the Professors of any other faith are none of them . 

The last Title that I mentioned in the Argument was [ Justified ] Paul calleth all the Baptised Church of Corinth Justified : None that profess not a Justifying faith are called Justified ; therefore none such should be Baptised . 

The Major I proved to Mr. Blake out of 1 Cor. 6.11 . [ The are washed , ye are sanctified , ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus , and by the Spirit of our God. ] Mr. Blake doth not at all deny the Major or the sense of the Text alleged to prove it . But darkly in generals Intimateth a denial of the Minor , silently passing over that particular Title [ Justified , ] as if he durst not be seen to take notice of it . I confess , its sad that good men should be so unfaithful to the Truth , which is so precious and is not their own , and which they should do nothing against , but all they can for it . But in general he saith , pag. 152.  Of Sacrament , [ Other phrases are there brought , or Titles as proper to the Regenerate , which are well known in Scripture , to be applied to such as have Apostatised , and are brought by Arminians to prove falling away , and are censured by their Adversaries . ] Answ. Those other Titles which I proved to be given to the generality of the Baptised , were no other than what we ascribe to them , [ to be Heirs , and Justified , quickened and have all trespasses forgiven them , and to be saved . ] And if indeed these Titles be so promiscuously used , it will be harder to understand Scripture , than Interpreters have hitherto thought . Why did not Mr. Blake show but one Text ( for this one in hand ) where any are said to be Justified upon a faith short of Justifying ? I think he was loath to name this Title , lest he should have seemed to contradict himself in the terms , or be put to the searching out for a distinction of Justification , which we have not yet heard of ▪ that he may tell us in what sense the unregenerate are Justified . If he should say , it is a conditional Justification , so Infidels are justified without any faith at all : but that is no Justification , because not actual . Mr. Hudsons' words and Aims ( which he annexeth ) mention not Justification , much lesle that any not Professing Justifying faith are Justified . 

And here I must needs again say , I know no man that hath made Scripture terms so Equivocal as Mr. Blake hath done , while he pretendeth to abhor it . Two senses of the word [ sanctified , Believers , Disciples , etc. ] we yield him , viz. as they signify those that are such in Heart , and those that Profess to be such in heart . But these will not serve his turn , but he must moreover have a third sort , even such as only Profess another faith short of Justifying ? yea and a faith which is specificially distinct from Justifying faith , yea and that by a Physical specification ( if he will be understood , for he falls upon me for making but a Gradual difference , who yet ever affirmed a Moral Specific difference . ) So that we have not only many sorts of Sanctification , Faith , etc. but also of Justification too . Whether we shall have as many Salvations , and as many Heavens or not , in his sense , I yet find him not express . 

But I would know why he doth so usually say that [ a faith short of justifying entitleth to B●●tism : and Disciples , Saints , etc. are titles that belong to more than the justified . If indeed he take his own short faith to be really justifying , and his own new made Saints to be really justified ; Doth not his own ordinary appropriating the Titles of Regenerate and justified to ( I know not how to call them ; for he hath left me no one proper name for them that I can remember , ) — to those that are the Heirs of Glory , show plainly that in the primary signification they speak only of such , even in h●ss own apprehension : and that therefore the words simply expressed signify no other ; bare Professors of justifying faith being but seemingly , Analogically , secundum quid , — such ; and his Professors of another kind of faith , being not such in either sense . 

Having gone thus far about Titles , let me add another , because I find Mr. Blake so oft apply it to the — justified ( I shall crave leave to use that term as proper to them , or else I confess I shall be at some loss for a name for them because he hath taken them all out of my hand that I can think off . ) And this is the Title [ Regenerate ] Christ hath instituted no Baptism , but what is to be a sign of present Regeneration ( at least to men at age . ) But to men that Profess not a justifying faith it cannot be adminstired as a sign of present Regeneration : therefore he hath Instituted no Baptism to be administered to such . 

The Major I have proved already in the first Argument . And its plain in Joh. 3.5 . Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. ] and so in Tit. ● . 5 . Where it is called the Laver of Regeneration . ] In both which though I am of their mind that think that the sign is put for the thing signified ; yet it may thence plainly appear what is the thing signified ; even Regeneration , or the new birth ! yea so commonly was this acknowledged by all the Church of Christ that there 's nothing more common in the writings of the Fathers , than to take the terms Regenerate , Illuminate etc. and Baptised ] as signifying the same thing or at least spoken of the same person : which occasioned one of our late Antiquaries so stiffly to pled that Regeneration in Scripture signifieth mere Baptism , and that all the Baptised are Regenerate . 

I grant that it oft falls out that Baptism being misapplyed sealeth not Regeneration at present , and that the sam● person may afterwards be Regenerate , and his remembered Baptism may then be of use to him for the confirmation of his faith . But this is not the Institutors commanded use of it , to be so administered at first , if the party profess not saving Faith , though this review of it is a Duty , where it was so abused at first ( of which none afterwards . ) 

The Minor I shall take for granted , while Regeneration stands in Scripture so connexed to salvation ; I know no Regenerate ones but the justified , or those that profess to have a justifying faith : Nor hath he proved any more . 

Argum. 11.  All that are meet subjects for Baptism , are ( after their Baptism , without any further inward qualification , at least without another species of faith ) meet subjects for the Lords Supper ( having natural capacity by age ) But no one that professeth only a faith short of justifying is meet to receive the Lords Supper , therefore no such a one is a meet subject for Baptism . 

Or thus : Those at age whom we may baptise , we may also admit to the Lords Supper ( without any other species of faith ) But the Professors of a mere common faith short of justifying , we may not admit to the Lords Supper , Ergo , etc.  

The duty of a particular examination before the Lords Supper is nothing to our purpose , because 1. that makes a man fitter than he was , but the want of it is not in the cognizance of the Minister always , nor will not justify our refusal of a godly man excepting some apparent gross evils . 2.  And it is the necessity of another faith and state that we are enquiring after , which will not be proved by the necessity of an actual examination or excitation of our present grace . 

The Mayor Mr. Blake will easily grant me ; and if any other deny it , I prove it thus . 1.  It is the same Covenant that both Sacraments Seal ; one for initiation , the other for confirmation and growth in grace : therefore the same faith that qualifieth for the one , doth sufficiently qualify for the other . For the same covenant hath the some condition . 

2.  They are the same heresies that are conferred in baptism and the Lords Supper to the worthy Receiver . Therefore the same qualification ( for kind ) is necessary for the reception . The Antecedent is commonly granted . Baptism uniteth to Christ and giveth us himself first , and with himself the pardon of all past sins , etc.  The Lord's Supper by confirmation giveth us the same things : It is the giving of Christ himself , who faith by his Minister , take , eat , dr●nk ; offering himself to us under the signs , and commanding us to take himself by faith , as we take the signs by the outward parts . He giveth us the pardon of sin , sealed , as procured by his body broken , and blood shed . 

3.  A member of Christ's Church , against whom no Accusation must be brought from some contradiction of his first profession , must be admitted to the Lords Supper : but the new baptised may be ordinarily such ( at age ) ; therefore if he can but say , I am a baptised person , he hath a sufficient principal title to Baptism coram ecclesia ( I mean such as we must admit ) though some actual preparation be necessary ) unless he be proved to have disabled his claim on that account either by nulling and reversing that profession , or by giving just cause of questioning it . 

4.  The Church hath ever from the Apostles days till now , without question , admitted the new baptised , at age , to the Lords Supper , without requiring any new species of faith to entitle them to it . I take the Mayor therefore as past denial . 

All the controversy between Mr. Blake and me is like to be about the Minor , whether the profession of his common faith short of justifying , make people fit for , or capable of the Lords supper . 1.  no man should be admitted to the signal profession of Receiving Christ as he is offered , who will not orally profess to receive him as he is offered . But all that are admitted to the Lords supper , are admitted to the signal profession of receiving Christ as he is offered . Therefore no man that will not orally so profess to receive Christ should be admitted to the Lords Supper . The Major is plain , because 1.  Else we cannot know who is fit , if he will not make profession of it . 2.  His refusal shows that he either understands not what he doth in the Sacrament , or is wilfully uncapable , by infidelity , or impenitency . 3.  The Minor is evident in the nature of the Sacrament . The offer of the bread and wine with the command , Tade , eat , drink , is signally the o●fer of the Lord Jesus himself , with a command to take him . He that pu●s forth his hand to take the bread , professeth thereby to Accept of Christ as offered . If it be said , that Mr. Blakes professor of a lower sort of faith , doth profess to take Christ as offered , I say , no : This proposition I here suppose as evident in itself , that no man but the sound Believer doth take Christ as offered , no not as Christ. He is offered as a Saviour from the Gild and Reign of sin ; and so Mr. Blakes professor doth not so much as profess to accept him . For I hope we are agreed , that so to accept him heartily is saving faith . 2.  no man should be admitted to receive a sealed pardon of sin ( or have it delivered to him ) that doth not profess that faith which is of necessity to make him capable of a sealed pardon : but he that only professeth a faith short of justifying , professeth not that faith which is of necessity to make him capable of a sealed pardon . Therefore he is not to be admitted to the Lords supper . It is a present sealed pardon that they profess there to receive by the very actual receiving : God presently offereth ; and they presently profess to accept it signally , and therefore must do so verbally . 

3.  no man is to be admitted to the Lords supper that professeth not true Repentance for sin . But Mr. Blake's Professor doth not so : for that is inseparable from saving faith . Therefore Mr. Blake must deny the Major , or say nothing that I can imagine , but what is to no purpose . And if he do deny it , 

1.  I would desire him once to give us a just Description of that Repentance , short of saving , which he will be satisfied with the Profession of , in his Communicants . 2.  I must confess as much as I am against separation , I never intent to have communion with Mr. Blakes Congregation , if they profess not saving Repentance and faith . And if he exact not such a Profession , I say still he makes soul work in the Church . And when such soul work shall be voluntarily maintained , and the Word of God abused for the defilement of the Church , and Ordinances of God , it is a greater scandal to the weak , and to the Schismatics , and a greater reproach to the Church , and sadder case to considerate men , than the too common pollutions of others , which are merely through negligence , but not justified and defended . And if Mr. Blake be angry at my speaking these things , I cannot help it . I am bound to tell him of it as a faithful Brother , that I doubt not but God is angry at his Doctrine , and the great wrong that he doth the Church of God , while he is so angry at his Brother for resisting it . For my part , I would not have done his work , no nor justified it as some of his near Learned Friends have done , for more than I will speak of . it 's like he will hardly exact a Profession of saving Repentance from the lapsed for their Restoration to the communion of the Church , if he will not do it of the Church themselves in their Sacramental communion . 

Argum. 4.  Furthermore they that will not profess true Love to Christ as a Redeemer , are not to be admitted to the Lords Supper . But no man can Profess true Love that will not Profess true faith : Ergo , etc.  

The Major is proved , in that it is a Sacrament of communion in Love : We receive the highest expressions of Christ's love , and are to receive them with gratitude , which hath always love in it . 

Argum. 5.  They that profess not true Pope of Christ's coming in Glory are not to be admitted to the Lords Supper . But none can do that but the Professors of a saving faith . Therefore the Major is proved , because it is the very end and use of the Sacrament to exercise Hope of Christ's coming [ Do this in remembrance of me till I come ] which Implieth Expectation , or Hope . 

Argum. 6.  no man is to be admitted to the Lords Supper that Professeth not a sincere love to the Saints as Saints : But so can none do that Profess not a saving faith ( without contradicting himself ) Ergo.  

The Major is proved in that the very business of that Church there , next their communion with Christ , is to have communion with the Saints in Love : and if they be at variance but with one , they must leave their gift at the Altar , and go first and be reconciled to their Brother , and then come and offer their gift . But Mr. Blake is so far from excluding the ungodly , that he would not have us so much as dissuade them from coming . Pag. 196. he saith to that [ 1.  It is as I suppose , without all Scripture Precedent to warn men upon account of want of a new life by the Spirit , wholly to keep off from this or any other Ordinances of Christ — that we should warn men upon this account , upon this very ground , to hold off from all address to Ordinances , I have not learned . ] Answ. That we should dissuade them to come till they have that Faith and Repentance and Love to the brethren which is the fruit of a new life , I have proved , and more have done it than you will ever well answer . And it will not follow , as you pretend , that then none must come that have not the certainty of their sincerity in the Faith , as I shall further show when I come purposely to your Objections . And where you talk of unregenerate men's being incapable of examining themselves , it 's a great mistake ; else no wicked man could despair , if he be not able to find himself to be wicked ; And than it would be a sufficient Evidence of Grace for a man to find himself graceless , which is a contradiction . 

And it 's an unhappy confusion that Mr. Blake is guilty of almost all along , while he pleadeth against the Interest of the Regenerate only in the Sacraments , that he confoundeth most commonly the Professors of Justifying Faith and holiness , with his Professors of a faith short of Justifying ; and thus in his arguing against Mr. Hooker and Galaspie , and others , carrieth on the matter in the dark ; as if these were all one , or the arguments will serve for the one that will serve for the other ; which is merely to lose his own and his Readers labour , or leave him deceived , which is worse : How many leaves of that volumn , and his former of the covenants , are guilty of this dark misleading work ? 

I could willingly here answer his Arguments for unregenerate men's right to this Sacrament ; but 1.  I shall meet with much more about their pretended right to baptism anon , and the answer of those will serve for both . 2.  And he hath so mixed the two Cases ( of Professors of saving faith and of not saving ) together , that if I deal with him on the later , he may say , he speaks of the former . 

The first Argument of Galaspies 201 , which he answereth , is from [ the Nature of Sacraments , which are to signify that we have already Faith in Christ , Remission of sin by him , and Union with him ] The sense of the Argument is , That seeing Sacraments ( according to Christ's institution ) are confirming signs , presupposing the thing signified both on our part and on Gods ; therefore none should use them that have not first the thing signified by them ( at least those at age ) To this Master Blake answereth , This to me is as strange as new , that Sacramental signs declare & show that we have Faith & remission of sins . The Sacrament now in question is a sign of the body & blood of Christ , in whom by faith remission of sins may be obtained I know ; but that it is a sign either that we do believe , or that we have remission of sin otherwise than upon believing ( to which this engages , but not presupposes ) I know not , Repl. Though I undertake not to defend all the Arguments that other men use in this Case ; yet this doth so much concern the cause of baptism which I am now debating , that I shall give you this reply to it : 1.  The sacramental Actions are signs as well as the substance of bread and wine . The Offer with Take , eat , signifieth the offer of Christ to us , to be received and applied : the Taking , and Eating , and Drinking signifieth our Acceptance , & Application of him . With himself is offered the pardon of sin , and given to all that Accept him , which by Taking , Eating and Drinking we profess to do . It is my duty to tell you , that it is sad that a Treatise of Sacraments should profess not to know , that our believing and Remission is here signified . it 's pity but this had been known before you had written of them , at least Controversally . What Divines are there that deny the Sacraments to be mutual signs and seals , signifying and sealing our part as well as Gods ? and how ill do you to wrong the Church of God by seeking to make men believe that these things are new and strange ? If it be so to you , its pity that it is so : But sure you have seen Mr. Gatakers Books against Doct Word and Davenant wherein you have multitudes of sentences recited of our Protestant Divines , that affirm this which you call new . It is indeed their most common doctrine , that the Sacrament doth pre-suppose Remission of sin , and our faith , and that they are instituted to signify these as in being ; ( though through infancy or error some may not have some benefits of them till after , ) it is the common Protestant Doctrine , that Sacraments do solemnize and publicly own and confirm the mutual Covenant already entered in heart ; as a King is crowned , a Soldier listed , a Man and Woman married , after professed consent : so that the sign is Causal as to the Consummation and Delivery ( as a Key , a Twig and Turf in giving possession ) , but consequential to the Contract as privately made , and the Right given thereby : So that the soul is supposed to consent to have Christ as offered first ( which is saving faith ) and then by receiving him Sacramentally delivered to make public profession of that consent , and publicly to receive his sealed Remission . Mr. Corbet ( cited by you ) might well say , that primarily the Sacrament is God's Seal ; but did he say that it is only his , and not secondarily ours ? And in the next words , you do in effect own part of the doctrine yourself , which you have thus wondered at as new and strange , saying [ I confess it is a symbol of our Profession of Faith ; but this is not the Faith spoken to , neither is Remission of sins annexed unto it . ] Answ. If you put ( Profession ) for the thing professed , you speak obscurely , when you might have spoken plainly : But if you mean as you speak , ( taking Profession properly ) then 1.  You yield that the Sacrament is our symbol , and so declareth or signifieth our Action as well as Gods. 2.  And it is not only a sign of our Profession , but a Professing sign and therefore a sign of the thing professed : For the external sign is to declare the Internal acts of the mind , which without signs others cannot know : And therefore the Actions of Taking , Eating , Drinking , do signify the same Internal Acts which a verbal Profession doth signify . As therefore the Words , and outward Actions are two distinct signs of the same Internal Acts , so are they two ways of Profession . My signal Actions do not signify my words , ( which are plainer signs themselves , and therefore need not darker to express them ) but they both express my mind : so that they are not only Symbols of our Profession , as you speak , but Professing Symbols . 3.  And if so , than they must be signs and Professions of those Internal Acts which correspond with them ; which is the Inward Taking Christ , and Eating his Flesh , and Drinking his Blood by Faith , which ( no doubt ) are the proper acts of saving faith . 4.  And therefore this is the faith spoken of , and Remission of sins is annexed unto it , ( which you deny ) though it seems you will speak of the Profession of a common faith , to which Remission is not annexed . 

The second Argument was from some Scriptures , proving that the Sacrament necessarily supposeth Conversion and saith , and therefore is not to work it . To this Mr. Blake Answers ; 1.  By referring to what he hath said in another book about some of these Texts ; and thither I shall follow him : 1.  About Mark. 16.16 . he speaks , Treat . of Cou. pag. 243.  Because he confesseth that these Texts are spoken of Baptism ( and so are more to my principal end , and will hold as to the Lords Supper only : ) I shall here peruse his Answers , having used the same Texts myself before . But ( now I peruse the place ) I find that his words of Mark 16.16 . are those that I have already answered in my former Reply to him : and you may peruse his Rejoinder , if worth the labour . The same I say of his words on Act. 8.36 , 37. on Act. 2.  28 . in pag. 392.  I find nothing to our purpose worth a Reply ; but his Contest with Mr. Tombs , let Mr. I — regard . To Act. 2 41. he now answers , [ It speaks no more than ready Acceptation of the tender of the Gospel ; and whether this necessarily imply saving faith , let Ezek. 33.31 . Mat 13.20 , 21.  Gal. 4.15 . be consulted . ] To which I reply , 1.  If by [ the tender of the Gospel ] you mean [ the Gospel tendered ] , then either it is [ the Gospel as the Gospel ] , declaring the work of Redemption , and offering us a Saviour to deliver us from sin and wrath : and this no unregenerate man did ever gladly or heartily accept . Or else it is [ the Gospel as a Novel doctrine ; or only ●hat part of it which offereth them pardon without the other part which offereth salvation from sin itself . And this is mentioned in the Texts ( or some of them ) that you refer us to : But that this is not meant in the Text , Act. 2.41 . is plain ; because it was the doctrine of Redemption , Faith and Repentance which they gladly received , and in prosecution of it sold all , and lived in the Communion of Saints in the Praises of God. 2.  Or else by [ the tender of the Gospel ] you mean , that which the Gospel tendereth : And that is , Christ as Christ with his full salvation , which no unregenerate man doth heartily Accept though pardon alone they would willingly have : but that 's not the tender of the Gospel . If [ the glad Acceptation of the tender of the Gospel ] that is , of Christ as Christ , and his full salvation , be not justifying or saving Faith , I despair of ever knowing what it is : and if this Acceptation or Faith be common , all 's common . I still believe that Justifying faith [ is the Assent to the Truth of the Gospel , and hearty Acceptance of Christ as he is there offered , or of Christ as Christ ] 

And having distinguished of the Object , so must we of the Act. it 's one thing to accept indeed by hearty Consent , and another thing to accept o'er tenus , or to say I accept it . The former only the Godly have , as to [ Christ as Christ ] : the Unregenerate may o'er tenus , verbally Accept Christ as Christ , and heartily be willing to have pardon by him , and submit to some common Reformation , lest they should miss of that pardon : but Christ as Christ , they will not accept . 

Now to the Texts : And its hard that you should allege Ezek. 33.31 . for [ ready Accepting the tender of the Gospel , ] when the Text saith plainly , that their hearts went after their covetousness , and they hear the word and would not do it , though they took pleasure to hear the Prophet , as a minstrel to tickle their ears and not as a Minister to save them from sin : when as these in Acts 2. sold all and lived in Community with the Saints . Those Mat. 13.20 , 21. received the external Message , and Christ himself o'er tenus , by verbal Acceptance , and Internally they would have had Christ ad hoc for their own ends , as a subject or servant to their worldly Interests ; but they never received Christ as Christ , to save them from the world , and self , and sin ; for these were still preferred before him ; nor did they ever accept of God as their God , that is , their chief good and chief Lord I am bold therefore ( by your Patience ) to say , that as to the Acceptance of Christ as Christ , or God as their God , or the Holy Ghost as their Sanctifier , they cannot be said to have done it , but equivocally : and no otherwise did they receive the tender of the Gospel . As for the Galathians , chap. 4.15 . 1.  All were not in Love with Paul on the same account : and all love to the Preacher signifieth not an Acceptance of the tender of the Gospel . 2.  And you cannot prove but that these Galathians did it sincerely , and were sincere when this was spoken , for all their yielding so far to the temptation of false Teachers . ( Of which I have spoken before . ) Of Acts 10.47 . hereafter . 

The sense of the third Argument , is , that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper giveth us New food , viz. the Flesh and Blood of Christ. Therefore it supposeth the new Birth and Life . ] 

To this Mr. Blake saith [ 1.  Metaphors are ill Materials , to make up into Syllogisms . ] Repl. 1  They are such as Christ used John 6. and frequently in Reasoning ; and therefore I am resolved to believe they are good Materials . 2.  We must use Metaphors , or no words in some of the greatest Points in Divinity ( about God ) 3.  We cannot easily find fit terms here then [ Newman B●rth , Life and Food . ] And if you had rather have many words than one , change [ Food into special means of continuing or increasing our New Life . ] But this is a long term for a Syllogism . 

[ 2.  saith Mr. Blake , A difference may be put between ordinary and quickening food ] Repl. You should have told us your difference , & how it concerneth our case , if you would have had us taken notice of it . [ 3.  He saith , The word gives new Food , and yet supposeth not new life , 1 Pet. 1.  ● . ] Rep. The clean contrary is the scope of the Text you cite . As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word , that ye may grow thereby . The Word therefore as Food , doth suppose new Birth , and Life . Christ as our first life is given in the Word to those that had not life before ; but Christ as our Food is given after both in the Word and Sacrament . 

But you say , [ There is a Sacramental work preceding our eating , and there Christ is set forth to the aggravation of sin , to carry on the work of Contrition and Compunction . ] Rep. it 's a sorry arguing , that because there is that in the Sacrament which may benefit an ungodly man to see , that therefore he hath right to receive it , yea or is like to have benefit by it . He that will not consent that Christ shall be his full Saviour , may be moved to consent by seeing a Sacrament True , though it is not appointed to such ends , yet its possible . But how should he be moved to consent by receiving it , and so signally Professing to consent when he doth not ? that is , by lying ? 

The fourth Argument is from Rome 4.11 . Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith therefore so is Baptism ; therefore so is the Lords Supper ; therefore it belongeth only to justified Believers . To this Mr. Blake answereth , 1.  then Ishmael and each male were justified . Rep. 1.  He whom you answer spoken only of the Adult : and then you should have said only then Ishmael and all the males that had true right to Circumcision , were either justified believers , or the children of such , or ( as to Church right ) of those that Professed themselves such . And that is true . 2 And it is lis sub judice yet , whether the Synod of Dort , Davenant , etc. or Mr. Gataker were in the right , and so whether all the seed of justified persons have an Infant justification with them , or not ? 

You add that , [ Abrahams Circumcision there is not made a proof of h●s' justification . ] Repl. He that maketh it the Instituted Nature or use of Circumcision to be a Seal of a Righteousness of Faith which the person had before , doth make his Circumcision a proof of his foregoing Righteousness of faith . But so did Paul concerning Abraham : therefore , etc. 2.  Paul may give us a full proof of it , though he spoke those words to another intent . 

The fif●h Argument is to the same purpose with the former , as Mr. Blake reciteth it , and therefore I shall say no more to it , his answer requiring no more . The sixth Argument he passeth by himself . 

The 7.  Argument is from the Necessity of a wedding garment : I confess I do not think that it is the Sacrament only that is meant by tha● feast : but it is Christ as offered in the Gospel with his benefits , which in the Sacrament is specially represented : and coming in , is their coming into the visible Church by Profession ; and the scope of the Parable is to show these two things . 1.  That he tha● invited them to come in , did intend that they must come in that case , and with that preparation as is answerable to the nature of the feast , and is for the Honour of the Bridgegroom or Master of the Feast : and therefore they should so have come . 2.  That because they so came not , they shall only suffer as those that came not , but also be cast out into a greater degree of misery , that is , because they come not with an upright , penitent , true believing heart , disposed to Obedience . Now the thing that Mr. Blake should answer , is , whether it be not hence proved that men should have the Wedding garment of sincere faith before they come into the visible Church ( they or their Parents ) and much more before the Lords Supper ? God saith , Friend , how camest thou in hither not having on a Wedding garment ? But of this more anon . 

Where Mr. Blake saith [ The world may lay as fair a claim to this wedding Fe●st as the Supper . I reply . Neither one nor the other is it , simply considered in itself , but as a Church privilege or a sign of our Church-membership . And so the word of promise claimed , or other parts and uses of it proper to Church-members , are included with the Sacraments ; but not the word as preparing , and common to those without . The Lord of that Feast saith not , [ Friend , why wast thou invited h●ther ? ] for it was done by his own appointment : but [ Friend how camest thou in hither ? ] that is , I Invited thee not to come without the wedding garment to disgrace my house , but to bring it with thee ? This therefore of Mr. Blakes is no answer . 

The 8●h . Argument is [ That ordinance which is not appointed to work Faith , is no coverting ordinance : but etc. ] Faith comes by hearing , ] etc.  To which Mr. Blake answers that reading and seeing Miracles may also convert , and so may Sacraments as not being opposite but subordinate . ] I reply . Hearing as the chiefest way of Reception , is put for all the rest : It is the word heard or read , or some way received , that is the appointed means of Conversion . it 's possible the Sacrament may be a means too : but give us as good proof that it was appointed to that use , or may be used to that end purposely by the unconverted , as we shall prove the same of the Word , and you shall carry the Cause . 

The ninth Argument is , [ That Ordinance which hath neither the promise of the grace of Conversion annexed to it , or any example in the Word of God of any converted by it , is no converting Ordinance : But etc. Ergo. ] 

To this 1.  Mr. Blake answers ad hominem , which is not worth repeating ( that examples will not satisfy his Adversary ) . 2.  That we have as many examples of men's conversion by the sacrament , at we have of their receiving strength and nourishment . ] Repl. A wonderful confidence ! If Mr. Blake will bring as good proof of any converted by it , as we can , that the eleven Apostles , that the Church at Jerusalem , Acts 2. and 4. and the rest of the Churches were strengthened by it , he will make good that Assertion . 3.  What he saith of our ( not having precedents by name ) is nothing to the purpose . If he can prove it of any named or unnamed , specially of Societies , it will suffice . 4.  He tells us that [ The examples of Conversion by the word perhaps well examined would prove short of such Conversion as is here intended . The Conversion in Gospel-narratives is to a Christian profession . ] Repl. 1  This is too unkind dealing for any Preacher of the Gospel to use with that Word which converted him , and hath brought in so many thousands to Christ , and which he himself preacheth for the conversion of others . I should offend the patience of the Reader to stand to confute this , by proving that the Word hath been a means of true saving Conversion , yea the ordinary means . I refer Mr. Blake to what I have said before of the state of the Churches that Paul wrote to : Was there not one sort of Ground that received the seed in depth of earth and brought forth fruit ? Was not Paul sent by preaching to open men's eyes and turn them from the power of Satan to God ? Act. 26 v. 18.  Doth not Paul in all his Epistles speak of the Saints , as converted savingly by the word of the Gospel ? What heaps of clear Testimonies might we bring out of his Epistles ? How contrary is this new Doctrine to the Word , and all the ancient Churches , and all approved protestants Judgements ? I would we had such Evidence of true Conversion now among our Professors as the multitude of Converts gave , Act. 2. and 4. and as the Jailor gave , Act. 1.6 . and the Eunuch , Act. 8. and as Lydia , and many other . 

2.  But what if the Word had not truly converted them ? its somewhat to be brought to an outward Profession of true faith , which the rest were that were then Church-members : But the Profession of your faith of another species , is not [ the Profession of a Christian Faith , ] though you call it so . If you will give me but as good proof of any one baptised person that was brought but to the Profession of this lower Faith , as I will give you of multitudes that were brought to true saving Faith by the Word , and more to the Profession of it , I will say that you have done that which never man did before you . I pray make trial for the proof of some one . 

Well! But the main strength of the Argument which you had to answer , was concerning the Promise . To which you say , [ 1.  When the adversary shall bring a Promise made to the Sacrament for spiritual strength it will happily be found of equal force to the giving of a new life . ] Repl. You next say , Implicit Promises may serve : Show but one such . You say , [ Every Promise made to the Word is made to the Sacrament . ] Repl. Prove that , and take all . Though we have no Promise particularly of converting this or that man by the Word , yet we have that it shall convert many in general . Show where is a word of Promise that the Sacraments shall convert any one ? Sure , if Paul had but had such a Promise of converting men by Baptising them as he had of converting them by Preaching , Act. 26.17 , 18. and elsewhere , he would never have said , I thank God that I baptised none of you , but Crispus , etc. for I am not sent to baptise but to Preach the Gospel . 2.  We find where in that Sacrament , men have Communion of the Blood of Christ , and of his Body , and are partakers of the one Bread , and have communion with one another , and are helped by it , in calling to Remembrance Christ death ( in hope of that coming : ) all which are undoubtedly strengthening , 1 Cor. 10 , 16 , 17.  & 11.25 , 26.  Act. 2 , etc. But you cannot show where ever any was either united first to Christ , or his mystical Body by the Lord's Supper , or where it was appointed to be used to any such end , or where ever any generaral or Implicit Promise of such a thing is made . 

The tenth Argument was from the express danger of unworthy receiving , 1 Cor. 11.17 . The sum of the answer is , That [ This Argument would take off every Ordinance from the honour of Conversion . ] Repl. But I conceive that the strength of the Argument ( or that which ought to be its strength ) is wholly overlookt ; which is not from the Necessity of a Preparation in general , but of a special Preparation , or Worthiness , which is not so pre-requisite to the fruitful use of converting Ordinances . There is a saying by the superfluity of naughtiness , malice , etc. requisite , before a man can in reason expect that the Word should convert him : and yet it may convert thousands that are not so far prepared , by doing that and the rest . But the Worthiness of a Partaker of the Lords Supper must be more than this . For 1.  That which the Church is Judge of , must be that the Receiver be a Church-member , professing true Faith , and not contradicting that Profession by a scandalous life . 2.  Himself is required to examine himself for more , that is , whether he be sincerely what he Professeth , and Christ be in him ( or else he is a Reprobate , and not to take the children's bread , ) 2 Cor. 13.5 . and also that he have a Particular Preparation , according to the nature of the Ordinance . it 's expressly Necessary , 1.  That he discern the Lords Body . 2.  That he do this in remembrance of Christ's death , and with a hope of his coming : and 3.  For communion with Christ , and his Church , and to be partakers of the one bread : 4.  And with a Heart to take Christ and Eat ; that is , to feed on him by Faith , when he takes the bread . But all this cannot be done by the unregenerate ; nor is this prerequisite before a man come to the Word , that it may convert him That Preparation which is pre-requisite in a meet receiver of the Lords Supper , it was not instituted to effect ( unless as it may do it when God sees good , in an unworthy or prohibited use : ) But true Faith and Repentance are Preparations pre-requisite : Ergo etc.  

You cannot say , that to the hearing of the Word as a means of conversion , true faith and Repentance is so requisite . The text you mention 1 Pet. 2.1.2 . I say again , speaks of the confirming and edifying use of the word , and not of the converting use . The converted must bring true saith to the Word if they will expect increase of it : but the unconverted must not needs bring true faith , if they will be brought to believe by it . 

3.  Yet remember that we say not that men ought to forbear coming that are unconverted ; but that they ought to come ; but how ? To believe and repent , and so to come , and to do it in this order and no other , and they ever lie under all this Obligation . 

You next instance in Prayer , and conclude that [ As for Prayer there is no more ground or colour to make it a converting Ordinance than the Supper , etc. ] Repl. 1  A man that hath but common desires may be persuaded to ask for what he so desire's : Though he have no Promise of Acceptance , you do not find him threatened with judgement for such a Prayer ( so it be not grossly hypocritical or wicked ) as he is for unworthy receiving the Supper , without a discerning the Lords Body . 2.  When we exhort any man to pray for Christ's pardon , the Spirit , etc. we therein exhort him to desire them ; for desire is the soul of Prayer , and the chief part of its essence : Now the first of these desires which we exhort them to , is conversion itself , even that they would turn to God by a change of their wills , and express them in Prayer . 3.  I can show you where the wicked are commanded to seek the Lord , that is , by Prayer to express their returning hearts , which implieth their returning itself ; but you cannot show where ever they are commanded to communicate with the Church in the Sacrament , but in this order , first to be converted and repent , and so baptised , and so communicate : or if Baptised already ▪ to be Penitents first , and Communicants next . 

But if you would have all exhorted to the Lords Supper for conversion , whom we are bound to exhort to Prayer for conversion , you would do that which I confess I dare not do . 

The 11.  Argument was , that Ordinance which is Eucharistical and consolatory , supposeth such as partake of it to have part and portion in that thing for which thanks is given , etc. but etc.  To this it 's answered , that [ the assumption might as well have been of the Word and Prayer , which are Eucharistical and Consolatory . ] Repl. 1  To hear a Sermon is not to give thanks . 2.  The Application of the Word must be according to men's various states . An unregenerate man may take this for consolation , If I be converted and repent and believe , I shall be saved . ] A true believer may apply it to another measure of consolation , [ because I am a believer , this Promise is mine , that is , secureth me of the benefit . ] Now if the Impenitent and unbeliever shall do the later , he sin's such another sin as if he received the Sacrament , which is an Ordinance Instituted for personal assumption and application of the general Promise . 

2.  As for Prayer . 1.  To petition is not to give thanks . 2.  And for Thanksgiving itself , an Impenitent man may not give thanks for true saving faith , Repentance , part in Christ , and hope of Glory , though he may for the mercy that he hath , because he may not lie . Now in the Lord's Supper we must give thanks for our part in Christ , and pardon , and life through him : or at least , for the present Gift of Christ to us which we consent to accept . 

it 's added , [ This Ordinance is not wholly Eucharistical , etc.  It is for humbling as well as for comforting . ] Repl. But if the other use be common to it with other Ordinances , and here Inseparable from the Eucharistical , than other Ordinances may be used to that end ; but this may not by him that may not do both ; because if he receive the Sacrament ; he signally Professeth both . 

The substance of the twelfth Argument , with its answer , is spoken to before : where Mr. Blake saith , that [ The unregenerate may so far be suitably worthy for this work , that he may know himself called to it , and that it would be his sin to hold back from it , and he may hopefully expect a blessing in it . ] I reply : 1.  That he is called to it remotely : that is , first to repent and believe , and to communicate , we yield ; and that it is every man's sin that keeps off , that is , that comes not in this order . But that he may lawfully come before this Repentance , you never proved , nor shall do , I think . 2.  I would you could show us on what ground he may hopefully expect a blessing in it . True hope goeth not beyond the promise : but the unregenerate have no promise ( unless the Arminians be in the right ) of a blessing on any Ordinance ; much lesle on that which they cannot prove that they may use till they are converted . Yet Hope in a larger sense they may have , where they can prove that God hath set them a work though they have no promise . But that 's not here . 

The 13th . Argument is , That Ordinance which was instituted for Communion of Saints , is intended only for Saints , etc.  it 's answered by distinguishing of Sants as ( such by calling and separation for God ( or regeneration : and that the Lords supper is the privilege of the Church as visible . ) Repl. It's one thing to ask , Who may demand it and come there ? and another to ask , To whom may we give it ? We may give it to all professedly separated for God. None may ask or take it but those that are heartily separated to God. But your Professor of a lower faith is neither of these , and therefore may neither seek it , nor may we give it him , if he do seek it . Whoever professeth himself separated for God , doth profess saving sanctification , which consisteth therein . Self and Earth is highest in all the unregenerate : therefore they are not separated heartily to God.  

The 14th . Argument was , [ If Baptism itself ( to the adult ) is not regenerating or converting , than not the Lords supper : but etc. ] This Argument Mr. Blake hath no more to say to , but that this seemeth to suppose an opinion of Conversion by the very work done , which he disclaimeth . But here is no such supposition at all intimated ; and he should have dealt with it as he found it , and not so have bawkt it , especially when Mr. Gilaspie had so explained and confirmed it . And because Mr. Blake thought best to silence Mr. Gilaspie's proof of his Assumption ; and I think it worthy the Readers observation , at least , that he may see how far Mr. Blake is from truth in his affirmations of the singularity of my opinion , I shall here transcribe them . 

[ Aaron is Rod blossoming , pag. 514.515 . The assumption ) ( that baptism itself is not a Regenerating Ordinance ) I prove thus : 1.  Because we read of no persons of age baptised by the Apostles , except such as did profess faith in Christ gladly received the Word , and in whom some begun work of the Spirit of Grace did appear ( I say not that it really was in all , but somewhat of it did appear in all ) . 2.  If the baptism of those who are of age be a regerating Ordinance , than you suppose the person to be baptised to be an unregenerate person ( even as when a Minister first preacheth the Gospel to Pagans' , he cannot but suppose them to be unregenerate ) But I believe no Conscientious Minister ( N. B. ) would adventure to Baptise one who hath manifest and Infallible signs of unregeneration . Sure we cannot be answerable to God if we should minister Baptism to a man whose works and words do manifestly declare him to be an unregenerated unconverted person . And if we may not initiate such a one , how shall we bring him to the Lords Table ? ] 

The fifteenth Argument is [ If Baptism even of the aged must Necessarily precede the Lord's Supper ▪ then this is not a converting Ordinance : But etc. ] The reason of the consequence is , because true Repentance and faith are professed , and Remission of sin sealed in Baptism . Mr. Blake denieth the consequence , because all the Baptised are not Regenerate . Rep. But all the Adult Baptised according to Christ's Institution are Regenerate : ( of Infants it 's yet under debate ) And if any be not so , it is they that erroneously seek that which they should not have sought . 

The last Argument there mentioned by Mr. Blake , is from the Parable of the Prodigal , who returned before he had the Robe , Ring , Shoe Fatted-calf , etc. Mr. Blake answereth that [ All Ordinances are to bring a Prodigal to such a returning posture ] which is a mere begging the question , and not answering the Text , which Interpreters usually thus expound . 

The next Argument is pag. 245. recited [ From the Directory , where the Ignorant , scandalous , and profane , that live in any sin or offence against their conscience , are warned not to presume to come nigh that holy table . He answers [ it is meant of those that purposely resolve to hold their sin ; and doubtless that purpose standing , here is no comfort to be put into their hands . As Mat. 5.23 , 24.  Sacraments will not be accepted from that hand where malice is seated in the heart , and implacably continued : but it follows n●t , but that where the soul is startled and such resolutions for sin do not appear , this may be a means , etc. ] Repl. 1  You add your own corrupting gloss to the Directory : They say [ warn them to forbear that live in sin against conscience , ] You add , [ the meaning is , if they resolve to continue in it , ] And I pray you why will you turn us to men's resolutions , which is a secret of their hearts for a discovery of those whom we must refuse ? 

Is there the vilest Murderer , or Adulterer , that is not purposed to leave it before he dies ? 2.  But what if he resolve not to continue it ? Is it not bad enough if he will not resolve to leave it ? Doubtless this shows Impenitency , and the other can do no more . 3 But yet you have here destroyed all your Cause in a word . For you have here excluded all unregenerate men : for all the unregenerate are habitually resolved in most heinous sin , and that against conscience . They all will confess that God is better than the world , and yet they all esteem the world before God , and love it better than God ; they are a habitually resolved to please their Flesh before God , and look to their worldly felicity before his Glory . I have your consent therefore on this ground to conclude , that [ a Sacrament will not be accepted at their hands . ] 4.  But do you not contradict this , when you add [ yet if such Resolutions do not appear etc. ] What if they appear not ? I hats something to the Minister , but that 's nothing to prove God's acceptance , or the man's Title to claim the Sacrament . Should not secret sin deter aswell as open ? God and himself know them , though we do not . 

The 18th Argument [ Mr. Blake overpassing , answers the 19th which is , It is not communicable to any but the penitent : therefore not a converting Ordinance ] or , [ That Ordinance that is not communicable to any but the penitent , is not converting : But , etc. Mr. Blake denieth the Mayor to be true , unless limited , and giveth an instance ; Reproof is for Conversion : yet not to all : all converting Ordinances are not promiscuously to be applied to all . ] Repl. An unanswerable Argument , and a mere impertinent Answer . Is it not a wonder how the Major could be denied ? without distinguishing of Penitence , and saying that the Sacrament is communicable to the impenitent as to saving Repentance , but not as to common Repentance , and therefore may convert to saving Repentance . But he answer as if the Major had been this . [ That Ordinance which is for conversion , is for all ] : when it 's contrarily , [ That which is for the converted only is not to convert ] So that Mr. Blake saith nothing at all to the Argument , when he pretendeth to deny the Major , which taken of sound Repentance is as undeniable as that [ The Medicine that is only for the living , is not to make the dead alive ] : so ( the Ordinance which is only for the Penitents is not to convert men to repentance . ] To which he answers , by saying that [ Converting ordinances are not to be promiscuously applied . ] what 's that to the Major , or Argument ? The Pope dwelleth not at Rome , because the Turk dwelleth at Constantinople . So much for these Arguments and their Answers : the rest I shall pass over which Mr. Blake hath about Sacraments being converting Ordinances ; Only telling him , that I confidently deny his great Assertion , pag. 241. [ the unconverted have a fundamental proper right to the Lords Supper ] and yet do not find myself in any [ inextricable snares : ] nor will by difficulties be frighted to that opniion . 

I shall only here add in a word , what I yield about the Sacrament being a converting Ordinance ; viz. 1.  Some that have no Right to partake of it , may possibly be converted by looking on and hearing the adjoined word . 2.  it 's not impossible that he that sinfully and without title comes to receive it , may occasionally receive good by it . There is that there declared that hath a tendency to do good . 3.  But whatever it may be a means of beyond Divine Appointment through his mere good pleasure , yet it is not Appointed to be demanded or taken by any Impenitent unconverted man for his Conversion . 4 , Yet if a Minister know them not to be impenitent , but yet suspecteth it , as he must give it them upon their profession , so he may desire in the managing of the work , that it may be converting to them if they are not converted ; that is , that God will bring that truth to the heart which the signs represent to the eyes ; and make it an occasion of good to them that are out of their way in demanding it . 5.  Yet it is rather the Hearing and Seeing , than the Taking , Eating and Drinking , that we may with any encouragement pray for this Blessing on . 6.  I never know or heard of any converted by the Receiving of the Sacrament : but diverse I have know converted by the occasion of it . As some that ( by other kind of Doctrine than Mr. Blakes ) having been brought to apprehend the danger of unworthy receiving , have been awakened so in their preparations for fear of eating damnation to themselves , that it was a means of their conversion ; And some that by after-fears , lest then did eat unworthily ; And perhaps some by the serious speeches of the Minister in Prayer and Instruction before and after : but none by receiving itself . 

It is therefore little to his main purpose or cause , that Mr. Blake sect . 13.  Prop. 11. pag. 200. attempts to prove that ( the Lord's Supper with the word as appendent to it , may be serviceable to bring up those of Covenant-interest to the terms and Propositions of the Covenant , may serve to work a man of Profession of faith unto faith saving and Justifying : a man in the Name the Lord's , to turn unfeignedly and sincerely to the Lord ) For x. his half Professor is not in the mutual Covenant ( which its like he means by Covenant-interest . ) 2.  The distinction between a Nominal Christian and a Sincere ; a Profession of Justifying faith , and that faith itself , leaus out the persons that he hath to defend ; that is , The Professors of another species of Faith. 3.  it 's one thing to prove that the Sacrament may convert the unconverted , that is , that its possible , and that it is a thing that eventually hath come to pass ; and another thing to prove , that it is commanded to the unconverted or allowed them to be used to that end . The later is the thing that should be proved by him , and not the former only . 

But because his Proposition is somewhat more bashful than some of the Arguments brought as to prove it . ( which have the face to look further ) I shall briefly examine them . 

Pag. 200.201 . Argum. 1.  Men of that interest ( saith he ) that Baptism receives , as the intention of the work in order to salvation , these the Lords Supper serves to carry on by sanctification to salvation : But Baptism receives men of visible Profession only , etc. ] Answ. 1.  I distinguish between the secret Intention of God de eventu when he Instituted his Ordinances . 2. and the Appointed end or use of them , and the Intention which he commands men . And as to the last , I distinguish between the Appointed end and use of them as to the Minister and as to the Receiver : And so here are three distinct Questions before us . Quest. 1.  Whether God , who appointed this Sacrament , did intend that it should eventually be used to the Conversion of any souls ? To this I answer . no man can tell but by the Event . But I will not deny it , that which a man sinfully doth , may be the means of his Conversion . If a professed Pagan may be admitted to the Lords Supper , no man can be sure that this ( with the annexed word ) may not be the occasion or means of his Conversion . The same I say of the Excommunicate : yet must we not therefore admit such . What God decreeth to do by his Ordinances , is one thing ; and how and to what Ends we must use them , is another . 

The second Question is , Whether the Minister may or must deliver the Sacrament to the unconverted , with this Intention that he may be converted by it ? To this I answer , that the unconverted are of two sorts : 1.  Such as profess not to be converted , or savingly to repent and believe ; and to these he may not Administer it at all , and therefore not to such Ends. 2 Such as do profess saving faith and Repentance ; and to these he may administer it , with this disjunctive end ; that if the person be truly converted , it may confirm him ; if not , that if God so please , it may be a means of his Conversion . 

The third Question is , Whether the unconverted may Demand and receive that Sacrament as a means of Conversion ? To which I answer flatly , no : whether it be a saving Faith or another sort of faith which he Professeth , if he have not saving Faith itself , he may not Demand or Receive the Sacrament at all , and therefore not to any such ends . 

Now to come closer to Mr. Blake's Argument ; 1.  I grant the Major , ( as far as through the Lantern of his dark ambiguous phrases I can discern the sense of it , ) viz that we may admit those to the Lords Supper , that are justly admitted to Baptism , if naturally capable , and have not since given cause to suspend them . And here Mr. Blake shows , that it is the lower species of Faith that entitles men ( in his judgement ) to the Lords Supper , because he maintaineth that this lower species entitleth them to Baptism . 

His Minor I grant of the Professors of saving Faith ; and deny it of all others that Profess only another faith : nor hath he proved that such have a visible Interest , or Profession , it being not Christianity , but only part of its essence , which they Profess . 

His 2.  Argument is ( It is the mind of God they be admitted : therefore to this end . ] Answ. 1.  It is not the mind of God that they should Demand and Receive it : therefore not to this end . 2.  It may not be the admitters principal end , but a secondary , only on supposition that the Receiver be not what he seems to be , and so be not a lawful demander of it . 3.  It is not the will of God that your Professor of another kind of faith only be admitted . 

In the end he sums up his Argument thus [ Ministers must give the Sacrament so as it may be to edification , and not certainly to destruction : But they must give it to some not yet thoroughly sanctified : therefore some not thoroughly sanctified may receive it to edification , and not to destruction . ] Answ. 1.  Plus est in conclusione , quam in praemissis . You should only have concluded , [ therefore Ministers may give it . etc. ) and not [ therefore some may Receive it . ) For 2.  The word ( certainly ) which you put in the Major ( and leave out in the conclusion ) refers either to the Certainty of the Object . or God's subjective Certainty : or the receivers subjective Certainty ; and in all these respects its false . For if God or the Receiver were certain that it would prove destructive , yet the Minister may give it , if demanded ; but not if he be certain of it himself . But 3.  no Minister is required to be certain of the Demanders state , or whether the Sacrament will prove to his edification or destruction , nor whether the person intent rightly in it , but he is bound to give it to a Professor of saving Faith that Demandeth it , and to intend his good in it , which yet he cannot effect , if the Receiver be unmeet . 

To the Minor I say , its true : but not of those that profess not true sanctification . The conclusion as is said , is alien : For though there can be no Giving without Receiving , yet may there be lawful Giving when it is unlawfully Demanded and Received : therefore from lawful giving upon an unlawful Demand , to a lawful Receiving , is no just consequence . 

Ad hominem , I would frame the like Argument on Mr. Blake's principles thus [ We must give the Sacrament to edification , and not certainly to destruction . But we must give it to some that have not a Dogmatical faith : therefore some that have not a Dogmatical faith , must receive it to edification , etc. ] The Major is his own : The Minor he dare not deny on his grounds : for we must give it to men that Profess a Dogmatical faith , whether they have it or not : or else we must give it to no man , because we know not the heart . The conclusion therefore is unavoidable , that according to Mr. Blake's Principles , it is the end of the Lords Supper to convert Heathens to Christ by receiving it , so they will but lie , and say they are Christians first . I profess I see no way of Mr. Blake's avoiding this , but by renouncing his dangerous Doctrine . 

The 3.  Argument is , [ The Law and the Gospel in their joint strength may convert , etc.  But in the Lord's Supper there is Law and Gospel , etc. Ergo. ] Answ. 1.  What may possibly fall out is nothing to the Question of Lawful Demanding or Giving . 2.  there 's neither Law nor Gospel in a wicked man's unjust Demand and Reception , and Lying signal professing to take Christ when he doth not : but Law and Gospel is against it . 3.  The Law and Gospel which you mention as annexed to the reception are separable : and all you can thence prove , is , that a wicked man may be converted by seeing and hearing , and therefore may see and hear : but that 's nothing to receiving . 4.  Nor will it prove that he may see and hear , because its possible he may be converted by it , because the same Gospel is in its season with due application to himself to be preached to that end ; and Christ hath not appointed his beholding the Application to another to be the commanded means for such ends . 

The 4.  Argument is from the Heart breaking use of the Sacrament by aggravating sin , etc.  Where the London Ministers are cited , etc. ) Answ. The same answer as to the last may serve . And 1.  A wicked man's Demand and reception hath no humbling use , ( but as any Lie or other sin hath ) though his Beholding may . 2.  it 's an exalting use that this humbling use prepareth for , to the Receiver : seeing therefore the wicked are uncapable at present of the exalting use , they must have that humbling word delivered by itself which they are capable of , and not conjunct with that which they are uncapable of . 3.  The London Ministers speak not of the first humiliation in the passage of the New Birth , but of subsequential , at least , as to the first Intention of the work ; and if of conversion , it is but upon supposition that unjust Demanders do intrude . 4.  By the like Argument from the signification of the signs connext with the word , ( which declare Christ crucified and risen again ) you might prove as well that it is for converting heathens . 

The 5 Argument is [ That which is annexed to the word to second it in that very thing which works the soul to conversion to God , may bring etc. ] Answ. 1.  To the Major , if it may convert , it followeth not that it may be demanded to that end . 2.  To be added [ in that very thing ] is not to be added [ to that very use . ] For the same word which confirmeth doth convert ; but the Sacrament is not added to it for the converting use ( as commanded ) but for the confirming use . To the Minor I answer by denying it as to the end . The Sacrament is not annexed to that use or end , though to that th●ng : because this is a use which the word hath without the Sacrament , and the Sacrament added to the same word is added for higher inseparable uses which the unconverted are uncapable of . it 's added to be a professing sign on our part that we take Christ and Remission of sin by him ; and a seal applicatory on christs part : And because the wicked are uncapable of these special uses , they are uncapable of a lawful receiving of the Sacrament 2.  You may as well by this Argument too , prove that it is for conversion of Infidels Jews , Turks : For the Sacrament is annexed to the word in those very things that are for their conversion . 

The 6.  Argument is from experience : To which I answer ; All the experiences which Mr. Blake mentioneth , are not only nothing for his cause , but abundantly destructive to it . Many have been unwakened by fears of receiving unworthily to their condemnation , as wicked men do : will it follow , that therefore they may receive it who are wicked and unworthy ? or that there is no such danger to them if they do : Or rather that they should not receive while they are such , and that there is danger if they do ; sure it is some danger that is the matter of their fear , & some threatening which is the ground : if it be their du●y to receive it even while they know themselves to be wicked , because it is an appointed means to their conversion , what need they so to fear it , unless they fear the means of their own good ? If they say , it is the unworthy receiving which they fear ; it 's true , but that is to receive it in state of wickedness , Impenitence and unbelief , as all the unregenerate do : surely it is the wrath of God and eternal damnation which they fear , therefore they fear lest it should fix them in that state . But your worthy communicant is in state of damnation , when only our unworthy communicant is such . Moreover will it follow , that because other men's doctrine which are against you doth put men into these fears which occasion their conversion , that therefore your doctrine which abateth such fears is sound ? 2.  Or will it follow that Receiving converteth , because the fears of unworthy Receiving do convert or conduce thereto ? surely preparations and fears of unworthy Receiving are one thing , and the wicked man's unworthy Receiving itself is another thing : The former may do much good , when the later is like to do much hurt . The thing that such fear , is , lest they should have no saving part in Christ , or pardon , or eternal life , which you confess your pretended worthy Receiver hath not at all . 

The 7.  Argument is from the Confession of eminent Divines of an opposite judgement , who will have all admitted present at the consecration , to see the bread broken and divided . ] Ans 1  Had you named those Divines , you had been the more capable of an answer . I know some that have told men of your judgement , that all their reasoning do prove no more than thus , that the seeing and hearing , and not the taking may be fit to convert . ] But I never knew any that said they [ will have all admitted present to see etc. ] 2.  But what if they had or did say so ? what 's your consequence . How prove you that therefore they should be admitted to receive ? or that receiving is a means ordained and enjoined for conversion , because seeing and hearing is ? so much for that Argument . 

My 12.  Argument is from Mat 22.12 . [ Friend , how camest thou in hither not having on a wedding garment , and he was speechless . ] To [ come in hither ] is [ To come into the Church of Christ. ] By the wedding garment is undoubtedly meant , sincerity of true faith and repentance ; so that I may hence argue ; If God will accuse and condemn men for coming into his Church or the communion of Saints , without sincere faith and repentance , than it is not the appointed use of Baptism to initiate those that profess not sincere faith and repentance . But the former is plain in the text ; Ergo , etc.  

The 13th . Argument is this : We must Baptise none at age that profess not themselves Christians ; ( nor any Infants but on such a Profession of the Parents or Pro-parents ) but they that profess only a species of faith short of Justifying faith , profess not themselves Christians . Ergo. etc.  

The Major is certain ; because it is the use of Baptism to be our solemn Listing sign into Christ's Army ; our Initiating sign , and the solemnisation of our Marriage to Christ , and Professing sign that we are Christians , and we do in it dedicate and deliver up ourselves to him in this relation as his own . So that in Baptism we do not only promise to be Christians , but profess that we are so already in heart , and now would be solemnly admitted among the number of Christians . 

The Minor I prove thus : 1.  no man is truly a Christian that is not truly a Disciple of Christ ( that 's plain , Acts 11.26 . ) no man is truly a Disciple of Christ that doth not profess a saving Faith and Repentance ( save the children of such ) : therefore no man that doth not so profess is truly a Christian. The Minor I prove thus . no man is truly a Disciple of Christ that doth not profess to forsake all contrary Masters or Teachers , and to take Christ for his chief Teacher , consenting to learn of him the way to salvation . But no man maketh this Profession that professeth not saving Faith and Repentance : therefore no man that professeth not saving Faith and Repentance is truly a Disciple of Christ. The Major is evident , in the nature of the Relation . The Minor is as evident , in that it is an Act of saving Faith and Repentance , to forsake other Teachers , and take Christ for our sole or chief Teacher in order to salvation . 

2.  no man is truly a Christian that professeth not to take Christ for his Lord and King , forsaking his Enemies : but no man doth this but the Professors of a saving faith : Ergo. etc.  

3.  no man is a true Christian that professeth not to Take Christ for his Redeemer , who hath made propitiation for sin by his Blood , and to esteem his blood as the ransom for sinners , and to trust therein : But none do this but the Professors of saving Faith : therefore none else are Christians . 

The Major of all these three Arguments is further proved , thus : no man is professedly a Christian that professeth not to Accept of Christ as Christ ( or to believe in Christ as Christ ) But no man doth profess to take Christ as Christ that professeth not to take or accept him as a Priest , Teacher and King : Ergo. etc.  

The Major is plain in itself , The Minor is as plain , it being essential to Christ to be the Priest , Prophet and King. And from these essentials related to us and accepted by us , doth our own denomination of Christians arise . And that a bare Assent without Acceptance doth not make any one a Christian , is past doubt , and shall be further spoken to anon . If Baptism then be commonly called our Christening and so be our entrance solemnly into the Christian state , than it is not to be given to them that are not Christians so much as by Profession : but that Mr. Blake's Professor of another species of Faith is no Christian so much as by Profession , I doubt not is here proved . 

And furthermore , If a Faith defective in the Assenting part , about the Essentials of its Object , serve not to denominate a man justly a Christian ; then a faith defective in the Consenting or Accepting part about the Essentials of the Object , serves not to denominate a man a Christian : But the Antecedent is true : therefore so is the Consequent . By [ Defective ] I mean not only in the matter of perfection of degree , but that wanteth the very Act itself . 

The Antecedent is proved , because else the Turks are Christians ; because they believe so many and great things of Christ ; and else a man might be a Christian that denied Christ's death , or resurrection , or other Essentials of Christianity . 

The Consequence is good : For Christianity is as truly and necessarily in the will as in the understanding ; consent is as essential an Act of covenanting as any . So that I may conclude , that as he is no Christian that professeth not to believe that Christ is the Priest , Prophet and King ; so he is no Christian that professeth not to consent and accept him for his Priest , Prophet and King : But so doth not Mr. Blake's Professor of another faith : therefore he is no Christian , nor to be baptised . 

The 14 th' . Argument is this : If we must baptise men that profess not saving faith and repentance , then is it no aggravation of such men's sins , that they either played the hypocrites in such Professions , or fell from them , or walked contrary to them . ( For no man can walk contrary to a Profession which was never made : ) But the Consequent is false , therefore so is the Antecedent . 

Our Divines ordinarily charge wicked men with contradicting of Profession which they made with God , either in Baptism or the Lord's Supper . And they expound many places of Scripture which the Arminians take as favouring their Cause , to be meant according to the Profession of wicked men . Now it seems to me , that Mr. Blake by his Doctrine doth undertake to justify all these wicked men , from this aggravation of their sin , and to take them off from repentance and humiliation for it : For if they made no such Profession in baptism ( if at age ) or in the Lord's Supper , than it can be no aggravation of their sin that they walk contrary to it : But I dare not undertake to secure them from the punishment . 

Argum. 15.  If all ( at age ) that are baptised ( and all that receive the Lords Supper ) must engage themselves to believe presently ( in the next instant ) yea or at any time hereafter , with a saving faith , then must they Profess at present a saving faith . Or , if we must baptise none that will not engage to believe savingly , then must we baptise none that will not Profess a saving faith . But the Antecedent is true : therefore so is the Consequent . 

The Antecedent is Mr. Blake's Doctrine , who affirmeth that it is not necessary that they that come to baptism or the Lord's Supper , do Profess a present saving faith , but its sufficient that they engage themselves to believe by such a faith . The Consequence is proved thus . 

1.  It is not the Beginning of saving faith which we are to engage ourselves to in the Sacraments , but the Continuance : therefore the Beginning is presupposed in that Engagement : and so we must no more baptise without a Profession of Faith in present , than without an Engagement to believe hereafter . The Antecedent is proved thus : There is no one word in Scripture , either of Precept or example , where any person in baptism or the Lord's Supper doth engage , or is required to engage ▪ to begin to believe with a saving faith , or to believe with a faith which at the present he hath not : Show but one word of Scripture to prove this , if you can ; if you cannot , I may conclude that therefore we must not require that which we have no Scripture ground to require . 

2.  This Engagement to believe savingly , is either for a remote distant time , or for the next instant : ●ut no unbeliever ( as to that faith ) is called to promise in Baptism such a saving faith , either at a distant time , or the next instant : therefore not at all . 

1.  Not at a distant time : For first , that were to resolve to serve the Devil , and be an unbeliever till that time . 2.  And no man is sure to live any longer time . 

2.  Not at the next instant : For first , that instant cometh as soon as the word of Promise is out of his mouth , even before Baptism ; and therefore by that Rule he must believe savingly before . 2.  We may as well stay one minute or instant to see whether he will perform his Promise , as to baptise him upon that bare Promise of believing the next minute . 3.  It is a ridiculous unreasonable conceit , that any man should say , [ I believe not savingly yet , but within a minute of an hour I will ; ] and that this should be required in baptism and the Lords Supper . 

3.  God makes it not the condition or qualification of them that are to be admitted to Baptism or the Lord's Supper , that they should promise to do that which they have no Moral Power to do , ( I mean , such as the seed or habit of Grace containeth , as to the act : ) But the unregenerate have no Moral Power to believe with a saving faith : Ergo , etc.  

The Major is proved thus : 1.  To promise to believe savingly , is to Profess that they are truly willing to believe savingly ; but no wicked men are truly willing so to believe : therefore they are not called to promise it ; for that were to be called to profess an untruth , and so to lie ; Unless as they are called to be really willing and promise both ; and that is but to be sincerely faithful and to promise to continue so . 2.  It is not found any where in Scripture that I know of , that God doth call any wicked man to promise to be a godly man or true believer before he is so ; but only commands him to be so . And if God never call such men to such a promise at all , then is it not the condition or qualification of persons to be admitted to the Sacraments . ( We still speak of the aged . ) 

The Minor is proved from many Scriptures , and is the common Doctrine of all Antipelagians , at least ; We are dead in trespasses and sins : and must we baptise and give the Lords Supper to such dead men upon a Promise that they will be alive ? Out of Christ we can do nothing : Without faith it is impossible to please God. It is God that giveth to will and to do of his good pleasure . And no wicked man can tell whether God will give him the grace of saving faith : therefore he cannot promise to have it . But I shall speak more to this under the last Argument . 

Argum. 16.  If there can be no example given in Scripture of any one that was baptised without the Profession of a saving faith , nor any Precept for so doing , then must not we baptise any without it . But the Antecedent is true : therefore so is the Consequent . 

What is pretended this way we shall examine anon among the Objections . In the mean time let us review the Scripture examples of Baptism , which might afford us so many several Arguments , but that I shall put them together for brevity . 1.  I have already showed that John required the Profession of true Repentance , and that his Baptism was for Remission of sin . 2.  When Christ layeth down , in the Apostolical Commission , the Nature and Order of his Apostles work , it is first to make Disciples , and then to Baptise them into the Name of the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost ; And as it is a making Disciples , which is first expressed in Matthew , so Mark expoundeth who these Disciples are ( as to the aged ) by putting Believing before Baptism : and that we may know that it is Justifying faith that he meaneth , he annexeth first Baptism , and then the Promise of salvation , Matth. 28.19 . Mar. 16.16 . [ He that believeth and is baptised , shall be saved . ] This is not like some occasional Historical mention of Baptism , but it 's the very Commission of Christ to his Apostles for Preaching and Baptism , and purposely expresseth their several works in their several places and Order . Their first task is by teaching to make Disciples , which are by Mark called Believers . The second work is to Baptise them , whereto is annexed the Promise of their Salvation . The third work is to teach them all other things which are afterwards to be learned in the School of Christ. To contemn this Order , is to renounce all Rules of Order . For where can we expect to find it , if not here ? I profess my conscience is fully satisfied from this Text , that it is one sort of faith , even saving , that must go before Baptism , and the Profession whereof the Minister must expect . Of which see what is before cited out of Calvin and Piscator . 

That it was saving faith that was required of the Jews , and professed by them , Acts 2.38 , 41 , 42. is showed already , and is plain in the Text.  

Acts 8.  The Samaritans believed , and had great joy , and were baptised into the name of Jesus Christ ver . 8 , 12.  Whereby it appeareth that it was both the understanding and will that were changed , and that it was not a mere Dogmatical faith : and that they had the Profession of a saving faith ( even Simon himself ) we shall show anon when we answer their objections . 

Acts 8.37 . The condition on which the Eunuch must be baptised was [ if he believe with all his heart ; ] which he Professed to do ; and that was the Evidence that Philip did expect . 

Paul was baptised after true conversion , Act. 9.18 . 

The Holy Ghost fell on the Gentiles , Acts 10.44 . before they were baptised , and they magnified God. And this Holy Ghost was the like gift as was given to the Apostles who believed on the Lord jesus , and it was accompanied with Repentance unto life , Act. 11.17 , 18.  

Acts 16.14.15 . Lydia's heart was opened before she was baptised , and she was one that the Apostles [ judged faithful to the Lord ] and offered to them the evidence of her faith . 

Acts 16.30 , 31 , 33 , 34.  The example of the Jailor is very full to the resolution of the question in hand . He first asketh what he should do to be saved . The Apostle answereth him , [ believe in the Lord Jesus , and thou shalt be saved and thy house : ] so that it was a saving faith that here is mentioned : He rejoiced and believed with all his house , and was baptised that same hour of the night or strait way . It is here evident that he professed the same faith which Paul required , or else the equivocation would make the text not intelligible . And that which was required was a saving faith . 

Acts 18 8.  [ Crispus the chief ruler of the Synagouge , believed on the Lord with all his house , and many of the Corinthians hearing , believed and were baptised . ] Here we have two proofs that it is saving faith that is mentioned . One , in that it is called [ a believing on the Lord , ] which expresseth saving faith . Another , in that it is the faith which related to the doctrine preached to them , as is expressed in the word [ Hearing ] that which they heard they believed : but they heard the promise as well as the History of the Gospel ; and they heard of the Goodness as well as the Truth ; and they heard Christ offered to them as their only Saviour ; for Paul never preached Christ but in this manner , and to these ends , even as might tend to their Justification , and Salvation ; and it was a saving faith that he still exhorted men to . 

Those in Acts 19.5 . were baptised as [ Believers in Jesus Christ ] which is saving faith ; whether it were by John's Baptism , or by Paul , or others , I now inquire not . 

And what all the Churches were supposed to be to whom the Apostles wrote , I have showed before . In a word , I know of no one word in Scripture that giveth us the least intimation that ever man was baptised without the Profession of a saving faith , or that giveth the least encouragement to baptise any upon another faith . 

But before we proceed , Mr. Blake's exceptions against some of these arguments from the forecited texts must come under consideration , how little soever they deserve it , pag. 166.  

To what I said from Mat. 28.29 . [ I am very sorry to hear the constitution of visible Churches to suffer the brand of making of counterfeit and half Christians ] Answ. For all that I will not be moved with pity to err because you are sorry to hear the truth . 1.  Church constitutions make not Christians , of one sort or other but contain them when made . 2.  And my arguing was to prove that every faithful Pastor must intend the making of sincere Christians , and not only sergeant or half-christians . This is a truth that so good a man should not have been sorry to hear . 3.  If you mean that visible Churches contain not sergeant and half-christians , you might have been sorry long before this to hear both protestants and Papists say the contrary . 

You add [ It's well known whose language it is , that all charging duty on unregenerate persons is only to bring them to hypocrisy . ] Answ. And if the end of that duty were no higher than to bring men to be sergeant Christians , they had not said amiss . When we hear that charge , it is for persuading men to hear , pray , etc. for sincere faith : But if I persuade men to become Christians , and mean only the Professors of faith without the thing professed , or the believing with another sort of faith , than I might well be charged with persuading some to hypocrisy , and the other to be half-christians . 2.  You have not yet proved that Baptising the Professors of a lower faith , is the appointed means to bring them to saving faith . 

You say [ In order to make men sincere Disciples they must be made visible professing Disciples ] Answ. If there be not a palpable equivocation , you must mean , that it is the same Discipleship which some have sincerely , and others but visibly by profession : and then it must be the same faith . And then you say to this effect that [ in order to make men sincere , they must profess & seem to be so before , they are so , that is , a lie is the appointed means to make the thing spoken become true ] But if according to the current of your doctrine you mean in the later branch of your distinction , those only that profess another sort of faith , and so equivocate in the word Disciples , than I answ . 1.  Your Disciples are no Disciples , nor so called once in Scripture . 2.  Nor is that any thing to baptism , till you have proved that baptism also annexed to your Discipleship , is a means appointed to bring them to a higher saving faith . 

You tell us that [ men may be half Christians in order to be whole Christians ] Answ. But not baptised to that end , nor must the Preacher intent the making of any half-christians and no more . 

What you mention out of Aims of taking stones out of the quarry , to polish , etc. is nothing to the purpose . Baptising them is not polishing them , that is , preparing them for conversion , according to the Institution ; but it 's the placing polished stones in the building : To polish them for the building , is to make them true Disciples , and not Professors of another kind of faith . P●g 168.  When I say that to be Christ's Disciples is to be one that unfeignedly takes him for his Master , etc.  You answer , that [ This is true as to the inheritance of Heaven , but not as to the ininheritance of Ordinances : The Jew outwardly was not thus qualified . ] Repl. 1  Our question is , what is a Disciple ? and what 's your answer to that , unless you distinguish of two sorts , and mean that another sort there are that inherit Ordinances ? 2.  And then I say further , some Ordinances are without the Church , and those may have them that are no Disciples ; and f●r those proper to the Church , none have right to them but who at least profess the foresaid Discipleship I wonder what your three sorts of Disciples will prove , that do not profess to take Christ for their Master . 

Next , where Mr. Blake would have proved the Text not to be meant of sound Believers , because they are such Disciples as a whole Nation is capable to be ; I answered , that whole Nations are capable of saving faith , and proved it : to which he mentioneth the capacity of stones to be made Children ; As if men had no more than stones ; And as if God could not make all in a Nation believers , by the same means us he makes some such . He turns to the question , what a Nation is capable of to [ what may be expected ] ●nd argueth as if they were capable of no more than we may eventually expect , and saith [ this that is a doctrine so clear that proof needs not ; Where there never shall be any futurity , we may well and safely speak of an incapacity ] Ans. As if omne possib●le esset futurum : and men should have every thing good or bad which they are capable of . A sad world ! when among learned Divines such sayings are : Truths that need no proofs , as if the contradictories of our Principles were become Principles . it 's added [ Capacity is vain , when it is known , & confessed that existence shall never follow . ] Answ. Hath such an assertion been usually heard among the worshippers of the Creator & the admirers of his works ? If one of those that are suspected of Heresy had said such words , what should we make of them ! Doth all Passive or Objective power , Natural , Violent or Neutral , come into act ? Doubtless no man that hath one thought of these things will say so ; if he do , he must say that God can do no more than he doth : nor any creature do more than it doth ! But if there be such a power or Capacity of a thing that shall not exist , than it is sad to hear God charged with making all such powers or Capacities in vain . He knows why he doth many things which he tells us not the reason of ; but here there is reason enough apparent , to cause us to give God better words . 

I asked whether Preachers be not bound to endeavour the saving conversion of whole Nations ? He answereth [ I think they are to bring them , if Heathen , to a visible Profession , and as many as they can to thorow-conversion . ] Repl. 1  This is no answer to my question ; unless it import a concession of what was denied . Must men endeavour to convert a whole Nation , or not ? 2.  If we must endeavour to convert no more than we can convert , than we must know the success before we endeavour which cannot be ; and must endeavour to convert no more than will be converted , which is worse than false 3.  I will not endeavour to persuade any man to Profess to be what he is not , or to have what he hath not , or to do what he doth not . 

He next noteth it as a remarkable contradiction in adjecto , that I say , ( Vocation uneffectual is common to Pagans' ) saying , that [ Calling in Scripture Phrase is not a bar● tender , but accompanied with a professed answer . ] Repl. This is like much of the rest . Let these Texts be judge , prov. 1.24 . ( Because I have called and ye refused , I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded , but ye have set at naught all my counsel , etc. ) so Isa. 65.12 When I called ye did not answer , when I spoke ye did not hear , etc. so Isa. 50 2.  & 66.4 . and Jer. 7.13 . & 35.17 . Mat. 22.3 , 5.  He sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden , etc.  But they made light of it , etc. ] I shall recite no more . It hath not been thought a contradiction by protestants or Papists that I know of , till now , to talk of [ uneffectual calling ] So much of Mat. 28.19 . 

To what I said from Mar. 16.16 . little that needs a Reply is answered . He saith [ If I will contend for an exact order , than he must say that faith always preceds and never follows after Baptism ] Repl. In reason we must distinguish between a precedency of prescribed duty , and of event , and not seek to blind the Reader ( as you speak ) by confusion . There is constantly this order in the prescribed duty that no man should seek Baptism but a true believer , for himself and his seed ; and no man should baptise any but those that profess this true belief , and their seed . This is the fixed order of duty . But what then ? will it follow that eventually faith never followeth baptism , nor baptism never goeth before faith ? Yes , when you can prove that man never sinneth , by omitting his duty , and that God never recovereth a sinner by his Grace . 

You add [ And then he may preach in England to build up converts , but not to convert ] Repl. True , if there be none in England that neglected that faith which God commanded before , nor received baptism in a case which is unmeet for it , nor any that were baptised in infancy when they were uncapable of believing . As to your frequent objection of the Nullity of such baptism , I shall Dorid it anon , in its proper place . 

His concession in terms from 1 Pet. 3.21 . he retracteth by an exposition of his words as spoken Rhetorically , and thinks that only one that ever read Rhetoric may know his sense ; when there is such a Wood of Tropes and Schems that such Novices may sooner be lost in them , then hunt on 't the sense of every Rhetorician . The proper sense , he takes to be [ an egregious piece of affected nonsense ] for than it were true that [ justifying faith is a promise ] Repl. It only follows that justifying faith is not only an Assent , but the wills consent to the covenant of grace , or that Christ be ours and we his ; and this is heart-covenanting ; and that the external verbal promising or covenanting with God , is the profession of this faith . And it is not my fault if I be put to tell you , that as long as you are such a stranger to the nature of justifying faith , as many such dark , though confident passages in your books do import , your Arguing will want salt , if not sense . I know this is like to displease : But what remedy ? 

To the Text. Act. 8.37 . he answereth pag. 176 [ that indeed he never met with any thing either in Scripture or Reason produced , th●t carries with him so much as any colour for it , this excepted . ] Repl. This is not my first Observation , that confidence is not always a sign of a true judgement ; and the seeing of no difficulties before us , proves us not to know more than other men . His particular answers are , [ 1.  Philip. may call for that de bene esse when the Eunuch was to be admitted , which was not yet essential to his admittance . ] Repl. 1  it 's strange that when we are disputing what is of a necessity to a just admittance , that we must turn to dispute of the Essentials of an admittance . I never thought that any thing but admittance was essential to admittance : but there are many things since quibus non licet . 2.  Philip is determining a question , and giveth this in as the decision , [ If thou believe with all thy heart thou mayest . ] And to say that this is but de bene esse , meaning that it includeth not the Negative , [ otherwise thou mayest not , ] is to make Philip to have deluded and not decided or resolved . Use the like liberty in expounding all other Scripture , and you 'll make it what you please . The second Answer is , that [ Dogmatical faith is truly a Divine faith . ] Repl. But not the Christian Faith , nor anywhere alone denominateth men Believers in Scripture : I remember but one Text , John 12.42 . where it is called Believing on Christ ; and but few more where it is simply called Believing : but none where such are called Believers , Disciples , or Christians , or any thing that intimateth them admitted into the visible Church , without the Profession of saving faith added to this Assent . The rest which he here addeth , we shall take in , when we come purposely to speak of that subject . 

I conclude , That all examples of baptism in Scripture do mention only the administration of it to the Professors of saving faith : and the precepts give us no other direction . And I provoke Mr. Blake ( as far as is seemly for me to do ) to name one precept or example for baptising any other , and make it good , if he can . 

Argum. 17. is from 1.  Pet. 3.21 . [ I be like figure whereto even Baptism doth also now save us : not the putting away the filth of the flesh , but the answer of a good conscience toward God. [ Whence I thus argue ; If Baptism be appointed for out solemn admission into a state of salvation , as Noah's Ark received men into a state of safety from the deluge , than none should be baptised but those that profess that saith which entereth them into a state of salvation . But the former is true : therefore so is the later . 

1.  Here it is employed plainly that this is quoad finem Instituentis , the common appointed use of Baptism , which the Text mentioneth , though eventually it prove not the common effect , through the error of the Receivers . And this appeareth , 1.  In that it was spoken plainly in the Text of the very Nature and appointed use of Baptism , and so of Baptism as Baptism , without any Exception , Limitation or Distinction . Therefore it is not spoken of any different use that it is appointed for , to the Elect , as distinct from its common use to others . it 's spoken of that signification and common use to which Baptism is appointed ; viz. to save : Else we shall never be able to understand the use of it or any Ordinance from Scripture , if we shall take liberty to say , [ It is this to one , but not to another ; ] when the Scripture saith no such thing , but speaks of the nature and use of it without distinction . Else when it saith , [ Circumcision is a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. ] we may lay with the Anabaptiss , It was so to Abraham , but not to all others . ] And when the Lords supper is said to be appointed for the remembrance of Christ , ] we may say , that 's but to some , and not to others , when as the Text plainly speaks of the stated use of the Ordinances to all . 2.  And in the type its clear : for it was not some only but all that entered Noah's Ark that entered into a state of salvation from the deluge : therefore so it is here , as to the commanded use . 

2.  When Baptism is said to save us , it 's plainly meant of the state of salvation that Baptism entereth us into ; and not of Baptism ex ●pere operato , effecting our salvation : And so Baptism comprehendeth the state into which we are solemnly by it initiated . As a woman that is married to an honourable man , or a Soldier listed under an honourable Commander , is said to be honoured , the one by marriage the other by listing : Where antecedent consent is the great foundation on both sides of the honourable relations , and the subsequent state is the condition or state itself which is honourable : but the solemn signification is but the expression of the former , and passage to the latter . 

3.  Hereby its apparent , that though the answer of a Good conscience be the principal thing intended and that saveth , yet the external Baptism is here included as the sign and solemnisation ; so that when the Apostle saith , ( Not the putting away the filth of the flesh , ) he means ( not the bare outward act of washing alone or as such , ) but baptism as it is entire , having the thing professed on our part , together with the professing sign . 

4.  It is therefore but by way of signification , obsignation , and complimental exhibition , that Baptism saveth , it being neither the first or principal efficient or condition of it ; But is valid as it is conjunct with the principal causes and condition , for the attainment of these ends . 

5.  It is not a mere remote means leading towards a state of salvation , that Baptism is here affirmed to be : but an entrance , or means of entrance into that state of salvation itself . As the heart covenant or Faith doth it principally , so Baptism signally and complementally . This is plain ; 1.  Because it is not said to help us towards a state of salvation , but expressly to save . 2.  Because the Type which is here mentioned , viz. The Ark , was such a means , that all that entered into it for preservation from the Flood , were actually saved from it . All this laid together , doth confirm both the Antecedent and Consequence of my Argument . 

Calvin on the Text saith , [ Hoc in baptismo liquidò apparet , ubi Christo consepelimur , ut mundo & carni mortui , Deo vivamus ; — ergo sicut No vitam adeptus est per mortem quum in Arcâ non secus atque in sepulcro inclusus fuit , & toto mundo pereunte , servatus fuit cum exigua familia : sic hodic Mortificatio quae in Baptismo figuratur nobis ingressus est in vitam ; nec salus speranda est , nisi à mundo simus segregati . — Poterat quispiam objicere , baptismo No nostrum esse long dissimilem , quia plerosque hodie baptizari contingat . Respondet autem , Non sussicere externum symbolum , nisi verè & efficaciter baptismum suscipiant . ] ( mark verè ) Atqui ejus veritas in paucis reperietur . — And lest you should think that Calvin takes it for a means towards a state of salvation , and not the solemn entrance into it , mark what follows , [ Nec hic docere voluit Petrus inane & inefficax esse Christi institutum , ( that is , as to salvation ) sed tantum excludere hypocritas à spe salutis , qui Baptismum quantum in se est dep●avant ac corrumpunt . ] Mark here , that no Baptised men are excluded from salvation but Hypocrites . 2.  That they that are excluded from salvation for all their Baptism , are such as did deprave and corrupt it , and not justly use it . I conclude my sentence in his following words ; [ Quid ergò agendum est ? Nè separemus quae à Domino conjuncta sunt . Debemus in baptismo agnoscere spirituale lavacrum : debemus illìc testimonium remissi●nis peccatorum & renovationis nostrae pignus amplecti : sic tamen relinquere & Christo & Spiritui sancto suum honorem , etc. — His verbis docet Baptismum praecipuâ sui parte spiritualem esse : deinde peccatorum remissionem & reformationem veteris hominis in se complecti . ] 

Beza in loc . [ Hoc loco B●ptismus dicitur 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ejus liberationis qua contigit ecclesiae in diluvio . Name & haec liberatio & Baeptismus adumbrant ecclesiae sanct sicationem & emerfionem à peccati & mortis gurgite . ] 

Yet another Argument may hence be raised thus : 

Argum. 2.  If according to the Institution the Answer of a good Conscience must be joined with Baptism for the attaining of its end , then must we admit none that profess not that answer of a good conscience . But the former is certain from the Text : For Baptism is said to save ; that 's its appointed use : yet not the external washing , but the answer of a good conscience doth it therefore this is of necessary conjunction ; and without it Baptism cannot attain its end : But it is to be administered & received only in order to the attainment of its end , and therefore never in a way by which the end is apparently not attainable . 

What this answer of a good conscience is , we shall further inquire anon . Both the common expositions fully confirm the point which I maintain . The Assemblies Annot. recite both thus ; [ Hence by the answer of a good conscience we may understand that unfeigned faith , whereof they made confession at their Baptism , and whereby their consciences were purified , and whereby they received the remission of their sins etc.  Some understand by the Answer of a good Conscience , that Covenant whereinto they entered at their Baptism , the embracing whereof they testified by their unfeigned confession of their Faith ] viz. such a Faith as is aforesaid : so that I conclude that this Text doth plainly show that Baptm is for the saving of the Baptised as to the instituted use , and may not be used merely to any lower ends then to put them into a present state of Salvation . 

A●gum . 18.  no one may be admitted to Baptism , who may not be admitted a Member of the Church of Christ. no one may be admitted to be a Member of the Church of Christ without the profession of a saving faith ( by himself or Parents , or Proparents ) therefore no one may be admitted to Baptism without the profession of a saving faith . 

I speak of such admission to Church-membership as is in the power of the Ministers of Christ , who have the Keys of his Kingdom to open and let in , as well as to cast out . 

The Major is past question , because Baptism is our solemn entrance into the Church , who were before entered by private consent , and Accepted by the Covenant of God.  

All the question is of the Minor , which I shall therefore prove . 

1.  It is before proved that all the Members of the Church must be such as are visibly , solemnly , or by profession , sanctified from former sin , cleansed , justified persons of God , the Heirs of the Promise , etc.  But this cannot be without the profession of a saving faith , Ergo , etc.  

2.  This also is before proved , where it was showed that no others are Christians , or Disciples . 

3.  In Acts 2.41 , 42 , etc.  The many thousands were added to the Church , were such as received gladly the doctrine of saving Faith and Repentance , and continued in the Apostles doctrine , and fellowship , and breaking of bread and Prayer : and so far contemned the world as to fallen all , and make it common : And doubtless no man continued in those ways , ( of doctrine , fellowship , prayer , etc. ) without the profession of saving Faith & Repentance ; for the very use of these is such a profession . Of which saith Calvin in Act. 2.42 . [ Quaerimus ergò veram Christi ecclesiam : Hìc nobis ad vivum depictum est ejus Imago : Ac initium quidem facit à doctrinâ quae veluti ecclesiae anima est ) not as barely heard , but as professed or Received ) Nec quamlibet doctrinam nominat , sed Apostolorum ; hoc est quam per ipsorum manus filius Dei tradiderat : Ergo ubicunque personat pura vox Evangelii , ubi in ejus professione manent homines , ubi in ordinario ejus auditu ad profectum se exercent , illic indubiè est Ecclesia , etc.  Quare non temere haec quatuor rece●set Lucas , quum describere vult nobis ritè constitutum ecclesiae statum . Et nos ad hunc ordinem eniti convenit , si cupimus verè censeri Ecclesia coram Deo & Angelis , non inane tantum ejus nomen apud homines jactare . ] And ver . 47.  It is said that the Lord added daily to the Church such as should be saved . ] Obj. It saith not that all shall be saved that are added to the Church . Answ. But it describeth them that were added to the Church , viz. that were such as should be saved ; or as Beza yielded to another reading ( and so Grotius and many others , ) such as saved themselves from that untoward Generation , [ quisese quotidie servandos recipiebant in Ecclesiam . ] 

The Church is the Body of Christ , Col. 1.18 , 24. and none are members of his Body , but such as either are united to him , and live by him , or at least seem to do so . The Church is subject to Christ , and beloved of Christ , and cherished by him ; we are members of his body , of his flesh , and of his bones , Ephe. 5.24 25 , 30.  And those that are against the General Redemption , me thinks should be moved with the consideration , that it is the Church that Christ gave himself for ; even the visible Church which he purchased with his own blood , Act. 20.28 . Ephe. 5.25 . and he is the Saviour of his body , ver . 23.  But so he is not effectively the Saviour of the Professors of a Faith that doth not justify : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 he is the effective Saviour of those that profess a Justifying faith , and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 of the sincere : but of others , neither way . Hitherto Divines have gathered from the plain texts of Scripture , that there is but One Church , One Faith , and One Baptism : and that those that had this Faith really , were to be baptised , and were real members of the Church ; and that those that professed this faith , and so seemed to have it when they have it not , are visible members of the Church , and are so taken because their Profession is sensible to us , and by that they seem to have the thing professed . But the Opponents are fallen into a new conceit in all these . 

1.  They feign a New Christian faith to themselves , viz. A faith that is short of Justifying ; which Scripture and the Church of God have taken to be but a preparatory to the Christian faith subjectively , or but a common part of it objectively considered : so that before there was but one Christian faith , and now they have made two . 2.  And so before , there was but one sort of real serious or sincere Christians , consisting of such as had that real Christian faith : and now they have found out another sort of them , that hold another sort of faith . 3.  So have they feigned a new Baptism ; for the Old Baptism was for Remission of sin , and Burial and Resurrection wi●h Jesus Christ , and to engraff men into the Church which is the body of Christ , upon the profession of a saving faith : but the new feigned ends of Baptism are far different . 4.  And they have feigned also a new kind of Church : For the Church of Christ's constitution is but one , which is called visible from men's Profession , and invisible from the faith professed . But they have made a Church which consisteth of a third sort of members : that is , of men that neither have saving faith , nor profess it , but only have or profess to have a faith of a lower orb . 5.  To this end they have confounded the Church and the Porch , the Vineyard and the adjacent part of the Wilderness : those that heretofore were but Catechumeni or men in preparation for the Church , are now brought into it : and are annumerated to true Christians , before they once profess themselves such , and that upon a lower profession . 6 And hereby also the two sorts of Teaching are confounded , which Christ distinguisheth , Mat. 28.19 , 20.  That teaching which draweth men to Christ , and maketh them Disciples , and that which instructeth them when they are his Disciples ; that which persuadeth them to receive Christ Jesus the Lord , and that which persuadeth them accordingly to walk in him . For they take him for a Disciple , that is but learning to be a Disciple , merely because he submitteth to learn , and hath learned before some preparatory truths ; though yet he be not made a Disciple indeed , nor profess so to be . 

Mr. Blake is deeply offended with me , for saying that Hypocrites that seem not only to be found Believers , and profess a Justifying faith , when they have it not , are only equivocally or analogically Christians or members of the Church , etc.  But I shall say somewhat more concerning those Believers that are described by him , who do not so much as profess a saving faith , viz. that they are no members of the Church at all ( if notorious , ) and are not so much as to be named Christians , nor to be admitted into the visible Church . no man can prove that ever one man was admitted a Church-member in all the New Testament , upon the Profession of any lower kind of faith , than that which is the condition of Justification . Otherwise we should have two distinct Churches specifically different , or two sorts of Christianity and Christians differing totâ specie : because the faith which is here made their qualification , doth specifically differ by a moral specification . When the Jailor , Act. 16 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34. was admitted into the Church by Baptism , with his household , it was upon the Professing of such a believing , by which both he and his household might be saved , as is before showed . And so of all others in those times . 

Argum. 19  If we once admit men to baptism or the Lord's Supper upon the Profession of any other than Justifying faith , we shall be utterly confounded , and not be able to give any satisfactory Description of that Faith , and so never be able to Practise our Doctrine , as being utterly uncertain whom to baptise . 

That I may the better manifest this , I shall examine all the considerable Descriptions of that faith which I can meet with . The Papists themselves are not agreed in this business : sometime they speak as if a bare Assent would serve the turn ; but commonly they add that there is a Necessity also of consent , 1.  To be subject to the Church . 2.  To live under the Ordinances . And if they take the Intention of the party or Parents ; or their Godfathers and Godmothers to be necessary , as they do the Intention of the Priest , than a bare Profession with them will not serve , nor can they tell when any one is baptised . 

Mr. Blake doth speak so much , and purposely of this Point , that one would think we may expect an exact Description of this faith from him , if from any man : especially in his last Book , when I had so earnestly Entreated him before to do it , because of the omission of it in his former Book : And yet even in this hath he done nothing but involve and obscure his meaning more than before : though I had purposely urged him to a plain discovery of his sense , even somewhat beyond the bounds of modesty , as it is esteemed of in common cases : For I perceived that the stress of our differences did rest much in this ; because no wise man will leave his grounds till he see where he may have better ; unless he mean to be for nothing , or of no Religion : there 's no reason a man should upon every opposed difficulty relinquish that he hath . 

And here , that I may do Mr. Blake no wrong , I shall cite his mind in his own words , and gather as many of his disclosures of it as I can find . 

For what he hath said in his Book of the Covenants , I have spoken to it already in my Apology . And I write nor for those lazy Readers that had rather err than be at the pains of reading what is already written : I shall therefore suppose that , and gather what he saith in his Treatise of the Sacraments : 

Pag. 109. he saith [ I confess as much of Repentance in them as was required in any to the acceptation of Baptism : namely , A Renunciation of their false way , and a professed Acceptation of the tender of the Gospel . ] And after [ to renounce his way of Paganism , Judaisme , and to profess and engage to a Christian faith & conversation . ] Here I understand not Mr. Blake's english , if he do not plainly renounce his cause , and say the same that I do , and so make vain his industrious opposition . The tender of the Gospel is the tender of Christ , and pardon and life to all true Acceptors of it . If the professed Acceptation of this tender be not [ professed saving faith ] beyond all common faith , I must despair of knowing what faith is , and consequently being sure that I have it , and that I may be saved by it . And if professing a true Christian faith and conversation , and engaging thereto ] be not a professing of that which is proper to the sanctified . ( I mean in the special sense ) then Mr. Blake hath made a new Christian Faith and Conversation which Scripture never prescribed nor described . 

Pag. 172.  He gives another , but the most express answer , which is likest to be his mind [ For a direct answer , I say , it it not profession to say we have this faith , but a profession of our assent to the necessity of it , with engagement to it that gives this little , so P. 173.  [ I say & do profess of those that have those secret reservations wrapped up in their breasts , & not yet from under the power of lusts , yet convinced of their duty , and acknowledging the Necessity , that it is the mind of God that they should be Baptised and have admission to Ordinances , in order to bring them more sincerely and unreservedly to God. And this being the will of God , as you seem to yield when you say , we are bound to Baptise them : I say they have right in the sight of God to Baptism . ] I shall begin my Reply with his last passage ; and I must needs say that Mr. Blake doth unworthily abuse me and my words , in saying that [ I seem to yield that we are bound to baptise them . ] Them ! What them ? My own words which he citeth to prove this by me , are these [ Vocation , which is effectual only to bring men to an outward Profession of saving faith , is larger than Election , that makes men such whom we are bound to baptise ] Forsooth in these words I contradict myself ; I seem to give Mr. Blake the cause . I cannot but say , that it is pity the Church should be troubled with such an undigested undistinguishing management of controversies , for men to write so learnedly , and industriously , before they observe what they say . Is the outward Profession of a saving faith , ( which I say makes men such as we are bound to baptise ) the same thing with [ the Profession of a common faith , short of saving , or with that common faith itself ? ] What should a man say to such a confuter , but advice him to join with us his weak brethren , in desiring God to pardon us for such troubling and abusing the Church ? 

1.  As to his Description of the persons to be Baptised , I shall add , 1.  That his last Description , pag. 173. containeth nothing but what may stand with , First , an open refusal of God and Christ. 2.  And that which is commonly taken for the sin against the Holy Ghost . For its past doubt that men may both be convinced of Duty , and confess the Necessity of it , and yet may openly profess , that the world and their lusts are yet so dear to them that they will not yet have God to be their God , & Christ to be their Saviour , on the Gospel terms . And I think a man that openly refuseth Christ at the present , should not be baptised at the present , though [ he be convinced of Duty , and acknowledge the necessity of it ] . 

As to his other Description , pag. 172. the word [ Engagement to it ] either signifieth [ an engagement savingly to believe from that very instant forward ] and this doth Necessarily import a present Profession of consent , and so of present saving faith : For man can so engage that doth not Profess such consent and believe : And this destroyeth Mr. Blakes cause . Or else it signifieth such an engagement to believe for some distant future time , which is consistent with a non-profession of present consent to have Christ as offered . And this is the same with that before confuted ; If such may be Baptised , than they may say [ we are convinced that we must savingly believe in Christ , and we do engage ourselves to do it , as soon as we can spare the world and forsake the Flesh and the Devil ; but yet we cannot , and will not do this . ] Baptise such who dare for me . 

But for a further search of Mr. Blakes mind , observe his words , pag. 175.  Where he answers to what I now object . And first he citeth these words of mine [ Where you say that an acknowledgement of the Necessity of such faith , with engagement to it , is sufficient for a Title to the state . I reply . then those that at present renounce Christ , so it be against their knowledge and Conscience , and will engage to own him sincerely for the future have a Title to Baptism ] To which he replieth [ How comes I pray you that [ future in ? you manifest much reading in the Law : and I have heard this as a Maxim , In obligationibus ubi nullus certus statuitur dies , quovis die debetur ; There is no day overtaken , but engagement is for present , etc. ] 

To this I rejoine ; 1.  It is the first time that ever I heard of an engagement that was not the futuro as to the performance . We are agreed that the Engagement is present ; but the question is whether it be to a present or future performance . And it is by Covenant or promise that Mr. Blake supposeth this engagement made . And is there any which is not the futuro ? If the Church cannot hit the Right way of Baptising till such elucidations as these direct them to it — If you promise to believe de praesenti , either you do at that present believe , or you do not . If you do , your Promise as to that present act which you already perform , is vain : as if I promise to give you that which I have given you already , or in that instant give you ; which were no promise , but a donation or profession : If you do not then believe , than your promise ( as you call it ) is a falsehood ▪ And to tell a lie , is no such a duty as can give right to Baptism . no man should say , he believeth , when he doth not . 2.  But if it may be he means not futurum remotius ] but [ futurum proximum . ] That cannot well be neither , because he saith [ the engagement is for present . ] But suppose he do mean by [ present ] the futurum proximum , either this importeth a profession of saving faith , as well as an engagement to believe the next instant , or it doth not . If it do , I have the thing I seek , and Mr. Blakes cause is given away . If not , than Mr. Blake doth feign God to require such a kind of promise or engagement as our titile to baptism , which I believe the common vote of reason will pronounce to be vain , ridiculous , if not impossible by most . Vain it must needs be to make so solemn a promise of performing that in the next instant , which he may actually perform , & save all that ado . Should I cause covenants to be solemnly drawn up , and witnesses called , and seals affixed , that I will give such a thing in the next Minute after the sealing ; why then may I not as well give the thing itself ? The Minister may stay one minute longer before he go to Church to baptise the person , or he may use one word or two more in prayer and exhortation ; and by that time the instant would be come . And Ridiculous it seems to me , that any man should be admitted upon such a promise as this [ I will not yet leave my sin for God , nor renounce the world the Flesh and the Devil for Christ , or take him for my only Lord and Saviour : but I engage myself to do it , or I will do it as soon as the word is out of my mouth ] or [ I am not yet willing to have Christ as he is offered : but I will be willing the next instant . ] If any say so to me , I will hold my hand from baptising one minute , and ask him whether now he be willing ? For certainly the man must break his promise between the making and the sealing of it , if he be not a sound Believer already . For there must go more than one instant between his promise and the Act of baptising ( unless we had greater velocity of action ) : If therefore Mr. Blake's professor shall say , I promise to believe savingly the next instant [ then if he do not , the promise is broke before it is sealed : If he do ; I know no reason but why I may require him to profess that which he hath . 

And is it not a kind of impossibility for any unregenerate man , rationally and soberly to promise to be regenerate the next minute or instant ? Or for any that is destitute of saving faith , to promise to believe savingly the next instant : If he hath grace of such command and can believe the next moment , why not now ? And doth not that man show his heart unfound , that can believe the next moment , and will not do it at the present ? If it be so in his power , let him not stand promising , but do it . 

But perhaps some will say that Mr. Blake meaneth not the next instant or hour , or day , or any determinate time , but only an indeterminate time : some time hereafter . To which I answer 1.  He expresseth himself by the terms [ present ] and [ quovis die debetur : ] therefore it expressly includeth the next instant or day determinately . 2.  And if it were otherwise , either there is some future determinate time of the Debt and Obligation , or none . If none , it 's no covenant or Promise : and then it cannot be said quovis die debetur . If any , what is it ? and when ? then a Promise to be a Christian , so long hence may give right to Baptism : And who can tell how long it must be ? If any time before death , than thousands of Infidels , or persecutors of Christianity may say , [ We will be Christians before we die , and therefore will be baptised , though now we hate them for crossing us in our courses . ] But this cannot be Mr. Blakes meaning , for he speaks of a determinate time de [ praesenti ] & [ quovis die debetur . ] And it is not debitum ex praecepto that he speaks of , ( for that lieth upon Infidels , ) but ex promissione ; and therefore if quovis die debetur , then proximo die debetur ; and if proximo die , than also proximo instanti ; for none can show a reason why its due to morrow and not to day , or the next moment : and if proximo instanti , vel hora vel die , than the Promise was made for the next instant , hour or day , or else the Obligation could not have arisen from that Promise as to that time . 

But faith Mr. Blake [ bring me a man that in his heart is convinced that Jesus is the Christ , with his mouth professeth him , and engageth for him , and in the mean space actually renounceth him , and I will do what you would have me with him ; that is , a man that is falling headlong down a ladder , at the same instant he is climbing up it ] . To which I say , 1.  If you mean an Absolute Renouncing him , or for the same time when he determineth to begin his Accepting of him , I confess it were a contradiction : but of your own feigning , and nothing to our business . 2.  And therefore if you suppose the man to promise to believe savingly the next minute , than I confess it will not stand with a future Renouncing him : But than it is as true , that such a promise containeth , importeth , or supposeth a present profession of saving faith , or it is absurd and vain , as is aforesaid . 3.  But if it be a promise to believe only at such a distance of futurity , than it not only may stand with a renouncing Christ till that time come , but seemeth to imply that so it is , if you suppose faith to be so far in the unregenerate man's power that he can make such promises of it . I told you before ( which made you angry ) where a renouncing of Christ did stand with your two first qualifications , Conviction , and Verbal acknowledgement , viz. Mat. 21.38 . This is the Heir ; come let us kill him , and seize on the Inheritance . ] And for your lust of Engaging to him ( such an Engagement as you describe , to believe savingly ) as I have said , if it be to believe at present , it is inseparable from a profession of saving faith . If only to believe at such a distant time , it is possible to renounce all actual union and special communion with him till that time , and to say , I will not have Christ as offered till such a time , or till I can better spare my lusts ; can you show us here such contradictory work as your tumbler is supposed to make . 

Again , in Pag. 176. he reciteth the like , [ Our profession qualifying for Baptism is not a profession that we have such faith ( which cannot be done without an eminence of faith to assurance ; ) but a profession of the necessity of it to salvation , & an engagement to it . ] 

To which I say , 1.  For your reason in the Parenthesis , we shall silence it anon . 2.  Again : One that openly refuseth Christ at present , may profess that necessity of Faith , and engage to it for the future at a distance , that is , to be a Christian so long hence . But he that promises it the next instant , if soberly , doth profess it at this instant ; For he professeth his consent or willingness to have Christ as offered , which is saving Faith. For no man breathing can say ( with any such credibility as a sober man should regard ) I will be willing or consent the next moment or hour ; but he that is willing and doth consent or professeth so to do at this present when he saith so . 

Again , p. 177. he saith to the citation of the foresaid Text , [ I am sorry that such things should be mentioned where enquiry after truth is contended , and contention not studied . It is well known that I speak to a faith of profession , which is theirs that take so that party which is for that Christ , and not with those that professedly go in a full opposition against him , and are in a high road ( any such conviction of spirit supposed of sin , against the Holy Ghost . ] Ans. It is your expressed opinion that I argue against , and not your heart , nor any thing that is well known , by other means and to other men . If the faith or profession which you make a sufficient Title to Baptism , be consistent with such persecution or sin against the Holy Ghost ( as you speak ) than it behoved me to manifest the consistency , though it make you sorry ; I do it to show the face of your doctrine and not otherwise to contend & your sorrow is but a sorry defence . 2.  What you do mean by [ a faith of Profession ] ? This was not in the former descriptions which I examined or met with . Do you put the wrong end forward , and indeed mean [ a profession of faith [ or ] a faith conjunct with a profession ] ? If not I know not what you mean. If you do , than what profession is it , and of what faith ? Not of a saving faith ; for that you before disclaimed ; and if that were it that you mean must be professed , you yield the Cause . It is therefore the profession of some common faith ; and that is it which you call Dogmatical . And if it be indeed a profession of a mere Dogmatical faith , or Assent , it is consistent with that renouncing Christ which I mentioned , and is no more than theirs [ This is the Heir ; come let us kill him ] . But if it be more than Dogmatical , and have the Wills consent , why will no entreaty prevail with you to describe it , and tell us what it is that is consented to ? and so prove that to you to be the title to Baptism and the Lord's Supper ? In part or in whole ; I know not whether , you tell me of their consent in the next words , [ They take to that party which is for Christ and not with those that professedly go in a full opposition against him . ] But I dare not say that now I have all your sense . 1.  Where do you find in Scripture that such a faith is the Title to Sacraments ? or that ever man was admitted to them upon such a profession ? 2.  If they may be so admitted , then let us see the consequence . By [ taking to that party which is for Christ , ] either you mean , 1.  That they profess themselves to be of those that are sincerely Christians : or 2.  That they profess themselves willing to be under Church Rulers and Ordinances ( as Bellarmine speaks ; ) or 3.  That they will take part with Christians , in pleading , defending , etc.  If the first be your meaning , than they profess themselves true Christians , and so to have saving faith . For there is but two sorts of Christians ; Those that are really so , having saving faith : and those that are Analogically Christians , professing saving faith , when they have it not . 2.  If you mean the second with the Papists , then consider that it is not into the Pope , nor Church Rulers , nor Ordinances that we are baptised , but into the name of the Father , Son and Holy Ghost . And suppose that a man truly understand on what terms Christ is offered in the Gospel , that man may say [ I am content to be in the Church under teaching , and to receive the Sacraments , and to accompany Christians and fight for them ; but yet I will not yet be a Christian myself ; For I am not willing that Christ should sanctify me , and save me from my sins . [ Andrea who that dependeth on the mouth of Christ would baptise this man ? It is no more than belongeth to a Seeker or a Catechumne to be willing to hear . And God never made it a Title to Sacraments , merely to be willing to receive them . Else all may receive them that william At least , I must profess that I can hardly believe , but that all that will receive them , must profess that they receive them to the ends which they are appointed to . And that no man can do , that doth not eodem actu profess himself a true believer . If the third be your sense , than no doubt but many Christians in the indies have had Moors and Indian servants , who were willing to associate with Christians , and loved them , and would live and die with them , that yet were no Christians themselves . 

But the fullest declaration of Mr. Blake's mind I find pag. 147. upon my earnest provocation of him to describe that faith which entitleth to Baptism . The words are these : [ Seeing Mr. Baxter calls upon me to declare myself further in this thing , I do believe and profess to hold that he that upon hearing the Gospel preached , and the truth of it published and opened , shall professedly abjure all other opposite ways whatsoever , and choose the Christian way for salvation , promising to follow the Rules of it , is to be baptised , and his seed , etc. ] To which I reply : If this be not a profession of saving faith , I despair of ever being saved . 1.  no man but a sanctified man can truly desire salvation itself , as it is indeed consisting in the blessed fruition of God in Intuition , Love , Praise ; and there is no other salvation . no man but the Regenerate can truly renounce all opposite ways . One opposite way is the way of the flesh and carnal reason , and the way of worldliness , etc.  no man can live out of action ; nor out of moral action which tendeth to an end , and that end is his own felicity . He therefore that renounceth all other ways , must turn to Christ the only way : or else cut his own throat , or some way murder himself that he may cease action : or else must attain to a perfect desperation . 3.  no man but the Regenerate doth heartily choose the Christian way for salvation . For what is that but to choose Christ for salvation ? and what is that but ( supposing assent ) the true description of saving faith ? 4.  no man but the Regenerate can sincerely follow , or resolve and promise to follow the Rules of that way . For what is that but to follow the rules of Christ and Scripture ? And what is that but sincerely to obey ? So that he that professeth these four Points , or any one of them , doth profess that which is proper to the regenerate . So that if Mr. Blake do not here give up his Cause , and say as I do , understand English that can for me . If Mr. Blake dare adjudge all those to damnation that go not further than this faith which he here describeth to be professed , ( as he must if he suppose this to be the profession of a faith short of saving ) he shall never have my vote in approbation of his censure . If those who perform that which is here said to be professed , be not saved , I know not who william Therefore I doubt not but it is the profession of a saving faith . 

But what need we make any further enquiry , or dispute against a man that professedly yields the cause ? Hear his foregoing words , pag. 147. [ His two first Arguments drawn from authority , the first of the Assembly of Divines , and others of a number of Fathers , are brought to prove that the profession of a justifying faith is required to Baptism : And what is that to me , who never denied it , but in plain words have often affirmed it ? It sufficiently employed where I require a Dogmatical faith to Baptism . A Dogmatical faith assents to that of Apollo's , Jesus is the Christ ; and when I say that this entitles , I cannot mean concealed or denied , but openly professed : ] Reader canst thou tell what to make of this ? is not here a plain concession , that a profession of justifying faith is requisite to Baptism ? and doth he not aver that he never denied it ? Perhaps we have disputed all this while without an adversary ; as to Mr. Blake let it be so : and let us see the truth prevail , and I shall not be industrious to prove to Mr. Blake that he hath said the contrary . But yet me thinks its a marvellous thing that a man should so frequently express his mind against the necessity of the presence & profession of a justifying faith , as to Baptism , and for the sufficiency of a faith short of justifying , and the profession thereof , as a title to that Ordinance , and now say that he never denied the Profession of a justifying faith to Baptism , but in plain words hath oft affirmed it . Read the words that I before cited out of him : read both his books and see how much of the scope of them is this way . And let the Reader when he hath done , tell us if he can , what Mr. Blake talked for . By the words an English man would think that he had at large argued for the sufficiency of a faith short of justifying , in re & professione , as to entitle to Baptism . But here he seems most expressly to deny it . I say , he seems : for I must profess that I dare not presume that I understand him here neither . For the rest of his book which I thought I understood , seemed as plain as this . I began once of think that a fraud lay under these words , and that it is here necessity of Precept only which he means when he saith that [ a Profession of saving faith is necessary to Baptism ] and not a necessity to means , or that it is sine qua non . But though I know no other way to reconcile him here to his books , yet this cannot be his sense . For the man is not fradulent ; and besides his following arguing showeth the contrary . But then I confess that arguing amazeth me again . He will prove that he is for the necessity of the profession of a justifying faith to Baptism , because he is for the necessity of a Dogmatical faith , and that faith must be profess . wonderful ! Doth he make a justifying and a Dogmatical faith all one ? no ; he constantly distinguisheth and opposeth them . How then doth he prove that he asserteth the necessity of the profession of a justifying faith because he asserteth the necessity of a professed Dogmatical faith . Reader I am at a loss : I dare not say Mr. Blake is so ; perhaps he understands himself , make thy best on 't : for I can make nothing on 't , or worse than nothing . But if really he will be of this mind that [ the Reality of a dogmatical faith is necessary , and the profession of a justifying faith ] I shall not only thank him for giving quiet profession to the truth , but I will give him some back again , and will come myself a beg lower than he ; and will affirm that we must give them the Sacraments that profess a saving faith , though they have not so much as the Reality of a Dogmatical faith . Yet Reader if thou think that there is any parcel of the cause which Mr. Blake doth not expressly give up , after all his labour , adjoin his words p. 124. and rest satisfied [ so that I conceit no promise of these Ordinances made to such a faith ; but an actual investiture of every such believer in them . ] 

I have made the best enquiry I can into Mr. Blake's sense , and I cannot find any reasonable footing for a man to fix upon , if we once forsake our present hold ; and say that it is a profession of some other faith short of that which justifyeth , which is the title to the Sacraments . For as no man can prove out of Scripture then what faith it must be , but we shall there be at a loss ; so whatever he assert , we have evidence enough to prove it insufficient . A Real Dogmatical faith cannot be the title ; For then the Baptizer must know the heart . The profession of a bare Dogmatical faith or assent cannot be it : For than he that hath the faith of Devils , persecutors of Christ , and such as are supposed to sin against the Holy Ghost , should have title . Some consent therefore of the will there must be . But to what , if not to have Christ as he is offered , who can tell ? A consent to be externally Baptised will not serve . A consent to Baptism as Baptism compriseth saving faith . A consent to be a name Christian , and to live among them , may be without any profession of Christianity . no man can tell where to fix , nor what we must consent to , to procure a Title , if once we forsake the present ground . If any man will give us yet a more exact Description of a faith short of justifying , entitling to Baptism and the Lords Supper , I shall be willing to examine it . For hitherto I cannot see where I should set my foot if I should leave the ground I stand on . 

I now come to examine the Arguments that are brought for the contrary opinion . And I shall begin with Mr. Blake's , and then proceed to some which others insist upon . 

In his Tre●t of Sacr. pag. 161.  Mr. Blake begins some as he calleth them [ Additional Arguments , that a faith short of that which justifieth gives title to Baptism . ] 

ARGUMENT I  Mr. Blake They that have right in the sight of God to many and great Privileges of his gift , have a right in his sight to the first and leading Privileges ; this I think cannot be denied : having a right to those that follow , they have right to those that lead . If any had in the time of the Law right to the Passeover , they had right to Circumcision ; and if any now have right to the Lords Supper , they have right to Baptism . But those of a faith that is short of that which justifies , have right to many and great Privileges in the sight of God. This is clear from the Apostle , Rom. 3.1 . The Jew outwardly where Circumcision of heart was wanting , had every way much benefit and advantage ; he had therefore right to Circumcision , and those with him that are short of a faith that justifies , have right in the sight of God to Baptism . 

ANSWER I  The question is not in the conclusion . If all be granted , it 's nothing for Mr. Blake's cause or against mine . It is not all one to conclude [ those that are short of a faith that justifies have right ] and [ such a faith gives right ] or is the qualification , condition , or evidence of right either . A man that is a Burgess of such a Corporation hath right to be Mayor . But his Burgesship gives him not that right , but his election . A Frenchman hath right to the Crown of France , but not because he is a Frenchman . The Jew outwardly , Rom. 3. had not his right by a faith short of justifying ; But he had first an actual abode among Ordinances , and the offers of Grace and helps to salvation , by free providentiall disposal of mercy . 2.  The claim that he made to Church-priviledges before men , must be upon his Professing of saving faith ; viz. That he took the Lord only for his God , and believed in him according to the tenor of the Promise : and not upon the having or Professing of a faith of another Species . 

This answer sufficeth as to the present controversy : But because Mr. Blake doth seem also to intend these Arguments to the following controversy , I shall briefly enervate them as to both , that I may not be put to go over them again when I come to that controversy . 

2.  I deny that Baptism is [ the first and leading Privilege of God's gifts . ] It is a great Privilege to have the Gospel preached to them , to have pardon conditionally offered them , that is , if they will accept of Christ to be converted , and made a true believer ; to be born of Christian Parents . etc. These and more are Privileges , and before baptism . 3.  I distinguish at large of the term ( Right ) in my Apology . Here let it suffice to say : 1.  Right is properly so called , which in this case must arise from a promise or proper gift . 2.  Or it is Analogically so called , which ariseth 1 indirectly from God's command to the Parent , Priest , Pastor etc. to do this for all that require it , upon a profession of true faith . 2.  Or from bare permission or providential disposal . 4.  I distinguish also the Jews case from ours : They had some promise of a continuance of Ordinances among them , though not for perpetuity , yet for a long time , which no Church on earth hath now . 5.  And now I answer to the Minor : 1.  An Analogical improper right , resulting from permission , and a command to Ministers to Baptise all that upon such a profession require Baptism , this I ever granted to all that profess saving faith . 2.  But a proper right , from promise or proper gift , which may warrant them to claim or require the thing from God or man ; this I deny to any but true believers and their seed . They may not lawfully require it , though we must give it them if they do require it , upon such a profession . 3.  But without a profession of saving faith , they may neither require it , nor we give it if they do require it , whatever other short faith they have , or profess . 4.  Thus also the Case was with the Jews , allowing the difference made by the foresaid peculiar Promise to them . 

ARGUMENT II  Mr. , Blake . Those that are a People by God's gracious dispensation nigh to God , comparative to others , have right in the sight of God to visible admittance to this more near relation . This I think is clear ; men have right to be admitted to their right . But those that come short of Justifying faith , are a people by God's gracious dispensations nigh unto God , comparative to others ; this is plain in the whole visible Nation of the Jews , as appears , Deut. 4 7.  Psal. 147.19 . and 148.14 . Those therefore that are short of Justifying faith , have right in the sight of God to admission to this nearer relation . 

ANSWER . The Jews were nigher to God than other people . 1.  In that they had the offers of Grace which other people had not . 2.  And many great Deliverances and temporal privileges , which others had not . Both these Infidels and Heathens may now have ; and therefore they prove no Right to Baptism . 3.  They were nigher by some promises peculiar to that Nation , which is nothing to us . 4.  They were nigher by their Consent to the offers of Grace , and the Covenant of the Lord ; which was proper ( in sincerity ) to the sanctified . 5.  And by their profession of Consent , and external engaging themselves to the Lord ( whether they had inwardly faith or not . ) Now to the Major , I grant it : but add , that the three first sorts of Nearness give not right to Baptism : All admission to near Relation , comparatively to others , is not by Circumcision or Baptism . But it is only a Nearness in the two last senses that are questionable as to this . And I have before showed , in what sense true Consent to the Covenant gives right , and in what sense an outward profession of Consent gives right ; and that your common faith gives none in either sense . Lastly , if your conclusion were granted , it 's nothing to our question : For as is said , all admission to near relation is not by baptism : One Infidel may be nearer God and the Kingdom of Heaven than another , and yet 〈◊〉 be baptizable for all that . 

ARGUMENT III  Mr. Blake . Those that God ordinarily calls his People , and owns as his , openly avouching himself to be their God , have right in the sight of God to the signs and cognizance of his People , and are to have admission into the society and Fellowship of his People . This is pla●n , if God in Covenant will own servants , than his stewards may open the door to them ; if he will own sheep , his servants doubtless may mark them . But God owns all in visible communion , though short of faith that is Justifying ▪ as his People , and openly avouches himself to be their God , as in abundant places of Scriture is evident : See Deut. 26.18 . These have therefore right to the signs and cognisances of his people , to admission into the Society and Fellowship of his People . 

ANSWER . 1.  To the Major , with the forementioned distinction of Right , applied as before , I grant it . 2.  To the Minor I say , God owneth them as his people by internal consent and covenanting , who indeed are so : and he owneth them as his People by outward Covenanting , or Expression or Profession of consent , who are such : But those that have neither of these , but only profess some shorter faith , or consent to some other Covenant , or but part of this , he will not own in either relation , nor would have them taken into the Communion of his Church . Nor do you prove any such thing ; for Deut. 26.18 . is so much against you , that I marvel you were not troubled at the citing of it : For that Text alone is enough to confute all your pompous allegations out of the Old Testament from the Church state of the Jews . The words are [ thou hast avouched the Lord this day to be thy God , and to walk in his ways , and to keep his Statutes , and his Commandments and his Judgements , and to harken to his voice : And the Lord hath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people , etc. ] Do you think that they that in heart consent that the Lord be their God , and to walk in his ways , etc. have not saving faith ? then there was no such thing then on the earth . And if they had such faith , who sincerely consented , than they Professed such faith that Professed such consent . And the word [ avouching showeth that it was present profession , and not only a promise for some distant futurity . This Argument therefore is but like the rest . 

ARGUMENT IU.  Mr. Blake . Those whom the Spirit of God ordinarily calls by the name of Circumcision , they had a right in God's sight to Circumcision ; and those of like condition have like right to baptism ; This I think is clear ; the Spirit of God doth not mis-name , doth not nickname , nor ordinarily at least give equivocal names . But men short of Justifying faith are called by the Spirit of God by the name of Circumcision , as needs no proof . Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision , Rome 15.8 . And he was sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel . Those then of a faith short of that which is Justifying , have right in the sight of God to Baptism . 

ANSWER . 1.  I have no need to deny the Mayor ; but it is not sound : for they are called the Circumcision , i e. the Circumcised ; because they were actually Circumcised , and not because that all that were so had right to it . 2.  To the Minor , I grant it ; but with this note , that it is not because of their short faith that they were to be circumcised , but upon the Parents or their own profession and sincere consent to the Covenant . The Conclusion again containeth not your Thesis . there 's nothing in it about [ giving title ] or any thing of necessary connexion . 

ARGUMENT . v.  Mr. Blake . Those that are the servant of God , whom God owns as his servants , have right in his sight to be received into his house , and to be entitled to the Privileges of his Church . This we think should not be denied , and that God will take it ill if any shall deny it . But men short of that faith which Justifies , are owned of God as his servants , as is clear , Leu. 25.41 , 42.  There every Israelite that was sold to any of the Children of Israel , and his Children are called of God his servants , and that as Israelites ; of which a great part were void of that faith which Justifies . Therefore those that are short of faith which Justifies , have right in the sight of God to be thus received . This Argument me thinks might be of force with Mr. Baxter . When he had urged it for proof , that infants are servants and aught to be baptised , he add● pag. 18. [ is not here direction enough to help us to judge of the mind of God , whether infants are his Disciples and Servants or no ? Doth not God call them his servants himself ? What more should a man expect to warrant him to do so ? Men call for plain Scripture , and when they have it , they will not receive it : so hard is it to inform a forestalled mind . ] If God took such care upon that account , that they should not be held in bondage under any of his People , he takes like care that they should not be kept from the Society of his People . 

ANSWER . 1.  The Major is true . 1. distinguishing of Right , as before ; 2. and of Servants ; and taking the word Servants in a peculiar sense , as Leu. 25.41 . doth . The Minor also and the Conclusion is thus granted . But Mr. Blake's Conclusions have a common unhappiness to be strangers to the question : Doth it follow because I must baptise those that profess sincere Covenanting or Faith , though they have but a faith of another sort , that therefore I must baptise them on the account of that other faith ? By such an Argument . I may as well prove that Infidelity or Heathenism gives right to Baptism , thus : Many Infidels or Heathens have right to baptism ( that is , those that in heart are such , have such a Right as yours pleaded for , upon the account of an external Profession of Christianity . ) Therefore infidelity or Heathenism gives them right . If this Consequence must be denied , so must yours . 

ARGUMENT VI.  Mr. Blake . Those that bring forth Children to God , have a right in the sight of God to be of his household , and to be taken into it : This is plain ; especially to those that know the Law of servants in families , that all the Children in right were the Masters , and had their relation to him : But those that are short of Justifying faith , bring forth Children to God , Ezek. 16.20 , 21.  

ANSWER . This Argument is sick of the common disease of the rest ; the Conclusion is a stranger to the question . Quâ tales , they bring not forth Children to God in any Church sense . 

ARGUMENT VII . Mr. Blake . Children of the Kingdom of God , or those that are Subjects of his Kingdom , have right in the sight of God to be received into his Kingdom . This Proposition Mr. Baxter hath proved , pag. 21. therefore I may save my pains . But those that are short of faith that Justifies , are Children or Subjects of this Kingdom , Mat. 8.12 . The Children of the Kingdom shall be cast into outer darkness . Those therefore that are short of Justifying faith , have right in the sight of God to be thus received . 

ANSWER . This Argument also hath the same distemper : it 's nothing to the Question . They are Children of the Kingdom visibly , in regard of the profession of a saving faith , and not of any common faith tha● is short of it . Prove that , or you say nothing . 

ARGUMENT VIII . Mr. Blake . The Children of the Covenant have right in the sight of God to the Seal of the Covenant . This is evident , the seal is an affix to the Covenant : Where a Covenant is made , and a seal appointed , there it is not of right to be denied . But those that are short of faith that Justifies , are the children of the Covenant , Act. 3 25.  The Apostle speaking to the People of the Jews saith , ye are the Children of the Prophets , and of the Covenant which God made with our Fathers . 

ANSWER . Still the Question is wanting in the conclusion . The same Answer serves to all . it 's a sad case that the Church of God should be thus used by its Friends : to have such gross mistakes presented to the unskilful , which ( to use your own phrase to me , pa. 145. ) do serve only to blind the Reader . 

ARGUMENT IX . Mr. Blake . Disciples of Christ have right in the sight of God to Baptism , as appears in Christ's commissiion , Mat. 28.19 . But many are Disciples of Christ , that are short of a Faith that justifies : therefore those that are short of a Faith that justifies , have right in the sight of God to Baptism . If all that I have said , pa. 208. of the Treatise of the Covenant to prove this assumption , be too weak , as I think it is not , Mr. Baxters' proof pag. 21. of his Treatise hath sure strength sufficient ; there he proves that Infants are Disciples , because they are subjects of Christ's Kingdom ; and what Kingdom he means , he there explains himself . [ I speak not here ( saith he ) of his Kingdom in the largest sense , as it containeth all the world ; nor yet in the strictest , as it containeth only his Elect : but in the middle sense , as it containeth the Church visible , as it is most commonly used . ] And therefore by the way not equivocally used . Those then of this middle posture , non-elect , are Disciples . 

ANSWER . Still the same Error . None are Disciples upon the account of your other faith , but of either saving faith , or the profession of it . And as this and all the rest do look to the Other Controversies , the foresaid distinction of Right applied as is often done before , is all that need to be said in answer to them . 

ARGUMENT X.  Mr. Blake . Christians have right in the sight of God to Baptism ; This is Mr. Baxter's Proposition in the page before quoted ; and in reason is plain ; Christians must not be kept out of Christian fellowship . This is Mr. Baxter's likewise in the place quoted ; he makes Disciples Christians , and subjects of Christ's visible Kingdom to be one and the same . Therefore those that are short of Justifying faith have Right , etc.  

ANSWER . Still the same disease . You should have concluded that your lower faith gives Right . ] None are Christians on the account of your lower kind of faith , but only of saving faith or the profession of it . 

ARGUMENT XI . Mr. Blake . All that aught to be admitted visible Church-members , aught to be admitted in the sight of God to baptism . This none can question unless they charge it as Tautological , and it is Mr. Baxter's pa. 2.3 . and the medium of that Argument which he makes the chief of all he useth . But those that are short of Justifying faith are members of the Church visible . Therefore those that are short of justifying faith , are to be admitted to baptism . The assumption is his likewise , where he distinguisheth the visible Kingdom from the Elect , and no man can deny it that grants the distinction of a Church into visible and invisible . 

ANSWER . The same disease still . None short of saving faith ought to be admitted member , but on the Profession of it . What if I distinguish the visible Kingdom from the Elect ? Once for all I let you know , that I take saving faith to be the constitutive or necessary qualification of a real or mystical member : and Profession of that faith to be the qualifying condition of Visibility of Member-ship : But your other kind of Faith to be neither . 

ARGUMENT XII . Mr. Blake . The Children of God have right in the sight of God to be admitted to Baptism ; this is clear enough : but men short of Justifying faith are Children of God , even those that drew down judgements on the old world , as Gen 6.2 . The whole body of the children of Israel . Deut. 14.1 . 

ANSWER . The same Error continued , requireth the same Answer . 

ARGUMENT XIII . Mr. Blake . Those whom God ingraff's by his power into the true Olive , and makes partakers of the fatness of the Olive , they have right in the sight of God to be admitted . This is plain : God engraffing , right must not be denied : but he ingraff's by his power those that are short of that faith that justifies : even the whole body of the Church of the Gentiles , and we expect the like of the Church of the Jews , as appears from the Apostle , Rom. 11.  Therefore those that are short of a justifying faith , have right in the sight of God to Baptism . 

ANSWER . Again the same Error : Therefore accept the same Answer . 

ARGUMENT FOURTEEN . Mr. Blake . All of those that professedly embrace a Gospel-tender , in which there is a conditional Promise of Justification , Adoption , Glorification , have right in the sight of God to all Ordinances , ordinarily necessary and requisite to bring them up to these conditions , and to the fruition of these glorious Privileges , and consequently to baptism the leading privilege . This none can deny that know the readiness of Christ , in imparting saving ordinances to a People . But those that are short of faith which is justifying , may embrace a Gospel-tender , in which there is a conditional Promise of Justification , Adoption , Glorification . Those therefore that are short of faith which is justifying , have right in the sight of God to all such Ordinances , and consequently to Baptism . 

ANSWER . [ Embracing ] is a Metaphor , and can signify nothing here but their Wills , Consent , and Use. The words [ Gospel tender ] signify either the thing tendered , or the act of the tenderer . To consent to , and so embrace the latter , is no more than to be willing to hear , or to consent tha● God and his Messengers shall make the render . This an Heathen or Infidel may do . To consent to , and embrace the thing tendered , upon the terms that it is tendered , is saving faith . In that sense therefore I deny the Minor : and in the former the Major , as extending to Baptism . All that consent that Christ shall be offered to them , ought not to be baptised nor any on that account . None that consent to have Christ offered , ( Christ as Christ ) can be truly said to be short of saving faith . If by [ embracing ] you mean Metonymically [ the profession of embracing Christ ] then you say as I say , & give up your Cause . it 's that Profession , and not his short faith , nay that without any faith , that will warrant us to baptise him . 

ARGUMENT xv.  Mr. Blake . If the Apostle argue for a right to Baptism from gifts that are common to the justified and unjustified , than faith which is short of justifying , gives right in the sight of God to Baptism . This none can deny , unless they will call the Apostles Logic into question , and deny his Consequence . But the Apostle thus argues for a right to Baptism , from those gifts that are common to the justified and unjustified : This is plain Act. 10.47 . Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptised , which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we ? The Holy Ghost there , is the gift of the Holy Ghost then poured out ; the gift of tongues , as in the 45 , & 46. verses is held forth , which is a gift not only inferior to Charity , but such as may be served from it , 1 Cor. 13.1 . A gift of that kind , that men of a miraculous faith ordinarily did as in an instant confer . They are therefore gifts common to the justified and unjustified . Those therefore of faith short of that which is justifying have right to Baptism , 

ANSWER . This is the only Argument of all the seventeen that doth so much as speak to the question . A strange way of arguing ▪ To the Mayor . 1.  I deny the Consequence . The Argument will not hold from one common gift , to any common gifts , nor to this common faith . Prove this Consequence . 2.  I distinguish in the Antecedent between arguing from gifts as a Title , or the condition of a Title , and arguing from them as satisfactory evidences of a Title , such as profession itself is . To the proof from Acts 10.47 . I say further : It followeth not [ he that hath received the Holy Ghost may be baptised ] therefore he that hath your common faith may be baptised . For that 's no evidence of receiving the Holy Ghost . 2.  The Holy Ghost was promised only to be true Believers , Mark 16.17 . and not to any others : Yet God did not hereby restrain his own power from giving it to others . Seeing therefore God had promised it to true believers , though he did give it to some others , it followeth that it was a probable evidence of saving faith , though not a certain : And therefore it might warrant us to baptise them , as Profession itself might do : Especially when it accompanied that Profession : seeing that both Evidences are more full than one , and yet one is sufficient as to us . 3.  You cannot prove that ever God gave the holy Ghost to any that professed not saving faith : Nor yet that any man was baptised upon any such gift of Miracles without the profession of saving faith . Those Acts 10. confessed Christ , and professed faith before they were baptised . 4.  You cannot prove that it was only common gifts of the Spirit that is meant in Acts 10.47 . For ordinarily the Holy Ghost was given at once for Sanctification and such extraordinary works . And anologum per se positum stat pro significato famosiori . And their praising God doth intimate their love to God , and honour of him , and sense of his goodness ; which proceed from the sanctifying Spirit . 

ARGUMENT XVI . Mr. Blake . If the promise be to others besides Believers , than so is the seal ; for to whom God promises , to them he engageth himself to perform : But the Promise is to others ; therefore the seal is to others . This will be evident , if it be once understood that it is only the conditional Covenant , which God sealeth by the Sacraments ; for this promise is made to unbelievers , though the good promised is not to be enjoyed by any but those that perform the condition . 

ANSWER . The 16th . Argument Mr. Blake fetcheth from my words to Mr. Tombs , that he may prove me a self-contradicter . But I do not contradict myself every time Mr. Blake understands me not . I confess still that the Seal is to others besides Believers ; but though the promise be conditional , we must not seal to any but those that profess consent to the Conditions : And therefore not to any but those that profess to be true believers . 

ARGUMENT . XVII . Mr. Blake . If God do no more in his actual sealing to Believers than he doth when the Sacrament is rightly applied to Hypocrites , than he actually sealeth to Hypocrites : but God doth no more in his actual sealing to Believers , than he doth when the Sacrament is rightly administered to Hypocrites . The Minor is proved by the enumeration of the several acts . 1.  God maketh a promise ; 2.  He commands Ministers to publish it ; 3.  He hath instituted the Sacraments as mutually engaging Signs or Seals ; 4 He commands Ministers to deliver or apply them to those that profess their consent and desi●e to enter or renew the Covenant . Th●se two last I confess I have borrowed , and that from Mr. Baxter pag. 223. of his Infant Baptism , and whether they make for him or against him , to prove or disprove their right which he here calls Hypocrites , and distinguishes from Believers , I leave to the censure of the Intelligent Reader . 

ANSWER . 1.  I mean in that Argument , that as to the natural extrinsic action , commanded or performed , God doth no more : But yet God hath before the sealing in the foregoing promise done so much more , as that he is actually thereby ( as it were ) obliged to the performers of the condition , when he is not so to others . For while it is but conditional , it is not actual : for the act is suspended on the condition . 

2.  Is not Mr. Blake able to distinguish , between an Hypocrite and a Professor of another sort of faith ? I confess we may give the Seals to Hypocrites ; for they profess that saving faith which they have not : but it doth not follow that therefore we may give them to men that never so much as professed it , but only professed another kind of faith . And why will an ingenuous sober Brother insinuate that these are they whom I call Hypocrites , who never do so much as profess to be sincere Christians ? And now I am as content as Mr. Blake that the Intelligent Reader do pass his censure upon my supposed Contradictions , & Mr. Blake's Arguments . 

When I had mentioned the uncertainty , and the certain vanity of the contrary opinion , I thought meet to examine the Arguments that are brought for it , before I come to the last of my own : I have yet some more Arguments to answer from other hands , which I shall adjoyn before I conclude my own : and some of the same I find scattered up and down also in Mr. Blakes . 

ARGUMENT . XVIII . The Jews Children were circumcised upon the Title of a Dogmatical faith , or of some faith short of Justifying : therefore so may we and ours be baptised : for Circumcision extended no further than Baptism . 

ANSWER . 1.  I will not stand now upon the question , Whether such Arguments from mere Analogy will hold ; nor whether there were any special reason of a difference . I suppose in this I shall agree with Mr. Blake . But I utterly deny their Antecedent ; and require them to prove it if they are able : yea , that ever one person was circumcised upon the account of any faith short of that which then was saving ? We are not now upon the Question , what God looked for : or what was necessary to warrant them before God to demand Circumcision . But our Question is , what the Circumciser must look for ? and what was necessary to warrant them to circumcise them ? And that was the Profession ( by the person if at age ; if not , by his Parent or pro-parent ) of a true saving faith , and nothing lower . They professed to take the Lord only for their God ; and if they did but that sincerely , they should be saved : For to be our God , is to be our chiefest Good , and to take him for such , is to Love him above all and prefer before all . To take him for our God , is to take him for the Principal Efficient of our Being and Wellbeing : And so to take him , containeth the chief Dependence on him . To take him for our only God , is to take him for our only Sovereign Ruler : and so to take him , containeth resolution to obey him . And moreover , the Israelites did engage to obedience to God's Law , and professed their consent to obey it . 

Object . But many of them were wicked in their lives . Answ. 1.  But our Question is , Whether they they did not profess a saving faith ? or whether they were admitted on the profession of another kind of faith ? 2.  The more impious were to be cut off by death , according to God's Law : And dead men cannot beget children to be circumcised . 

ARGUMENT XIX . then we must rebaptise those whose ▪ Parents had not saving faith , because their Baptism is a Nullity : And what work will that make among us ? 

ANSWER . 1.  there 's no show of reason for the Consequence . If any such thing would follow , it would be but this , [ That we must rebaptise them whose Parents professed not saving faith ; ] and that 's not one that ever I saw present a child to Baptism , if we speak of a verbal Profession . 2.  Neither will this perhaps follow neither : but only that which was not done , should be done ; that is , Profession ; and not that which was done , be done again ; that is , external Baptising . 3.  I find by sad experience to my sorrow , that a considerable part of some Parishes , or Villages , are ignorant of the Fundamentals : I have spoken with abundance that know not that Christ is God or Man , or either ( but they say , he is a Spirit ; ) nor that the Holy Ghost is God ; nor why Christ died ; nor that any Satisfaction is made for our sins ; or any thing done or necessary to their pardon , but our own Repentance and Amendment : and with some that know not that the Soul goes to Heaven before the Resurrection , nor that the body shall ever rise again . Now I would know of Mr. Blake , Whether all the Children of these Parents must be Baptised again , or not ? For certainly these have not a Dogmatical faith , which is the thing that he saith entitleth to Baptism . And then what certainty have we that any of our Ancestors had a true Dogmatical faith ? As Mr. Blake therefore will deal with his Dissemblers that seem to have a Dogmatical faith , and have it not , so me thinks he should allow us to do by ours , that seem to have a saving faith and have not : and so by their Posterity . 

ARGUMENT xx.  By your Rule , no man may come to the Lords Supper , nor offer his Child to Baptism that hath not assurance of the sincerity of his faith . For if it be God's will that they must profess saving faith , than they must know that they have it ; for no man must profess that which he is uncertain of : for he cannot do it in faith , and so will be condemned . 

ANSWER . 1.  Mr. Blake will require the profession of a Dogmatical faith , and an engagement to believe savingly , as strictly ( I hope ) as I will require the profession of saving faith , and an engagement to actual obedience . And if a Dogmatical faith and such an engagement must be professed , than it must be known by him the professeth it , as necessarily as the other . And I would fain know of him how mere Dogmatical believers are sure that they have a Dogmatic faith . 1.  Many of them know not what that faith is , nor what the essentials of Christianity are ; nor know not those essentials themselves , as I before said from sad experience . They might therefore be sure that they have not a true Dogmatical faith , but not that they have it ; and yet they are as confident they have it as other men . 2.  Many that believe the same truths as others , believe them but side humanâ , and not divinâ : and therefore have no true Dogmatical faith . 3.  Many do but half believe them , and think they may be true & they may be false , and cannot tell whether they may believe them or not , but indeed do not ; their unbelief being more predominant , and therefore from it must be denominated . 4.  Many true saving believers are sorely tempted about the Truth of the Gospel , and troubled with doubts , and their Dogmatical or Historical faith is but weak , and mixed with much unbelief : so that they cannot tell whether their belief or unbelief be predominant , and consequently whether they believe or not . And for my part I see no reason but that it should be as hard to a true Christian to know whether he truly believe the Dogmata Christiana , the Articles of Faith , the truth of the Gospel , as to know whether he truly rest upon Christ , or love God above all . And I know many learned , wise , and godly men ( to all appearance ) that are in doubt , and long have been , of the truth of their assent to the Gospel , and are troubled with no other doubtings of their sincerity ( in any great measure ) but only as the doubts of this doth cause them . Some of the ablest men that ever I knew have groaned out many a complaint : OH , I am afraid I am an Infidel ! I cannot believe the Word of God I know not whether I believe it or not ! ] A Turk may have some thoughts or motions that it may be true ; but if he be more persuaded of the falseness than of the Truth , he is not to be denominated a believer . Now if Mr. Blake will but tell us plainly , how he would deal with these that doubt of their very historical faith , and what he would have them do , than I will tell him the like by them that doubt of their saving faith . 5.  Nay see what a desperate plunge he puts his believers to . He requireth them to perform impossibilities . They must engage to believe savingly ; that is , they must profess a consent so to do . And this they must know that they do sincerely ; or else they cannot do it in faith as the Objection saith : ) when as it is a thing that no unregenerate man can do sincerely . If he engage to believe savingly , he doth it not sincerely , but ignorantly or dissemblingly . At least , few of them know that they do it sincerely ( as themselves will here confess ; ) what then must these do in such a case ? 

6 At least , let the heart and light of a godly man and an ungodly be compared , and I will appeal to Mr. Blakes own judgement , whether a Godly man be not as likely to know his sincerity in saving faith , as an ungodly man to know that he ha●h truly a Dogmatical faith , and doth truly engage to believe savingly . I could soon show such disadvantages that a wicked man hath to know his own heart , even in this point , that me thinks might easily determine this Controversy , if it were needful to stand upon it . 

7.  It is the duty of the godly to give God thanks for his saving Grace ; for converting them , giving them the Holy Ghost , Justifying , Adopting them , etc.  Must none perform this duty but they that have attained Assurance of their Conversion , Justification , Adoption , & c ? then it is not many that must perform it . But if others may and must do this , on the same ground they may and must perform the other . It is the duty of every child of God to pray and praise God in the relation of a child , in a special sense , and to call God Father in a special sense , and to pled those Promises with him that are the proper portion of his Children . And must all omit this that have no assurance or subjective Certainty ? It it the duty of each member of the mystical body of Christ to love the Saints , and assist them as fellow-members : Must none do this , that is not certain of his own member-ship ? If I should instance in all the particulars of Christian Duty that this case extendeth to , you would see that this your principle reduced to practice would make bu● unhappy work in the Church and would do much to the extirpation of a very great part ( if not the far greatest ) of the service of God.  

8.  In all such Cases our Actions must follow the smallest prevalent persuasions of our Judgement , though far short of full Assurance . If a true Believer do think himself to be such , he may profess himself such : When so far as he knoweth his own heart , he doth believe and repent , he may profess that he doth believe and repent , implying or expressing that he speaketh according to the knowledge he hath of his own heart . We are so strange to ourselves , that if only Certainty must move us to Action , I think we should sleep out the most of our lives . He speaks sincerely that speaks according to his persuasion , and as he thinks , though he be not certain . 

9  In such cases it condemneth not to act in doubting , but the same man that doubteth may act in faith . Indeed if the doubting be so predominant , that a man is more persuaded that he doth not believe , than that he doth ( whether dogmatically , or savingly ) than he may not profess that he doth believe : that is , he may not think one thing , and speak another , and speak or do against his Conscience : And also if it be in an indifferent thing , as about meats , or drinks , or indifferent days , where he is certain to be innocent if he forbear , and uncertain to be innocent if he act , than he must take the safer side , and therefore forbear . And the Apostles words will reach no further than to these two points . He that hath unbelief , and therefore doubing , may say , Lord , I believe , help thou mine unbelief . 

10.  The thing that is necessarily required to the Sacramental participation , is not an Assurance that our faith is sincere and saving , but that it be really that Faith which is sincere and saving , whether we know it so to be or not . Many a man knoweth that he hath that faith which is saving , and yet knoweth not that it is saving . And many one knoweth that he performeth the saving act , but through vain scruples understands not whether he do it sincerely : And many think or hope they are sincere that yet doubt of it . I have met with many that have lived in deep distress for want of perceiving the truth of their faith ; that have cried out [ I have no true faith , I cannot believe ! Faith is a persuasion of God's love to me , or a resting on him for salvation , and I cannot be persuaded of his love to me , nor can I rest upon him . ] And when I have convinced them that [ the Gospel is 1. a Narrative of what Christ is , and what he hath done and suffered for us ; and 2. an offer of Christ , and life to all that will accept the offer : And therefore that faith is 1. an Assent to the truth of his Report , and 2. a Consent to be Christ's , and that he shall be ours . ] And when I have asked them whether they do these two things or not : whether they believe the Gospel to be true , and are willing that Christ and Life be theirs , and that they be Christ's ? they profess very cheerfully both this Assent and Consent ; they are w●lling to have Christ if they know their own hearts ; and yet they dare not say that they are true believers ; partly through general fears , and partly because they know not that this which they profess is saving faith . Now in such a case we are to let them know that it is the thing , and not their Certainty of the thing that God hath m●de necessary . And therefore we do not , nor must not ask them in Sacramental Administrations , whether they have saving faith by mere name , without description ? but whether they believe in God the Father , Son and the Holy Ghost ; and renounce the World , Flesh , and Devil ? and whether they are willing to have God for their only God , and Christ for their only Saviour , and the Holy Ghost their Sanctifier ? And he that saith , yea , doth profess a saving faith , though he know it not so to be . And what would Mr. Blake do with him if he say neither Yea , nor Nay ? 

Having thus vindicated the Proposition against their Objections and showed the vanity of all other ways , and that we can have no certainty what Profession to expect , if we expect not a Profession of saving Faith , I may well sum up all , and still insist on the 19th Argument , that we must expect the profession of a saving Faith , seeing if we take up with any other we are utterly at a loss : Mr. Blake cannot agree with himself what faith to require , nor hath given any certain description of it , when he hath so voluminously talked for it : and what he or others seem to require , as a thing distinct from saving faith , we see sufficient Reason to reject , as being wholly unproved , and by us proved insufficient to this use . 

I shall now therefore proceed to my 20th . and last Argument , for the Proposition , which is drawn from the constant practice of the Universal Church of Christ.  

It hath been the constant practice of the Catholic Church since the Apostles days till now , to require that Profession of saving Faith and Repentance , as necessary before they would baptise , and not to baptise any upon the Profession of any lower kind of Faith : Therefore it must be our practice also . 

And here I must confess myself in as great an admiration at the words and dealings of Mr. Blake and some godly learned Divines that go with him in this Cause , as ever I was brought to by the groundless confidence of such men . He must shut his eyes against the fullest Evidence of History and Church-practice , that will deny that it hath been the practice of the Universal Church of Christ to baptise upon the profession of a saving faith , and not otherwise : Insomuch that I must profess that I am not ( for my own part ) able to prove that ever any one person since the days of the Apostles , was baptised upon the profession of any other faith , by any save the gross Heretics , even those whose Baptism was accounted invalid . I desire Mr. Blake , or his Neighbours of his mind , to help me to an instance of any one approved Baptism since Christ's time , or his Apostles upon the account of a faith that was short of justifying , and not upon the Profession of a justifying Faith. Hitherto this is not done by them , & the contrary is fully done by others : and yet ( to my admiration ) they as confidently affirm that all the Church of Christ hath gone their way , or that it hath been their constant practice , and that they should forsake the example of the Church , if they should do otherwise : and they except against my Opinion as novelty . I must confess that such Experience hath brought me to lower thoughts of the credit even of good men than formerly I have had , and to resolve to try before I trust . One would think that the matter of fact in such a point as Baptism , which we all pass through , should have been out of question before this day . 

For the proof of the Church's practice , 1.  I have already said enough about the Apostles own practice and the Church in their days . Even when they describe the faith which they require expressly by assent alone , yet they show that it is a saving Assent which they require ; and the promise of pardon and salvation is in the same or other Scriptures affixed to that Assent : But this I shall not recite now . 

2.  The constant practice of the Church since the apostles to this day , is undoubtedly known . 1. by the very form of words in Baptism . and 2. be the history of their proceedings therein . 

1.  It is certain that the Church did ever Baptise into the Name of the Father , Son , and holy Ghost : And as I have proved before , the voluntary seeking and reception of that Baptism containeth the actual profession of a saving Faith.  

2.  It is certain that the persons to be baptised if at age , did profess to believe in the Father , Son , and holy Ghost , wh●ch as is showed , is saving faith . 

3.  It is also certain , that they did profess to renounce the Flesh , the World , and the Devil ; which is a profession of saving Repentance . 

4.  And it is certain , that they promised for the future to live in new obedience ; which is the consequent of saving faith : and thus they publicly entered the three stipulations ; Credit Credo : Abronuncias ? Abrenuncio : Spondes ? Spondeo . And no man can do this that hath not saving faith ; therefore the professing of it is not without the professing of a saving faith ; Nay indeed it containeth the profession of that faith . 

5.  Moreover it is a known case that the ancient Churches commonly took all those that were duly baptised to be in a state of salvation . That they supposed them to have the pardon of all their sins , I think none doubteth that ever read much of their writings . Davenant in his Epistle of Baptism giveth many proofs , and many hundred more may be given , if any be so blind as to deny it . All the doubt is , Whether they also ascribe Regenerating , Renewing Grace to all the rightly baptised ? And though Davenant deny that they ascribe the infusing of habits to it , as to infants ; your 1. he denieth it not as to the Adult ; nor 2. that they ascribed the Gift of the Holy Ghost to it , as to Infants . And yet as long as they put all duly baptised ( both Infants and Adult ) into a state of salvation , it matters not as to our question , whether Infants had habitual Grace . And yet Mr. Graker hath brought so many proofs out of the mounments of Antiquity , even for this also ( that the Father's uno ore took all the Baptised to be regenerate or renewed by inherent grace ) that when his Amanuensis had transcribed them , he f●und them near four times as big as his whole Book besides : and the very naming of the Author's and Books and Pages takes up near ten or eleven Pages ( St●i●tur , in Davena●● . Epist. pa. 53. to the end of 63. ) He begins with Justin ●arry , Irenaeu , etc.  I will not so much as trouble the R●ader to name the Authors , seeing he may there have them with the places together . And lest M● Blake should say that it is but common sanctification which they assert , he may there see the place● quoted where ●hey ascribe to all the dul● baptised [ peccatorum remissionem , mentis illumi●ationem , u●ii sordiumque ablutionem & expurgationem animae purgationem , purificatinem , emaculationem , totius hominis verant integram ] ; Circumcisionem , refectionem , renovationem , recreatio●en●nnou●tionem , anim●tionem , emundationem , sanctificationem internam , reformationem , ad divinan imaginem & similitudinem , restitutionem , regenerationem , ge●erationis nativae correctio●en ac●reparationem , veteri● hominis mortem & sepulturam , novi●nativitatem , vetustatis abstersionem , exutum , despoliatio●em , d●positionem , vitii omnis evomitionem , peccati interfectionem , criminum mortem & sepulturam , vi●tutis vitam , Spiritus sancti infusionem , gratiae coelestis consecutionem , hominis , mentis immutationem , & in melius transformationem . Hinc & Baptismum appellant Vndam genitalem , aquam salutarem , rorem purificum , & sanativum , vivificum , sanctificumq , lavacrum . Et Sacramentum hoc asserunt peccatis exuere , peccata expurgare , spiritualem lepram auferre gratiae ac virtutum Spiritus sancti donis atque primitiis endure , vim generativam habere , Dei siitos generare , corpus peccuti destruere , vertutem vitalem indere gratiam spiritualem confer atque infundere ▪ divinam imaginem instaurare , novam facere , massam , condere creaturam , dealbare , & nive candidiorem facere purum , justum , sanctum , novum facere hominem ; peccatum radicitus evellere , justitiam sanctitamque tribuere animae sordes maculasque abluere , ulcera morbosque sanare , aestus sedare , febres extinguere , putredines exuere , vitia exinanire , oculos aperire , aures reserare , vigorem dare , vires addere , formam floremq , Deo dignum conciliare , in vitam primordialem animam restituere , textum novum contexere , animas reparare , viventes spiritu informatas , utì aqua olim reptilia producere , esse baptise to quod matrix Embryoni , eo modo effigiare quo infans in utero essingitur , pari modo ex aqua resingere , reficere , quo ex terra primó fingebatur ; refundere , refingere prout statue solet : tingere ut lanum purpurâ , purgare , emollire , fulgidum facere , ut ignis ferrum , characteren effigiemque impr●mere●ut cerae sigillum ; vitium solvere & absumere & peccata exurere , ut ignis ceram ; hominem terreum , ut terram metallicam , in aurum transmutare ; crassos & animales in coelestes & spirituales transformare ; infantiam , juventutem revocare , puritati originali restituere ; vel eâ etiam praestantiorem , splendidiorem reddere . Typos baptismatis affirmant fuisse Naaminis purgationem , Pharaonis submersionem , Cataclysum Noathicum , piscinam Bethesdican , aquatilium creationem , formationem protoplasti . 

I have recited all these terms ( Mr. Gataker telleth you where to find them all ) lest Mr. Blake should not be able to find any one that certainly signifieth saving Grace , if we named not all . For though he abhorreth to impute equivocation to the Scripture as I do , yet he sticks not to do it much more where it serves his turn : [ Regeneration , Renovation , Adoption , Sanctification , Disciples and I doubt Justification , ] and what not , are all equivocal terms with him in Scripture , if I can understand him ; and so is the Church , the body of Christ , and many such like . Perhaps therefore it will not move him that Mr. Gataker nexe addeth pag. 63.  [ De baptismo denique exponunt illas sacras Scripturea Periochas , Psal. 34.5 . ( juxta Graec. Ver. ) Psal. 103.5 . Isa. 1.16 . Ezek. 36.25 , 26.  Psal. 51.10 . Joh. 1.13 . & 3.5 , 6.  Rom. 6.3 , 6. 1  Cor. 6.11 . Gal. 3.27 . Ephe. 4.22 , 24.  & 5.26 . Col. 2.11 , 13.  Tit. 3.5 . Heb. 6 4 & 10.22 . Quae loca Illuminationem , purificationem , renascentiam , regenerationem , refectionem , sanctificationem , mortificationem , vivisicationem , cordis renovationem , imaginis restaurationem , spiritus infusionem , hominem veterem exutum , crucifixum , abolitum hominem novum , Christum ipsum indutum , loquuntur : nec aut ad solam reatus amotionem possunt accommodari , aut de ea sola saltem , ab ullo ( opinor ) unquam interpret sunt exposita . Constat itaque Patres antiquos tam Regenerationem propriè dictam , quae in hominis renovatione interná consistit , quam peccati sive originalis , sive actualis remissionem sacramento isti tribuisse . Constat & ex iis quae suprà indicavimus , aevi itiden inferioris Scriptores plerosque cum in eadem sententia fuisse , tum & in canden mentem patrum priscorum dicta cepisse : So far Gataker . 

If all these terms be equivocal , and none of them signifying saving Grace , we must even give up the use or certainty of Language . 

But it may possibly be Objected , that this was the Father's error , who ascribed too much to Baptism . Answ. What ever they did in that , it proveth the point in hand , and showeth us what persons the baptised and the visible Church were taken for by the Fathers . 

Object . But doth it not rather show that saving Faith was not presupposed , because they supposed that Baptism did give the spirit , and sanctification , and therefore found not men sanctified before . 

Answ. 1.  It is undeniable that they took all that were duly baptised , to be presently in a state of salvation , without any delay : and therefore they did not take Baptism as a common Ordinance to lead men up to the use of other Church Ordinances , as the Supper , etc. ( which is also common to the notoriously ungodly , ) and so to saving grace . 

2.  And if the catholic Church hath in all ages thus annexed saving Grace to Baptism , and made any common faith the condition qualifying the person for this Baptism , than it would be plain that they all affixed saving Grace to the preparation of common Grace , and so the Catholic Church hath been Pelagian : which he that shall affirm , will do that for the Pelagian Cause which will better please the Jesuits than any considerate Reform Divines . It is therefore not to be doubted o● but that it was some Antecedent special Grace to which they thus confidently affixed other saving Grace . Which will the more appear , in that Austin himself , and those that followed him against the Pelagians , and the councils that opposed them , went all the same way ; which could not be the Pelagian way . 

3.  It was the constant Doctrine of these Fatherland the Church , then , that Faith and Repentance ( given in 〈◊〉 ) did go first ; and that Justification , Adoption , and San●●i●i●a●ion followed after . ( And so hold all the reform Divine● that I know of , till Mr. Pemble lately contradicted it . ) And so they took this Justifying Faith and true Repentance to be prerequisite to Baptism ; and therefore note , 1.  That all the forementioned terms describe only Justification and Sanctification . 2.  That they never speak a word of Justifying Faith or Repentance infused by Baptism ; for these are supposed . 3.  That therefore they ever enquired before hand whether they believed in God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , and renounced the Flesh , the World , and the Devil ( as is aforesaid ; ) and caused them to profess this before they would baptised them . 

4.  The Fathers erred not so much as many suppose in their ascribing to Baptism . For 1. sometime by Baptism they mean not only the external Ordinance , but the whole work therein to be done ; viz. the Accepting Christ solemnly in Covenant , and giving up ourselves , as a sanctified people to him , renouncing the Flesh , the World , and the Devil , and so becoming fully Christians . This is baptism with them , and not the outward sign alone . And what saith Peter lesle , when he saith , [ Baptism saveth us ] and thus expoundeth himself when he hath done ? And what say the Father's more ? 2.  When they speak of these effects of Baptism , they suppose a due recipient or subject , that is , A true Believer , or the Seed of such : and therefore they oft speak of the inefficacy of the outward Baptism to Hypocrites . 3.  When they speak of the outward Ordinance only , the collation which they ascribe to it , and all the great effects , are to be understood but by way of obsignation and solemnisation , and not solely , excluding the internal Faith and the Covenant : as actual solemnised Marriage gives a woman right to her husband and all that he hath , when yet she had a right by secret Covenant and Contract before . Now common Reason , and the Nature of the thing and many of the Contexts showing that the Fathers and Councils must be thus expounded according to these Rules , I would fain know how they deserve that heavy accusation that we commonly lay upon them for their Judgement in this , or what ground the Papists have to pled them generally for their efficay ex opere operato ? And yet I will not excuse each particular person of them thus . 

Object . But it is the Baptism of the Adult that the Church hath generally ascribed so much to ; and therefore though they took all the Adult for Regenerate and Justified when baptised , yet they did not judge so of Infants . Answ. I will answer this in Mr. Gatakers words . ibid. pag. 64.  [ 1.  Quae de Bapt●smo in genere enunciantur , etiam paedobaptismo conveniant necesse est , quod sub isto comprehendatur . 2.  Baptismum unum eundemque agnoscere se profitentur veteres , adultorum parvulorumque ; nec diversum in his ab illis effectum ejusdem . 3.  Etiam parvulorum Baptismi disertè meminerunt aliquoties , ubi baptismo ista tribuunt . 4.  Axioma illud quod ab adversa parte urgetur tantopere de Sacramentorum effectis , ubi obex non ponitur , adversus ipsos cum primis valer . ] 

Object . But the Father's sly to the Parents or pro-parents faith , when they speak of Infants right to Baptism : therefore its plain that they supposed it not in themselves . Answ. True : By which you may discern that Faith was presupposed as the Evidence of their right to Baptism and its effects , that is , to Justification and Sanctification : and therefore it was such a Faith as had the promise of these effects , viz. Justification and Sanctification ; and therefore not another kind of faith . And this faith was supposed to be in the Parent for himself and his seed , because the condition or qualification of the Infant is but this , that he be the seed of a Believer . But than you must note , that though they supposed the condition of Right ; viz. faith to be in the Parent , and not in the Infant himself , yet they always affirmed the consequent fruits ; viz. Regeneration , and Justification and Adoption to be in the Infant himself and not in the Parent for him . I may answer this therefore in Mr. Gatakers words , ibid. pag. 65.  [ Resp. 1  Aliud est fides ipsa , aliud Regeneratio , seu mentis internae renovatio , quae sine fidei actu ullo consistere potest . 2.  Ad fidem Patres alienam adeò confugiunt , ubi de parvulorum salute agunt ; quia fidei alienae beneficio foedere continentur , & ab Baptismiritum suscipiendum jus obtinent . Vid. Bellarm . de Bapt. lib. 1. c. 11.  Prop. 5.  

Object . But is it a likely thing that the Fathers and Catholic Church should be so blind as to take all for truly justified and regenerate that are baptised ? then either they must take all the members of the Visible Church to be such , and so be saved ; or else they must suppose them to fall away from saving grace . 

Answ. 1.  The supposition of falling away was too common with them , though a few words on the by have fallen from some few of them that seem inconsistent with it . 2.  They did not take All Collectively to be justified that were baptised and Church-members , but All Distributively , or each single person , 3.  And that was only by that judgement which is grounded on human faith , because they are bound , fide humanâ , to believe that he is a true believer that professeth himself so to be , as all the baptised at age did . 4.  But when they came 1. to speak of All collectively , 2. or of Hypocrites in general , 3 or of any that did after discover themselves to have dissembled in Baptism particularly ; then they declare the uneffectualness of Baptism to those Hypocrites , and that they took not all the Visible Church to consist of justified ones ; but that the Hypocrites , though baptised , were but the chaff , and the upright were the Wheat . But it is but Hypocrites that they say this of , and not men that never ( by themselves , or their Parents , or Pro-parents ) did so much as profess the Christian justifying faith , but only a faith of another kind ; 

And as it is true of the Ancient Church that they never baptised any without the Profession of saving faith and Repentance , so it is true of all the Christian Churches in the world , that I can hear of to this day . The Papists themselves do use the same words in Baptism , as are afore expressed , and require a Profession in the Parents or pro-parents , or the person , if at age , that they believe in God the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost , and that they renounce the Flesh , the World , and the Devil . And though their false Doctrine force them to mis-expound their own words , yet custom hinders them from changing them . And about the sense , they are not agreed among themselves . Some of them , as is said , would have Baptism only ( necessarily ) to admit Infants into the visible Church , and place them under Government and ordinances and give them ex opere operato a certain preparatory grace . Some of them will have it to imprint an indelible Character ( they know not what ) and to give them true Sanctification ( which they call justification ) by inherent grace . Some of them affirm , that as to Infant-baptism the Council of Trent hath not defined whether it justify or not , and therefore it is not the fide . And Accordingly , some of them make true faith pre-requisite in the Parents ; and some of them make a certain congruous disposition ( Meritum de congruo ) to be pre-requisite ; but wherein that congruous Merit must consist , they know not , or are not yet agreed : Commonly its thought to be in a fides informis , or bare Assent . ( Which Mr. Blake calls a dogmatical Faith ) conjunct with a reverend esteem of the Sacraments and a consent to become members of the Catholic Church , and to be under their Government , and use the Ordinances : Or a consent in the Parent that the child do these . 

And for the reform Churches , it is passed all question by their constant practice that they require the Profession of a saving Christian Faith , and take not up with any lower . The Practice of the Church of England , till the late change , may be seen in the Common-prayer-book , wherein all that is forementioned is required . 

The Judgement of the present Guides of our Churches ( as to the most ) is easy to be known by the Conclusions of the late Assembly at Westminster . In the larger Catechism they say [ baptism is not to be administered to any that are out of the visible Church , and so strangers to the Covenant of promise , till they profess their Faith in Christ , and obedience to him : but Infants descending from Parents , either both , or but one of them , professing faith in Christ , & obedience to him , are in that respect within the covenant , and to be baptised . ] Here you may see whom they take to be of the visible Church , and in that respect within the covenant . 1.  The words [ professing faith in Christ ] if they were alone do signify a justifying faith professed . For though [ to believe in Christ ] may sometime signify a lower kind of Faith , yet analogum per se positum , stat pro famosiori significato . 2.  But that there may be no doubt of their meaning , they add the necessity also of a profession of Obedience to Christ , to show that it is the working faith which must be professed . And it is not only a Promise of Obedience for some distant futurity , but the Profession of it , which they make necessary . And I conceive that he that professeth faith in Christ , and obedience to him , professeth that which will prove saving , if he have but what he professeth . 

The same they say in their confession of Faith. Cap. , 28.  And again in the shorter Catechism : Profession of Faith in Christ , and obedience to him , is the thing required . In the Directory also they tell us that Baptism is a seal of the Covenant of Grace , of our engraffing into Christ , and of our Union with him , of remission of sin , Regeneration , Adoption , and Eternal Life : that the water in Baptism representeth and signifieth both the blood of Christ , which taketh away all guilt of sin original and actual , and the sanctifying virtue of the spirit of Christ against the dominion of sin and corruption of our sinful nature That baptising , or sprinkling and washing with water signifieth the cleansing from sin , etc.  That the promise is made to believers and their seed , etc.  And they mean , no doubt , the promise of the foresaid special mercies : for even Mr. Blake himself doth ( once ) deny any promise of baptism to be made to the Infants that he pleadeth for . And the promise of Justification , Adoption , etc. is made to no believers , but those that have justifying faith , otherwise than as it is barely offered , and so it is to Infidels also . 

They add also in the same place [ that All who are baptised in the name of Christ do renounce , and by their baptism are bound to fight against the Devil the World , and the flesh . ] 

All this is further manifest in our daily administration of Baptism . I never heard any man baptise an Infant but upon the Parents , or Susceptors , or Offerers Profession of a justifying faith . Nor do I believe that Mr. Blake himself doth baptise any otherwise ; though he dispute against this , and for another Baptism . The grounds of my conjecture are , 1.  Because I suppose he is loath to be so singular as to forsake the course of the Church in all ages : And therefore I conjecture that he requireth them to profess that they believe in God the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost , and that they renounce the world , the Flesh , and the Devil . 2.  Because he so often professeth that he taketh the baptised to be in covenant with God , and that this covenant is by them entered in baptism & he saith that he knoweth but of one Covenant , and that is the covenant of saving grace ; and that they are presently obliged ( debetur quovis tempore ) and therefore it is not only for a distant futurity that they engage themselves . And if this be so , it is past doubt that they profess a saving faith . For the Gospel hath two parts , 1. the Narrative , or History of Christ's person , and sufferings , resurrection etc.  2. and the offer of Christ and life to sinners ; Accordingly Faith hath two parts ; 1. the Assent to the History , or to the truth of the Christian Doctrine , ( and this Mr. Blake maintaineth to be necessary ) and 2.  Consent to the offer : And this is called the Receiving of Christ : And this is our Internal covenanting , which Mr. Blake confesseth necessary . For the covenanting of the Heart is this very consent , with a resolution for future duty : and the covenanting of the mouth is the Expression or Profession of this Consent , with a promise of the necessary consequent duty So that though Mr. Blake do say pag. 171. that [ ●ustifying Faith is with him the thing promised ] and do thrust from him the imputation [ of such an egregious piece of affected nonsense ] as to say , that justifying faith is a promise : Yet it is not only all the sense that I have of the nature of justifying faith , ( that i● is an Assent to the Truth of the Gospel with a consent to the offer , or heart-promise to be Christ's ) but it must also be his own sense though disaffected , or else he must palpably contradict himself : There being no other internal entering or accepting the Covenant or Offer of Grace , but by that consent and heart promise . 3.  And I must also conjecture this , because we even now found Mr. Blake denying that ever he denied the necessity of the Profession of a saving faith to baptism . But if in my conjectures I be mistaken in Mr. Blakes practice , I must say that I know not of any man else living , esteemed a Christian Pastor , that baptizeth upon any lower faith , without the profession of a justifying faith , and that Repentance which is its constant concomitant . 

I had gathered a great many expressions of the Ancients which I had thought to have inserted to show their judgement : But perceiving it wholly needless because of the forementioned Evidence , I supersede that labour . 

And it seems not very necessary to mention the judgements of our reform Divines , as expressed in any of their particular sayings , when their public Confessions and Practices are so satisfactory herein . 

I have recited many of their Testimonies before , and more that conduce to this end , I shall reserve to the following Disputation , and therefore shall here add the fewer . 

Calvin . in Act. 8.37 . saith , [ Quòd non admittitur Eunuchus ad baptismum nisi fidem professus , hinc sumenda est universalis regula , Non ante recipiendos esse in Ecclesiam qui ab ea prius fuerant alieni quam ubi testati fuerint Christo se credere . Est enim Baptismus quasi sidei appendix : ideoque ordine posterior est . Deinde si datur sine fide , cujus est figillum , & impia , & nimis crassa est prophanatio . ] Here note , 1.  That Baptism ( as received ) is the seal of our faith , ( how much soever denied by Mr. Blake ) as it is the seal of God's Promise , as administered . 2. that the constant order is that baptism follow faith . 3.  And that it is no better than an impious profanation of it , if it go without faith ; that is , 1.  If the party seek it without the Presence of faith . 2.  If the Pastor administer it without the Profession of Faith.  

And that it is no other than true Christian saving Faith that he means , appears by his following words : [ Sed scriptura totum cor saepe accipit pro sincero & non fucato , cui opponitur , Cor duplex . Ita non est quod perfectè credere imaginemur , qui ex toto cord credunt : quando infirma & pusilla sides in eo esse poterit , cui tamen integer erit animus & omni fictione purus . Sic accipere convenit quod David juctat , Se diligere Dominum ex toto cord , etc.  Fides ergo totius cordis est , quae in cord vivas radices habens , ad quotidi●nos tamen profectus aspirat . ] 

The foresaid passage of Calvin is lately cited by some Ministers that put forth [ certain propositions tending to Reformation of the Parish Congregations in England : p●inted for the Norwich Bookseller , 1655. p. 16. who p. 17. answer Mr. Blakes opinion . 

Calvin in Act. 2.38 . [ Tametsi in contextu verborum b●ptismus remissionem peccatorum hìc praece●it , ordine tamen sequitur ; quia nihil aliud est quam bonorum quae per Christum consequimur obsignatio etc. ] See the rest there before cited . 

See him also at large . Institut . lib. 4. cap. 15. where he shows that Baptism is appointed to seal up the present pardon of sin , and to show our mortification and newness of life , etc.  And so that it is to be administered to them that believe . Yet he maintaineth , that the use of it is also for the pardon of sin through all our life after ; but that is only to be given as the consolation of the truly penitent . 

Beza confess . side . cap. 4.  § . 46 , 17. pa. ( mihi ) 28 , 29. knows no faith but one , and that the saving faith which all must bring to the Sacrament that will have the thing signified ; and all that are without it he reckoneth hypocriets , and knows no other baptised ones but elect believers and hypocrites ; and saith , that upon the confession of true faith in baptism , we are to take them for faithful , till they show themselves hypocrites . [ Affi●mamus signa exteriora naturali modo percipitur à fidelibus , tum ab infidelibus , sed cont●a●io pro●sus eventu . Fiddles praeter signare● ipsas percipiunt , etc.  Res ipsa baptismi est aspersio sanguinis Christi in missionem omnium peccatorum , Mortificatio , Regeneratio , etc.  Fides antem illud unum est per quod homines rem Sacramenti sibi applicant etc.  Fides haec non oritur à nobis sed gratuito communicatur electis , etc.  Interea Charitas jubet ut pro fidelibus agnoscamus quotquot ve●ae fi●ei Confessionem edunt , tantis per dum hypocritae patefiant ] 

Also in his Absters . Calum . Heshusiit pag. 333. ad 7 mam Cal. he is more full , showing that Faith and Adoption go before Baptism ; yet that the Church doth judge ex probabilibus conjecturis an aliquis ad Christum pertineat , putà in infantibus , si quis ex infidelibus sit prognatus : in adultis , si quis Christianam fidem se amplecti profiteatur , & Ecclesiae per baptismum inseri roget . ] And by the next words he shows that he means by [ being in Covenant , and belonging to Christ , & believing ] that which is proper to the elect ; [ Nam potest quidem esse ex Reproborum numero qui ex fidelibus est prognatus , & potest aliquis simulare se Christianun ; sed occulta haec Deo , etc. ] Et postea : [ Meritò arbitramur infants Fidelium in peculio Domini censeri , & Spiritu sancto profundi , ( that is , before baptism . ) 

And yet more fully in his Question : & Respons . n. 106 , etc. pag. 343.  [ Q. Quid significat In Nomen ? R. Sic declaratur Baptismus esse solenne jusjurandum quo baptizandus seize totum addicit uni Deo & trino , etc.  [ Vid. reliq . Now it is certain , that he that professeth [ se totum Deo addicere , ] professeth no lesle than a saving faith , 6r else there is no profession of it . 

Pag. 345.  Q. 123.  [ Sed multos etiam ex sanctissimis prognatos , ad Foedus nihil pertinere declarat Esavi exemplum & quotidiana experientia . ( Mark that he makes ad foedus pertinere proper to the elect . ) R. Multi quoque ex adultis fidem ore profitentibus hypocritae sunt ; ( He talks of none but sound believers and hypocrites ; ) sed occulta illa particularia judicia Deo relinquenda sunt . Benè autem sperare nos in●genere de iis omnibus qui ex fidelibus noscuntur , & foederis forma indefinita jubet , & charitas monet . ] And the next Question and Answer shows that he speaks of saving Faith. And pag. 346.  Q. 127.  [ Ergò servantur omnes ex pio parent oriundi ? R. Certè meritò praesumuntur servandi , ut qui in foedere comprehensi videantur probabili neque imaginariâ duntaxat conjecturâ . Sed hoc interea nihil praejudicat occultis , & particularibus Dei judiciite : & excipiendos esse liquet , qui cum adoleverint , illam Gratiam suâ incredulitate excutiunt . 

Pag. 347.  Q. 133.  [ Sed quum is qui Papista est , non sit verè Christianus , non ejusmodi hominem adulium , nec dum baptizatum , ad Baptismum admitteres ? R. Nequaquam nisi prius Catechumenum factum , & Papismo renunciantem . Q Ejusmodi verò parentibus natum infantem admitteres ? R. Nè id quidem temere facerem . Q. Quibus ergo Conditionibus ? R. Nempe si vel ex parentibus aut cognatis aliquis , Papismum ejurans , & infantem habens in potestate , hoc à me postularet : vel alioqui idoneus Sponsor adesset , qui piam & rectam Infantis institutionem polliceretur . ] 

See him also in 〈◊〉 Anno. in Act. 8.37 . & Act. 2.38 . Rome 63 , etc.  

Pet. Martyr in Rom. 3. pag. ( mihi ) 148.  [ Quodque isti sibi fingunt Poenitentiam non requi●i●in B●ptismo , potissimum verò quando tinguntur adulti , & vanum est , & Scriptures palam adversatur , etc. ] And that you may see that he meaneth saving Repentance and Faith , and oweth not Mr. Blake's lower sort , he faith before [ Sed quicquid illi dicunt , una est ratio verae poenitentiae , ut ex animo doleamus admissa peccata , quae Deum à nobis abalienaverunt : Cui dolori adjungitur desiderium condona ionis , & preces ut eam obtineamus , cum certo proposi●o non ampliùs incurrendi in eadem peccata , & voluntate mortificandi veterem & induendi novum homin●m Quae omnia side niti oportet , quia sine illa constare non possunt . ] Leg. & in c. 4. pag. 176. & in c 5. p. 254. & in c. 6. p. 334. etc. & p. 339. etc.  

Et loc . Commun . Cl. 4. c. 8 p. 821.  § . 3.4 . & § . 6. pag 823.  [ Non excludimus eos ( infants ) ab Ecclesia , sed ut ejus parts amplectimur , benè sperantes , quod ut sunt secundum carnem semen Sanctorum , ità etiam sint Electionis divinae participes , & Spiritum sanctum & gratiam Christi habeant ; atque hoc nomine illos bap●izamus . Neque audiendi sunt qui hac de re movent scrupulum , ac dicunt , Quid si Minister fallatur ? Quid sirevera Puer neque est filius Promissionis , divinae Electionis atque Misericordiae ? quia idem cavillus esse poterit de adultis . Nam de illis quoque ignoramus sictè neone accedant , an verè credant ; an sint filii Praedestinationis , an Perditionis ? an Christi gratiam habeant , an illà sint destituti , & mendaciter dicant se credere ? Quid tu illos baptizat ? Scio dices , idcirco id facio quòd sequor illorum externam professionem , quam si mentiaentur , meâ non refer● . Ita nos dicimus , Ecclesiam ideò complecti nostros pueros & baptizare , quòd ad nos pertineant . Idque est illi Divinae voluntatis tale indicium , quale est in adult●s externa professio : quia ut ibi falli potest , ita etiam hic . Non est res adeò certa , quin aliter haberi possit , etc ] Vid. & sect . 11.  And of the sum of the Covenant , sect . 12. he shows that it extendeth to salvation , [ Ero Deus tuus , & Seminis tui : Illi sanè quibus Deus exhibetur , à morte , peccato , atque damnatione liberantur : quandoquidem hoc proprium Deo convenit , ut suos liberet ac servet . ] 

Et sect . 15 pag. 826.  [ Putant ( adversarii ) vi & efficaciâ operit Baptismi peccatum remitti ; neque agnoscunt Sacramentis potius Remissionem obsignari , quam adulti assequuntur credendo , & parvuli fidelium qui ad electionem pertinent , per Spiritum sanctum & Gratiam jam habent , etc. Eph. 5.25 . Sanè hoc loco vides , Ecclesiam esse quae lavatur & baptizatur . Idcirco dum parvuli tinguntur , constat ad Ecclesiam pertinere : & Ecclesiae parts verè esse non possunt , nisi spiritu Christi sint ornati , Quamobrom parvuli qui verè ad electionem Dei pertinent , antequam baptizentur , spiritu Domini sunt instructi . ] Vid. sect . 16.17 . And on 1 King. 8. folio 74. the same Peter Martyr saith , [ Justificatio ex Baptismo non pendet , sed antecedit . Object . Quorsum ergò Baptismus eyes traditur , si ante rem Baptismi habuerint ? Resp. 1  Quia Deo paremus , etc. 2.  Promissionem & do●um quod accepimus obsignamus . 3.  Ibi à Spiritu sancto per Verbum & externa Symbola Fides confirmatur . ] 

Piscator in Mat. 3.11 . [ At nullum inquam Sacramentum organum est Fidei donandae , sed Sacramenta sunt organa Fidem jam donatam confirmandi ; ad hunc enim usum à Deo sunt instituta , etc. ] Vid. reliq . where he calleth Simon Magus an hypocrite , and in Acts 8.13 . expoundeth simon 's 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 by Professus est fidem . In ver . ●6 . Adulti antequam baptizentur , suam in Christum fidem prositeri debent . ( Which I before showed , he takes to be that Faith which is joined with true Repentance for Remission of sins ) Vid. & in Acts 2.38 . Scholar  

Altingius Loc. Comm. Par. 1. pag. 201.203 . Vid. quae habet de forma & sine B●ptismi . Et de Subjecto inquit , [ Subjectum Baptismi est Populus fidelis , sive verè sit , sive censeatur talis ob externam fidei professionem , etc.  Where he shows , that it must be true Faith or the Profession of true Faith , and not of any other kind . Et Par. 2 pag. 608.  [ In adultis Resipiscentia ac Fide● , vel saltem utrusque Professio praecedere debet Baptismum . ] 

Also more plainly in his Problem . Theol. part . 1.  Pr. 59 pag. 223.  [ At quotquot adulti baptizantur secundùm Institutionem Christi , two ante Baptismum jam habent per fidem ablutionem peccatorum : ut Abraham justitiam ante Circumcisionem , Rom. 4.10 , 11. est etim Baptismus Credentium , , Mar. 16.16 . Act. 2.38 , 39  Act. 15.9 . Ergò . ] Vid. etiam Explicat . Cateche● . Par. 2.  Q. 71. pag. 316.  

Junius Thes. Theolog. Vol. 1.  Col. 2113.  [ Fides enim , vel saltem semen fidei , praecedat necesse est , quandoquidem quicquid absque fide peccatum est . mò tam necessaria fides , ut Sacramentum damnet , etc. ] The words before and after show that he speaks of Justifying faith Et Col. 2117.  Finis Primarius est significare & designare in cordibus fidelium gratiam Dei Patris in filio suo , Rom. 6.4 . 1 Cor. 10.16 etc.  [ Respectu hominis igitur necessum est ut p●aecedat Fides , vel saltem Foedus & semen fidei ( ut Infantibus , quod coram Deo idem cum actu valet ; ) nam sine fide nullus Jesus , Ep. 3.17 Extra Christum , nihil nisi mors est , Joan. 3.36 . Et sine Christo nulla gratia , Eph. 2.5 . Imo quicquid sine fide sit peccatum est , Rom. 14.23 . Ideoque si vivere velimus , fide opus est . Gal. 2.16 . Si Justificari propter Christum , id fit solâ fide , Gal. 3.11 . ] It is expressly Justifying faith that then he speaks of . 

Polanus Syntagm . lib. 6. cap. 55. pag. 494. thus defineth Baptism [ Bapt●smus est primum Sacramentum novi Testamenti , in quo illi , ad q●os foedus gratiae Dei pertinet , juxta mandatum Christi , aquâ persunduntur seu abluuntur in nomen Patris , Filii , & spiritus Sancti , id est , ut illis qui baptizantur significetur & obsignetur , eos in communionem foederis Gratiae susceptos , Christo & Corpori ejus mystico Ecclesiae ●nsertos , justificari à Deo propte● effusum pro nobis sanguinem Christi , & regenerari per Spiritum Christi : & vic●ssim obligentur ad colendum fide & bona conscientia & invocandum r●ligiosè solum hunc Deum , Patrem , Filium , & Spiritum Sanctum . ] 

Pag. 495.  [ Quemadmodum soli baptizandi sunt qui in foedere gratiae censentur : ita fidelis qui baptizatur , suscipit externum baptismum aquae , ut ei significetur & obsignetur , ipsum tam certò a peccatis sanguine & spiritu Christi ablui , quam certâ aquâ corpus ipsius persunditur & abluitur . [ Baptizandi sunt non tantum adulti fidem in Christum prositentes , sed etiam infants Christianorum . Adultis , sed fidem in Christum professi● Baptismum posse & debere conferri extra controversiam est . ] And he still takes Fides in Christum for saving Faith here . 

Infants baptizandi . Ro. 2.  Quia ad ipsos pertinet Promissio Remissionis peccatorum per sanguinem Christi . ] H●●herefore supposeth Infants to have the special benefits of the Promise . 

Zanchius de Sacr. Scripture . Tract . integ . pag. ( mihi ) 350 , 351. maketh baptising into the name of Christ to signify such a professed Devotedness to him , [ ut sciamus nos non esse nostros neque Diaboli , neque Mundi , sed Patris , Filii , & Spiritus sancti , sicut cum Merces ab aliquo Mercatore emptae obsignantur illius sigillo , cujus factae sunt , ut agnoscantur non ampliùs èsse illius à quo emptae sunt , sed illius qui emit : sic quoniam empti sumus sangnine Christi , cum hoc credimus , & nomen damus Christo , professi nos omnino velle esse Christi , & Christo inservire . ] And if this can be done by a faith short of saving , heartily and truly , than I know nothing that is proper to the Justified : To profess this therefore , is to profess true Sanctification , and consequently a Justifying faith . 

Idem Zanch. de Christianâ Relig. Fid. de Bapt. c. 15. pag. 516.  [ Baptismus est primum novi Foederis sacramentum , quo cum omnes , qui vel poenitentiam peccatorum professi , fidem etiam in Christum , adeóque in Deum Patrem , Filium , & Spiritum sanctum profitentur , vel saltem propter parentum piotatem ad foedus pertinent , Christ● , tanquam et jam per Spiritum sanctum incorporati , obsignantur ; ut non sint amplius fui juris , sedillius , per quem in foederis societatem , eóque in unum corpus cum eo , sanctisque omnibus , & in omnium spirituali●em coelestiúmque bonorum participationem asciti esse dicuntur , etc. ] And that you may know that it is no common Repentance , which they must profess in his sense , he addeth . Vnde & Sacramentum Poenitentiae in Remissionem peccatorum , etc. appellatur . ] Thess. 2.  Etsi verò hes omni● de Baptismo praedicentur , veréque illi tanquam organo Spiritus sancti ad hec efficienda attribuantur , eóque ut omnes qui baptizantur tales fieri & esse sacramentaliter verè dicantur , reipsâ tamen non nisi in electis , spiritu Christi donatis , impleri credimus ; cum two etiam soli verè credant , veréque ad Christum , & ad mysticum ejus Corpus pertineant . ] See also Thes. 4. of the necessity of professing Repentance and Faith.  

Much more to the same purpose out of Zanchius may be collected . 

Ursinus ( and Paraeus ) Catech. Qu. 69. p. 384 . 39●,3●1 . shows in the very definition of Baptism , that in the lawful use there is certain Remission of sin annexed . [ Vsus legitimus Baptismi est , quando baptizantur Conversi●ritu & sine instituto . Q●ando baptismus confertur iis quibus est institutus , nimirum Conversis & Ecclesiae membris , & quando ab his vera fides accipitur , juxta illud Licet tibi baptiz iri si credis toto cord . ] And pag. 329 he supposeth the Infants of Believers before Baptism to have the Holy Ghost and to be Regenerate . Many other passages he hath this way . 

Paraeus in Rom. 11. pag. 1179.  [ Neque Circumcisione illis jus Foederis tam conferebatur quam obsignabatur : Ità baptismo nobis idem jus non tam confertur demum quam obsignatur . Vid. Tertul. Obsignatioxem fidei , Chrysost. Signaculum fidei , Basilius . Segillum fidei , August . Sacramentum fidei baptismum appellant ; quo fidem haberi ante baptismum testantur . At fide habetur Adoptio : ergo ante baptismum etiam haberi adoptionem testantur . ] 

Item in Rom. 6. p. 59● , 597.  [ Resp. Praemissae sunt universaliter verae de Baptismo legitimo , qui est cum fide suscipitur Sacramentum : & de hoc u●ul quitur Apostolus ; de baptizatis nimirum fidelibus : de his solis vera conclusio , omnes baptizatos regenerari . De Simone Mago & Hypocritis sictè Sacramentum sumentibus Major est falsa ] 

Pag. 597.  Object . Qui non possunt promissiones oblatas fide percipere , nec mortificationem & vivificationem profiteri , non debent baptizari , etc. Resp. Major de Adultis vera est , quibus Baptismus conferri non debet , nisi fidem & poenitentiam professis . ] Here it is evident by the Description and the Concomitants , that is a saving faith whose profession he makes thus necessary . 

If yet there be any doubt of his Judgement , see in Rom. 4. pag 399 , 400.  [ Si Sacramenta non sunt instituta justificandu sed justificatis , h. e. non Infidelibus sed Conversis ; non igitur nisi conversione & Fide sumi debent : secus sigilla Justitiae esse cessant . Quid enim non habentibus Fadem & justitiam obsignarent ? [ Et antea [ Justitia Fidei est Remissio peccatorum fide accepta propter Redemptionem Christi . Ad hanc obsignandum Deus dedit , & Abraham accepit Circumcisioni signum ] I pass much of the like . 

Bucanus Loc. ● ommu● Q. 21.  [ Quid est b. pazari in nomine , Patris & Filii & Spiritus sancti ? Resp. Hac phrasi significatur invocto Patre● Filio & Spiritu sancto , eum qui baptizatur , remissis peccatis , in gratiam recipi à Deo , qui est Pater , Filius , & Spiritus sanctus , & acceptari , obsignari , initiari , in tugurari , recipi & consecrari in peculium , familiam , jus gratiam , religionem , fidem , communionem , etc.  Patris , filii , & Spiritus sancti , etc. ] 

Qu. 69. pag. 622.  Quinamsunt baptizandi ? Omnes vivi qui probabiliter ù Deo in Faeius recepti sunt , vel recepti esse perhibentur . jique vel adulti , qui ad Ecclesiam accedentes , doctrinae Evangeli ●ssensum praebent , sidem in Christum profitentur , peccatorum confessionem seu poenitentiam edunt , Mat. 3.6 . & 20.19 . Et Christus dixit primùm qui crediderit ( thats with a saving faith ) Postea & baptizatus fuerit , Marc 16.16 . Sic. Simon Magus admissus est , Eunuchus , & ali● ] See more fully the Answer to Quest. 31. p● 624.  

Synopsis Leydensis Disput. 44. pag 608.  § 27.  Pugnat hoc cum omnibus Scr●pturae locis , in quibus Fides & Resipiscontia , ac proinde ut Regenerationis initium ac semen in B●pt●zandis praexigitur . Causa autem efficiens effectu suo posterior esse non potest . Nec valet quicquam quorundam inter eos excep●io quâ baptismum adultorum ità distinguunt à baptismo Infant 'em , ut baptismum adultorum signum & signaculum Regenerationis acceptae esse concedant , sed infantium Baptismum instrumentum Regenerationis inchoanaae esse velint . Nam praeterquam quod illius d●fferentiae in tota Scriptura nulium extet fundamentum , quae Baptismum non nisi unius generis agnoscit , etc. ] 39  Efficaciam ergo Baptismi non alligamus ad momentum illud , quo aquà externà corpus tingitur , sed in omnibus b●ptizandis Fidem & Resipiscentium cum Scriptura praerequirimus , saltem secundum Charitatis Judicium ●idque tam in Infantibus foederatis , in quibus ex vi divinae Benedictionis & Foederis Evangelici , semen & spiritum Fidei ac Resip●scentiae statuendum esse contendimus ; quam in adultis , in quibus actualis ●idei & Resip●scentiae professio est necessaria . ] Leg. Thes. 31 , 32 , 33 , 34.  

Et 44 45 46. ] Nec tamen omnes homines in mundo viventes baptismi capaces sunt , sed illi tantum qui profoederatis & Novi Testaments haeredibus haberi à nobis possunt , cujus hoc Sacramentum sigillum & pignus est . 45.  Tales sunt primò omnes & soli adulti qui fidem in Christum & Resipiscentiam veram profitentur . etc. ] 46.  Siquis verò , licèt fidem professus , impiè vivat , baptismo initiandus non est ; quia baptismus non est tantùm sacramentum Fides , sed etiam Resipiscentiae ; ut nec ille , qui cum Fides in Christum & Poenitentiae professione , errores aut haereses contra fidei verae Fundamentum fovere , aut tueri velit : quia Resipiscentia non tantum est à vitae urpitudine ad vitae sanctitatem , sed etiam ab erroribus ad agnitionem veritatis , 2.  Tim. 2.23 . Imò verò tantum abest ut hae● etici a●t errorum talium fantores ad Baptismum sint admittendi , ut ex praecepto Apostoli , Rom. 16.17 . & alibi , à fidelibus sint vitandi , & ab Ecclesiae communione arcendi . ] I hope these are plain enough . 

Wendeline Christ. Theolog. l. 1. c. 22 pag. 455.  Materia circa quam Baptismus versatur , vel à qua recipitur , secundum Institutionem sunt omne ▪ & soli is homines qui probabiliter censentur esse in foedere Gratiae : quales sunt 1.  Adulti ex Judaismo & Ge●tilismo ad Christian●smum conversi , doctrinâ Christianâ imbuti , & in Ecclesia Fidem & Poenitentiam professi etc.  [ Et pag. 461.  Apostoli olim non baptizarunt , nisi eos qui jam actu erant fideles , vel ex judicio Charitatis pio verè fideles habebantur . Ergò baptismus ipsorum non suit organon quo Spiritus sanctus Fidem & Regenerationem in baptizatis inchoavit . Et proi●de tale org●non nec jam est . ] This shows that he speaks of Faith and Repentance which accompany Regeneration . The Antecedent he proves , first by the example of Lydia . Cornelius , the Eunuch etc. and Act. 2.41 . & 8 12 , 37.  Et post . [ Sed quoad ipsam fidem eadem est ratio Adultorum & Infantum . Nam ut illi baptizabantur , qui s●cundum Confessionem ipsorum credebant , & per fidem in foedere D●t●erant : sic & high baptizandi sunt , qui ex ●ffectus Charitatus pr●●fidelibus & verè foederatis habentur . ] Leg. Arg. 2.  

Et pag. 484.  Fuerunt enim baptizati fideles & renati . 

Et pag. 466.  [ Gal. 3.27 . Loquitur tantum de baptizatis fidelibus . Tum enim Adulti ex Judaismo & Gentilismo recèus conversi baptizabantur , & quidem postquam in Christum professi , & ex Judi●io Charitatis renati erant , Acts 8.37 . Plerique tum Adulti fuerunt bapt●zati , qui ante baptismum omnes induisse Christum sunt professi : fuerunt dubio precul in iis quoque multi hypocritae , etc.  

Pag. 467. ad Arg. 4.  B●ptizari in Rem●ssionem peccatorum , est per baptismum confirma● 〈◊〉 Rem●ssione pecc●torum . Sic baptizabantur olimab Apostoles Adulti in Rem●ssionem peccatorum , quam per fidem ante baptismum a●ceper●●t . Sec & Johannes praedic●bat baptismum Resipiscent●ae , ●d Remissionem peccatorum Marc. 1.4 . Qui tamen non baptizabat nisi ilios qu● Resi●●scentiam priu●●ssent prof●ssi , & Evangelio cred●d●ssent ver . 15. ] more such passages may be added . 

K●ckerman , System Theolog. goes so far as to say , [ pag. 446 , 447.  Qui sine fide utuntur Sacris Signis , non precipiunt ipsum formales male Sacramentorum , sed nudum tantùm materiale ; quia formaleseu relatio addita materiali requirit fidem utentis . Materiale autem etiam fine fide percipi potest ab indignis & hypocritis . ] Et pag 448.  Terminus cui , hoc est , id cui est institutum Sacramentum , sunt electi & fideles . ] These may be true of false , as the word [ Sacrament ] is taken . 

Festus Hommius speaketh the same words as many of the rest , in his Definition of Baptism , Dispu . 44 pag. 239. and his Supposition that Infants to be baptised have faith in actu primo , in radice & semine , atque interna Spiritus sancti virtute , Thes. 3.  I shall forbear reciting the words . 

Sam Maresius . Colleg. Theolog. loc . ult . pag. 494 [ Verbum inchoat sidem ; eam Sacramentum confirmat : ideò hoc non nisi fidelibus suo sensu , corumve libe●is administratur ] See more § 27 , 28. and § 51 pag. 5 11.  Baptismus conferri debet , non sacriligè etc. sed 1.  Adultis omnibus qui● Judiaesmo aut Ethnicismo transeunt ad religionem Christianam , nec antiquam in fide fuerint instituti , & eam profiteri queant , etc. Qui crediderit , & baptizatus fuerit , servabitur , Marc , 16.16 . ubi Fides praecedit baptismum tanquam conditio praerequisita ; non illum per modum effectus consequitur . Ita Act. 8.12 36 , 37.  Nec Philippus voluit confer baptismum Eunucho , nisi sub hac conditione , Si credis ex toto cord , licet . His citing ( Marc 16.16 . shows that he meant only saving faith . ) 2.  Etiam Foederatorum seu qui probabiliter tales censentur , infantibus , etc. ] See his Exeg . Artic. 24.  

Lud. Crocius speaks as the rest , Syntagm . Theol. l. 4. cap. 13. the bap . pag. 1143. etc. 1149 , etc.  

Beumlerus Theolog. lib. 3 , folio 159.  Baptismi objectum , cui is administrandus , sunt soli & omnes soederati Dei. Foederati sunt aut Adulti , aut Infants . Adulti sunt conversi ex Judaeis & Gentibus : quibus Baptismus non conferendus , nisi peccata & fidem in Christum consitentibus . ] And the reasons he gives next for Infant baptism , show he means a special faith , and his description of the Covenant . pag. 154.  Foedius Gratiae est , quo deus per fidem in Christum nos pro justis reputat , ac proinde pro faciis Foederis , quod in remissione peccatorum gratuitò & imputatione Justitiae Christi consistit , agnoscit . ] 

Georg. Solinius Method , Theolog. makes no other of the Adult the subject of Baptism , but the Professors of faith , pag. 245. and that either verè credentes , or hypocritae , pag. 244.  

Et in Exeges . Confes. August . pag. 823.  [ Si à Deo instituta sunt Sacramenta , ut generalis illa promissio gratiae de Remissione pecoatorum , & vi●ae aeternae , singulis qui Sacramentis legitimè utuntur peculialiter obsignetur , etc. ] At sacramenta in hunc sinem instituta sunt , Rom. 4 Gal. 3. CITIZEN  Pet. ● . 

Melancthon's Judgement is the same as the rest , as is apparent in his Common places ; and in Sohnius , Thes. Theol. ex Corpore doctr . Phil. Melancthonis . c. 19 pag. 59.60 , 61 , 92.  

Trelcatius Instit. Theol l. 2. p. 198.  [ Materia baptismum recipiens sunt omnes & soli qui probabiliter in foedere censentur . Censentur autem tam adulti , qui principiis fidei initiati , ad Ecclesiam accedentes , fidem suam & poenitentiam apud homines profitentur , tam infants , etc.  Many passages before and after show that he ( as others ) take to be foederatus or in foedere to be proper to the truly Regenerate , and therefore they truly say , qui probabiliter censentur esse in foedere . 

Jo. Ger. Vossius , Thes. de Sacram. Essicac . Th. 37.  Disp. 2. p. 3.28.339 mentioning the Answers of the Reform Divines to an Objection , divideth them into two parts , as not agreed in the point . The first is those , [ qui dicere solent , eum qui fidem habet praedicationi Evangelicae , virtualiter quidem salutem habere , quia & dispositus est ad salutem consequendam , & instrumento instructus , quo gratiam s●lutarem attingere & consequi possit , etc. ] And thus they confess that Faith goeth before Baptism , ( even this Justifying faith which they call the Instrument ) but they think that Justification and Sanctification follow Faith and Baptism . The other sort are they , who think [ that the Spirit by the Word ( before Baptism ) doth not only beget Faith , but also offer to Faith , and confer the spiritual Grace of Regeneration : So that both sorts agree of the Precedency of Faith ( in the Adult . ) 

And Thes. 42.  [ Contrae haec objicitur à quibusdam , quòd Abraham Justitiam Fidei habuerit ante Circumcisionem , Rom. 4.10 . quod item Cornelius gratiam Sanctificationis habuerit ante Baptismum , Act. 10.2 . verùm neque nos negamus , Gratiam Justificationis aut Sanctificationis ab Adultis ante Sacramenti usum Fide apprehendi : sed dicimus ordinariè ante usum Sacramentorun tenuem tantùm Gratiae gustum haberi : extraordinariè autem posse etiam tum auctiorem esse manifestiùsque sentiri . ] So that ordinarily some true saving grace antecedeth . 

Wollebius defineth Baptism thus ; [ Baptismus est primum novi Foederis Sacramentum ; in quo , Electis in Dei familiam receptis , externâ aquae aspersione peccatorum remissio & regeneratio per sanguinem Christi & Spiritum sanctum obsignatur . ] And p. ●21 . he makes it ( as others do ) one difference between the Word and Sacraments , [ Quod Verbo ordinariè Fides excitetur , Sacramentis confirmetur . ] And therefore Grace which may be confirmed , must be before expected . 

Luther Tom. 2.  Pag. 439. shows that Baptism containeth the Profession of saving Faith ; [ In Baptismo est Promissio Dei offerentis ; & nostrum VOVERE nihil aliud est quam ACCEPTARE CHRISTUM qui offertur nobis . Felix sanè votum quod non promittit dare , sed tantum bona accipere & acceptis adhaerere . ] 

Alstedius Definit . Theolog. pag. 137.  [ Baptismus 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 consideratus , est sacramentum in quo homo electus tam certò abluitur sanguine Christi , quam certò corpus ipsius aquâ aspergitur , Gal. 3.27 . Baptizari in Nomen Patris , Filii & Spiritus sancti , est baptizari in cultum sanctae Trinitatis , & quidem ità ut Pater , Filius & Spiritus sanctus nobis promittant Remissionem peccatorum & vitam aeternam , & nos vicissins' illis promittamus obsequium . ] Et Distinct. c. 27. pag. 129.  [ Vsus baptismi est commu●it vel singularis . Ille est respectu hypocritarum & credentium . ] There is no third sort acknowledged to have right to Baptism . 

Bishop Usher in his body of Divinity , pag 415.  [ The outward Elements are dispensed to all , who make an outward profession of the Gospel , ( for in Infants their being born in the Church , is instead of an outward Profession ; ) because man is not able to distinguish Corn from Ch●ff : but the inward grace of the Sacrament is not communicated to all , but to those only who are heirs of those Promises whereof the Sacraments are Seals . For without a man have his name in the Covenant , the Seal set to it confirms nothing to him . 

1.  It is here apparent that it is the outward Profession of no other than a saying faith that he meaneth . As also he shows afterwards . 1.  By opposing such Professors as Hypocrites , ( when have not the thing professed ) to the Elect and Justified , as here he doth the ( half to the Corn ; and 2. by his Description of the faith professed , [ The Church doth not only baptise those that are grown and of years , if any such being bred Pagans' be brought up within the pale of the Church , and testify their competent understanding of Christianity ; and profess their faith in the Lord Jesus , and Gods precious Promises of Remission of sins by his blood , and their earnest desire to be s●aled with Baptism for the strengthening of their souls in this faith . ] Quest Doth the inward Grace always accompany the outward sign ? Answ. no : but only when the Profession of their faith is not outward only and sergeant , but sincere and hearty , etc. ] Here then is no third sort that are hearty professors of a lower kind of faith . 

Amesius , Bellarm. Enervat . De Necessit . Bapt [ Gen. 17.  Ero Deus tuus & Sem●nis tui● Filii corum qui participes sunt benedictionis Abrahae , sunt Filii Dei etiam quum primò nascuntur , etc. 1.  Regenerationem esse partem promissionum , & singulari modo ad fidelium filios pertinere , forderis ipsius formula manifestè declarat . 2.  Filii Christi incipimus esse per fidem ante baptismum . 3.  Baptizantur propriè homines quia pro filiis Dei habentur ; non ut incipiant esse Filii . Alioquin ratio nulla esset quare filii infidelium non aequè baptizarentur ac filii fidelium . 

Et cap. 3. pag. ( mihi ) 53. [ repugnat haec distinctio ( of a faith before Baptism which is but a disposition to Justification , that is , to Sanctification ; and a faith after Baptism , wh●ch is an essential part of Sanctification ; which was Bellarmin's distinction ) 1.  Scripturae , quae fidem justificantem antecedere docet Baptismum , Acts 15.9.2 . Rationi & experientiae dictanti eâdem plane fide recipi Baptismum , quâ recipitur fructus Baptismi . 3.  Confessioni ipsius Bellarmini , quae extat lib. 2. the Effect . Sacr. cap. 13.  [ Adulti per fidem & contritionem veram Justificantur , antequam reipsa ad Sacramentum accedant . ] 

Dr. Willet on Rom. 4 Contr. 6 pag. 224. saith , [ The Sacraments then , non institut sunt Justificandis , s●d Justicatis ; are not instituted for those that are to be Justified , but are for them which are already Justified , ] as Paraeus . 

Musculus Loc. Commun . de Baptis . Artic. 2 pag. ( mihi ) 728.  [ Propter hanc , nondum debet baptizari , qui gratiam Christi praedicatam tam , sibi per incredulitatem aversatur , tantisper dum in eà tergiversatione & incredulitate perseverat & cor impoenitens retinet . ] Hâc de causâ Apostoli poenitentiam & sidei in Christum confessionem requirebant ab adultis , priusquam eos baptizarent . Sic Petrus , Act. 2. etc. His locis patet requiri ab adultis cor poenitens sermonem gratiae recipient , & in Christum credens : ità ut impenitents sermonem gratiae recusantes , & increduli , baptismi hujus capaces nondum esse qutant , etianisi sint de Electis , donec convertantur . 

Scharpius' Curs . Theolog. de Baptis . loc . 24. col . 1228.  [ Baptismus est primum Novi Testamenti sacramentum à Deo institutum , quo & Remissio peccatorum , Regeneratio , & initiatio in Ecclesiam significatur , & in fidelibus obsignatur , ut & obligatio nostr● ad obedientiam ] Col. 1254.1255 . [ Arg. 2.  Qui sunt in foedere gratiae , illi necessario servantur , licèt non habuerint signum foederis , quia foedus & ejus signum non sunt ejusdem necessitatis , etc. ] Arg. 3.  Infants sine Baptismo dicuntur sancti , 1 Cor. 7.14 . quia Baptismus infants sidelium non facit filios Dei , sed illis obsignat foedus gratiae , illósque in foedere contineri certos reddit . ] 

Col. 1193.  [ Quid recipiunt Impii in Sacramentis ? R. Nuda tantùm signa , idque ad condemnationem . 1.  Qua beneficia in Sacramentis oblata tantùm de fide percipiuntur : at Impii non habent fidem ; ergo . 2.  Nihil spirituale conserunt aut obsignant Sacramenta , nisi iis quibus in Verbo hoc promissum extat . At in Verbo nihil Impis promittitur , sed solis fidelibus : quia omnes promissiones habent annexam conditionem fidei : ergò . 3.  Christi beneficia tantùm in legitimo Sacramentorum usu percipiuntur : at nulli Impii legitimè Sacramentis utuntur , sed indignè participant , 1 Cor. 11.27 . ergò — ] Lèg Col. 1202 , 1203.  Resp ad Bellarm. Object . 5.  

Cartwright against the Rhemists on Mat. 3.6 . pag. 15 saith [ So that we bring not our children to the end that they should thereby have Remission of sins , but because we are by the promise induced to believe , that as being the Elect of God , they have already received it . Otherwise it were as much as to put the Seal to a blank wherein nothing is written , nor nothing is given . 

Dr. Fulk against the Rhemists on Rom. 6.  § 5. saith , [ The Apostle by express words excludeth Circumcision from being a cause of Justification , because Abraham was justified before he was circumcised , who is the form of Justification of all men , as St. Ambrose saith , Com. on Gal. cap. 3.  And Baptism succeeding in the place of Circumcision , is a seal of Justification by faith in all Christians , as Circumcision was in Abraham ; not a cause thereof ] See him on 1 Pet. 3.21 . 

The Divines of the Assembly that wrote the Anotat . on the Bible , say on Act. 8.27 . ( If thou believest , etc. ) With a sincere and perfect heart , without which Ephraim cannot save ; he had here to do with a man of years , and yet an alien , and therefore might not admit him into the Church of Christ , until he had made profession of his faith . ] You see here that it is a saving faith which they think necessary to admittance ; of which also they speak on , ver . 12.  [ Faith aught to precede Baptism in men and women of years , when they who were aliens and strangers come to be baptised : For it is necessary that they should confess their faith , and testify their Conversion before they be admitted by Baptism , Ambrosi . de Poenit. l. 2. c. 5.  

And the Repentance that was to precede Baptism in the Jews , Act. 2.38 . they expound thus : [ This Repentance is not only in knowing , or acknowledging our sins , or saying , God be merciful ; but in the change of our minds , purposes , and evil c●urseses of our Lives ; As Austin de Eccl. Dogm . cap. 58. saith very well ; [ Poenitentia vera est poenitenda non admittere , & admissa destere . See also Tertul. advers . Marc lib. 2. cap. 24. ] And on Mat. 3.6 . [ Confessing their sins ] In words professing their detestation of them and Repentance for them . 

Deodate on Acts 8.12 . [ Were baptised : Renouncing by the same means all manner of Impiety and Superstition etc. ] Verse 13.  Simon believed , ( made an outward profession of believing , or gave some assent to the doctrine , but hypocritically , and without giving way to the inward operation of the Holy Ghost , to a true conversion and lively Regeneration . ) 

On Mat. 3.6 . [ Were baptised confessing , etc. ] viz. to God in the person of John his Minister ; though not with a particular enumeration , but yet with a true feeling of compunction shame , & humble acknowledgement , and with hate and disturbance of sin , for to implore divine mercy . Act. 19.18 . [ So on Rom. 6.3 . ] Namely , for a Sacrament ; that we are Christian , not only by profession , but likewise in spiritual truth , receiving the grace and Spirit of God , and then cooperating thereto by faith , voluntary obedience , and newness of life ] Many other passages to the same purpose I omit . 

Rob. Bodius in Eph. 5.25 , 26 pag. [ Opus operatum ( Papistarum ) in alio gravissimo errore fundatum est ; quo nempe statuunt illi Baptizandos priusquam hoc signaculo obsignentur , Christi membra non esse , etc. p. 756.757 . [ Et sicut Abrabamo jam per fidem justificato , impressus est Des mandato novus ille circumcisionis Character , non ad Justiti●m primitus illi conferendam , sed ad eandem visibili illo signo obsignandam ; sic etiam in Christum credentibus adultis , jámque per eam fidem coram Deo justificatis , confertur ex Christi mandato Baptismi sigillum ; non ut per illud tum primùm Justitiam accipiant , ut absurdè docent Adversarii , sed ut illa fidei Justitia quâ jam in Christo doncti sunt , hoc externo Baptismi sigillo eorum cordibus obsignetur . ] Et pag. 760. col . 2.  [ Supponit quod falsum est , & à nobis constanter negatum & suprà refutatum , viz. Baptismum esse solum nos Justificandi & Sanctificandi instrumentum , nec ante mentes & conscientias nostras à peccatis ablui , quam externè baptizemur : Atque nos hucusque docuimus non primúm baptismo nos justificari & sanctificari , sed hoc sigillo , Remissionem peccatorum , Christique Justitiam jam per sidem nobis imputatam , ut & Sanctificationem nostran●am per Spiritum sanctum in nobis inchoatam , in cordibus credentium obsignari . 

Et pag 762. col . 2.  He expoundeth , 1 Cor. 7.14 . sanctitatem esse [ Jus illud quod habent ad Deifoedus gratuitum & bona spiritualia in Foederis promissione comprehensa ; nempe , ut Ecclesiae membra censeantur , & remissionem peccatorum & vitam aeternam in & per semen illud benedictum , nempe Jesum Christum Mediatorem , unà cum-piis parentibus , vel saltem eorum altero , consequantur . Jus ( inquam ) quod ex gratuita Dei 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 dependet , qui non tanùum cum ipsis parentibus sed & cum ipsorum semine , foedus suum pacisci , & bona in eo promissa usque ad fidelium parentum posteros extendere dignatus est , ut norint se non sibi tantum credere , & ad Deum converti , sed & instrumenta esse divinitùs ordinata , ad eandem Foederis Gratian in liberos posteròsque suos derivandam , donec ipsi in eam aetatem adoleverint quâ possint actu ad Deum toto cord converti , Christum mediatorem viuâ veráque , fide amplecti , eáque ipsi praestare , quae parents & susceptores pro ipssis & eorum nomine sposponderunt . Nec tamen Dei gratiam erga infants fidelium sic parentum fidei alligamus , ut ullum liberae & arcanae ejus electioni praejudicium faciamus , etc. sed hoc tantum asserimus , ex Dei voluntate nobis in foe●ere suo gratiose patefactâ , nobis const●re , i●fantibus , ad hoc ut ad Baptismum admittantur , & Ecclesiae Christi membra censcantur , donec in annos maturiores adoleverint , idem prorsus esse ac valere ( ad nostrum judicium quod attinet ) è Piis p●rentibus nosci , vel natos esse , quod adultis fideique capacibus fidem hanc proficeri . Nam sicut ex his , Deus solus novit qui verâ & salutae●i in Christum praediti sunt side , vel non sunt , ac proinde quinam ad suam electionem pertineant ; nostrum tantùm est Charitatis judicium , secundum quod eos omnes qui Christo fidem & obedientiam profitentur , pro sidelibus & electis habere debemus nisi seize factis & reapse alios ostenderi●t : ita etiam ex illis novit D●minus solus quosuam elegerit ; nostrum autem est ex eâdem Charitatis regulâ eos omnes pro Dei foederatis & Christi membris habere , quos videmus esse piorum & fidelium semen & sobolem , sive baptismo fuerint obsignati , sive , etc. ] See more there . 

So that he takes it to be a profession of a saving faith that is necessary in the adult , which must give us ground in the Judgement of Charity to judge them true believers and elect ; and that we suppose the like of their Infants in the same judgement : and therefore suppose them justified before we baptise them . 

Perkins , Order of Causes of Salv , pag. 71. c. 32.  [ A Sacrament is that whereby Christ and his saving Graces are by certain external rites signified exhibited , and sealed to a Christian man ] pag. 72.  The holy use of a Sacrament is , when such as are truly converted do use those rites which God hath prescribed to the true ends of the Sacrament . Therefore 1. the Reprobate , though God offer the whole Sacrament to them , yet they receive the signs alone without the things signified by the sign ; because the sign without the right use thereof is not a Sacrament to the receiver of it , Rom. 2.25.2 . The Sacrament received before a man's conversion , is afterwards to the Penitent both ratified & becometh profitable : and that use of the Sacrament , which before was utterly unlawful , doth then become very lawful Leg p 74.  [ The action of the party to be baptised is twofold : the first is . To offer himself to be baptised before the Minister , etc.  This signifieth that he doth consecrate himself to the Lord , and th●t he utterly renounceth the Flesh , the World , and the Devil , 1 Pet. 3.21 . ] 

And pag. 73.  Within the Covenant are all the seed of Abraham , or the seed of the faithful . These are either of riper years , or Infants . Those of riper years are all such as adjoining themselves to the Visible Church , do both testify their Repentance of their sins , and hold the foundation of Religion taught in the Church . ] 

Anton. Fayus in Rome 4.11 . pag. 239. saith , [ Fides ergò praecedit Sacramenta , quae absque side sunt tantùm inania signa ; & eandem sidem Sacramenta fou●nt & augent . ] And he fully shows that he speaks of Justifying Faith.  

Et in Rome 6.3 . pag. 3●1S [ Baptismus non facit nos Christianos' , Filios Dei , peccato mortuos , sed tales nos esse indicat . ] 

Lud. de Dieu in Rome 4.11 . saith , [ Nisi Abrahami praeputio praeextitisset sides , vanum fuisset signum Circumcisionis . Itaque vel eo quòd signum ei fuit datum , colligitur jam ante habuisse fidem . ] Et in Hebr. 6. pag. 305.  [ Add quòd ablutio Baptismi , repurgatae à tenebris peccati , adeòque illuminatae mentis sit indicium & obsignaculum , ut reipsâ illuminationem profiteatur qui baptismum suscipit : ] that is , such illumination as hath mentem à tenebris peccati repurgatam . 

Michaël Ragerus , ( though of that party that give too much to Sacraments ) saith , in Rom. 4.11 . pag. 104.  Obsignatio & confirmatio praesupponit gratiam , vel collatam jam , vel mediante sacramento conferendam : quibus verò gratia non confertur , illis non obsignatur per sacramentum . Ità igitur gratia Regenerationis hypocritae adulto per baptismum neque confertur , neque obsignatur . ] Et in Rome 6.3 . Vide plura . 

Hemmingius in Rom. 4.11 . putteth true faith into the Definition of a Sacrament ; [ Sacramentum est visible signum mandatum & institutum à Deo , quo ut Deus hominibus suam gratiam testatur & obsignat ; ità homines vicissim suam in Deum sidem profitentur , càmque usu Sacramentorum confirmat . ( The Context shows that its Justifying faith which he means ) Hinc etiam apparet quis sit principalis finis Sacramentorum , videlicet obsignare promissam gratiam , quae fide accipitur & possidetur . ] Vide plura in Rom. 6.3.4 . ex Ambrosio , pag. 142.  

Yates Model of Divin . pag. 330 , 331.  [ Christ in the Sacrament profiteth not except he be eaten by faith . A Reprobate may receive bread ; but the sign , seal , and thing signified are none of his : for he hath no experience of this mystery , that wants the first part of Divinity , without which the second cannot work . ] So Christ with all his benefits being received , and the fruits thereof being truly received by faith is our happy communion with the body and blood of Christ : Otherwise we communicate no more with Christ in the Sacrament , than we do with the bread and wine , whilst they stand untouched upon the Communion Table . ] 

C●cceius in Sacr. Script . potent . pag. 337.  ] Quae est validitas Baptismi nisi haec , quòd baptismus tum praedicatus tum collatus confirmat omni Credenti Remissionem peccatorum ? & est 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 sive firmamentum Interrogationis & restipulationis bonae conscientiae ad Deum : & qui cum professione Nominis Patris , Filis & Spiritus sancti , & sine contemptu Sacramenti ad nos venit , cum possimus securè ut fratrem & foederatum recipere , etc.  Qui baptizatur , profitetur se Christi discipulum : qui credit à Christo didicit ; qui veritatem prositetur , oftendit se à Christo didicisse & gratiae quae baptismo obsignatur , participem factum esse . Quid igitur illi baptismus in nomine Christi susceptus testatur minù , quam omni Discipulo Christi ? [ Vid rel . 

Et in Thesibus de Foedere , Thes. 454. [ ( sanctitas infantum ) est , 4.  Quòd qui illius seminis in infantia moriuntur , Circumcisionis foedere initiati à parentibus foedus retinentibus , non exscinduntur ex populis suis , sed Regnum coelorum adipiscuntur , sanctificati per spiritum promissionis sanctum . ] Et Thes. 457.  [ Et in adultis quidem ad foedur accedentibus requirit professionem fidei in Christum , Act 8.36 , 37. in infantibus nihil nisi genitum esse à parent saltem altero fidem professo , ( Eccl●siâ ) in Charitate quae omnia sperat , judicans , & illos sincerè professos , & hos jam verè sanctificatos . ] Thes. 458.  [ Et quidem consilium Gratiae patescit in omnibus fidelium liberis , qui in infantiae moriuntur , de quibus certam consolationem habent parents , eos non exscindi . In iis verò qui adolescunt , singulis consolationis conditio subintelligitur si manserint in Fide , & Charitate , & sanctificatione cum modestiâ , 1 Tim. 2.15 . ] Thes. 428.  [ Nam primo Deus baptismum dans considerandus venit , ut is qui per ministrum stipuletur à nobis , five nos interroget de veritate & sinceri●ate resipiscent●ae & sidei ejus quam supra explicavimus . Thes. 426. ( which is a special faith . ) ] Et Thes. 492 , 493 , 494.  [ Obsignatio Communionis praesupponit sidem exploratam communicantis , ut Thes. 209. quae sides se habet ad minimum ut 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , confugientis , Heb. 6.18 . Inest igitur in oblatione Symboli stipulatio Fid●i quae & verbis ( Hoc facite ad recordationem mei ) innuitur . Quam stipulationem explicat Paulus , 1 Cor. 11. 26 , 27 , 28 , 29. additâ comminatione in eos qui indignè comedereni . Illis enim incumbit is reatus quem , etc. Mal. 1.14 . etc. Et sic corporis & sanguinis Christi , sive mortis Christi , ut blasphemus , persecutor & latro sit reus . 499.  Inest fidei stipulatio etiam per consequens in illis , [ Accipite , edite ; Hoc est corpus meum ] — Comeditur autem — sided qua unum cum ipso fimus . — 494.  Stipulatio fidei per fidei obedientiam , attestanti post explorationem bonâ conscientiâ acceptata , parit Jus accipiendi Sacramentum sacrae Co●nae , & eo ritu judicandi restipulationem atque interrogationem Dei ut Patris nostri de communione filii ipsius . Ità Testamentum in vim & effectum Foederis transit . 

Dr. Prideaux Fascicul . Controvers . de Sacr. Quaest 1. p. 278.  [ 3.  Nulli adulti ad Sacramenta sunt admittendi sine praeviâ Fidei professione pro captu & modulo , Mat. 28.19 , 20.  Marc. 16.16 . Acts 2.  & 8.37 . Ergò hoc non expectandum ex insequente Sacramentorum opere operato . ] It is unquestionable that he here speaks of saving Faith. 1.  By the Texts cited to prove it : 2.  Because else it had been nothing to the Question in hand , which he was to conclude . And pag. 279. speaking of Circumcision and other Sacraments of the Old Testament , he saith to the Papists , [ Symbola fuêre Gratiae collatae , non Causae conferentes ; ] which he repeats , pag. 280. sol . Q. 3.  

Dr. Hammond in his Practical Catechism of Baptism , pag. 308 , 309. and so on through diverse pages , is so full for the point , that I refer you to the perusal . 

The Catechism appointed to be used in England , was then accounted the doctrine of the Church of England , and it speaks full to the point : [ Quest. What is required of persons to be baptised ? Answ. Repentance , whereby they forsake sin ; and Faith , whereby they steadfastly believe the Promises of God made to them in that Sacrament . ] And this they say that Infants themselves perform by their sureties ; and therefore judge it necessary . 

Bullinger Decad. 5.  Serm. 7.  & 8. is full upon the point , and too long to be transcribed . He sums up his own doctrine , folio 453. thus : [ Veritas Catholica in Scriptures sanctis nobis tradita simpliciter pronunciat , Omnes eos esse baptizandos quos Deus agnoscit pro suo populo , particit ésque purgatior is vel sanctificationis , remissionisve peccatorum judicat . Nam tota hác traltatione de Sacramentis ostendi & demonstro , Baptismum esse signum populi Dei & Symbolum purgationis nostrae per Christum . ] — [ Instituitur quidem disputatio acuta de eo , quinam sint populus Dei & participes Remissionis peccatorum per Christum ? Dicimut populum Dei agnosci vel ex confession hominum , vel ex liberalis promissione Dei. Ex confession quidem hominum . Nam cos pro filiis Dei agnoscimus , qui jam adulti palûm profitentur , Deum verum Deum esse suum , & Jesum Christum Salvatorem esse suum . Caeterùm ea confessio vel verè , vel ficte fit : Vere , ut Petrus , Eunuchus etc.  Ficte verò , ut cum Simon Magus in Acts Apost . dicit se credere in Jesum Christum : sive verò verè , sive sicte quis credat , quando fidem in Christum palàm confitetur , ( animi penetrali● solus Deus inspicit etc. nostrûm non est rectè consitentem separare vel abjicere à populo Dei. Nam Philippus Simonem Magum non repulit , sed pro fideli confitentem recepit , & pro fideli baptizavit ; licet is re verâ & coram Deo esset hypocrita . ] 

Dr. Whitaker de Sacram. is so oft and plain for this , that I need not stand to gather particular words . Mr. Gataker against Dr. Ward hath cited enough of them : As pag. 75.  [ Requirit fidem ante baptismum in adultis , Mar. 16.16 . unde constat fidem esse quae servat , non baptismum ] But I will pass many more there cited . 

Mr. Gataker himself hath purposely opposed Dr. Ward in this point which Mr. Blake defendeth , And pag. 71. he saith , [ 1.  Ego quaenam sit fides illa ac poenitentia initialis non intelligo , quâ praeditum ausit quis ad baptismum admittere , quem tamen verâ viuàque fide in Mediatorem imbutum nondum credat . Philippus certe Aethiopi baptismum poscenti , Si credis ( inquit ) ex toto cord , licet : quasi non baptizaturus , nisi id ille porfiteretur , ipseque Charitatis saltem judicio ita credere , credat . ] Read the rest . And pag. 66.  Ad hos sins ( Sacrationem , & Remissionem peccatorum ) vel alterutrum horum , consequendos , Baptisma mihi minimè institutum videtur , quum in institutione ipsa eyes primariò administrandum ordinetur , qui ex praedicatione Evangelii side in Christum imbuti , & disciplinam Christianam jam amplexifuerunt . Mar. 16.15 , 16.  Matth. 28.18 . At high & sanati ex parte , & reatu omni exoluti , ad Baptismum suscipiendum accedebaent , aut ejusmo two saltem esse praesumebantur antequam ad Baptismum admitterentur . Quin & Johannis baptismae ejusdem fuisse efficaciae cum illo qui ab Apostolis ex Christi instituto administrabatur , adversus Pontificios nostri omnes tuentur . At in Joannis Baptismo praevia exigebatur poenitentia quam peccatorum venia necessariò & inseparabiliter consequitur . ] See his Defence . of this against Dr. ward 's Answ. pag. 67 , 68  And as to the pretended different use to Infants , pag. 69.  [ 1.  Principali effecto , imò principalibus effectis caruisse baptismum , etc. 2.  Si quem in parvulis alium effectum statuere libuerit , quam in adultis obtineat , id mirum valdè S.S. nusquam insinuâsse : nec de eo certi quicquam constare poterit , quo fides nostra nitatur , donec Verbulo sal●em Divino aliquo illud nobis innotescat . ] 

Steph. Tzegedinus Loc. Commun . de Sacram. Tab. 2. saith , [ Sacramenta non confer gratiam ; quia sancti prius Justificati receptique in gratiam , quam initiati sint Sacramentis . ] 

Lamb. Danaeus Resp. ad Tom. 2.  Bellarm. de Sacram. pag. 167.  [ Bellarminus putat absurdè hic oportuisse Baptismum praecedere Fidem ; non autem Fidem Baptismum . Promissio enim praecedit sigillum — ergo est mediatum & subsequent & fidem & verbum Sacramenti , & utroque posterius . ] ( He speaks of Justifying faith . ) Leg. & pag. 78.  Many such passages he hath , too long to be cited . 

Ravanellus Biblioth . de Baptism . pag. 184.  [ In nomine , vel in nomen Patris , Filii , & Spiritus sancti baptizari dicimur — quia per baptismum S.S. Trinitas nor in gratiam recipere testificatur , & nos vicissim spondemus ac profitemur ei nos totos dicare & consecrare ] Et col . 2.  Adulti ad baptismum admittendi sunt , modò fidem prositeantur , Act. 2.41 . & 8.12 , 13 , 37 , 38.  & 9 18 , 6 , 11 , 17.  & 16 , 15 , 14 , 33 , 32. & peccata publicè confiteantur , se agnoscentes , ex gratuita remissione salutem consequi , Mat. 3.6 Marc. 1.5 . ] 

Et de Sacram. pag. 512.  Col. 2.  [ Terminus vel finis Sacramenti est vel Cui , nempe , soli foederati ; Inter foederatos autem Dei censentur omnes illi qui sunt in external Ecclesiae communione , & prositentur se in Christum , credere ; & vero cum inter hoc quidam possint esse hypocritae & impii , ideo Sacramenta in Ecclesia communia sunt piis & impiis : Ita tamen ut impii pro Piis probabiliter habeantur . ] Thus commonly speak protestants on this Subject . 

The Church of Scotland in their Heads of Church Policy , recited by Spotswood in his History l. 6. pag. 289. thus begin ▪ [ 1.  The Church of God is sometime largely taken for all them that profess the Evangel of Jesus Christ , and also it is a company not only of the Godly but also Hypocrites professing outwardly one true Religion . 2.  At other times it is taken for the Elect only and the Godly . ] So that here are none acknowledged Church-members , but those only that are truly Godly and Elect , or seem to be so , and are Hypocrites if they be not so . 

The Helvetian Confession , ( as in the Harmony translated , p. 287. ) of Bapt. faith , ] To be baptised in the name of Christ , is to be enrolled , entered and received into the Covenant and Family , and so into the Inheritance of the sons of God , and called the sons of God , and purged also from the filthiness of sins , and to be endued with the manifold Grace of God , for to lead a new and innocent life . — We therefore by being baptised , do confess our faith , and are bound to give unto God obedience , mortification of the flesh , and newness of life ; yea , and we are listed soldiers for the warfare of Christ ; that all our life long we should fight against the World , Satan , and our own flesh . ] ( And none but sound believers truly consent to this : and therefore none but Professors of sound belief do profess consent to it . ) 

I shall pass over the Confessions of other Churches containing the same doctrine . 

The Professors of the Protestant University of Saumors in France , in their excellent Thes. Vol. 3. are full on the point . Pag. 58.  Thes. 27.  [ Obsignat autem illam certè , ut quia nos profitentur habere per fidem communionem cum Morte & Resurrectione Christi , fructum utriusque ad nos pertinere testificetur . Fructus autem ille primùm in Justificatione situs est . At quemadmodum professio illa habet in se inclusam promissionem de per severantiâ in eâ fide , sic obsignatio pariter habet stipul itionem quandam tacitam illius perseverantiae . ] 

Thes. 29. pag. 59  Sacramenta verò non conferuntur nisi it● qui vel fidem habent , vel saltem eum prae se ferunt , adeò ut nullis certis argumentis compertam esse posset eam esse ementitam . ] 

Pag. 50.  Thes. 7.  [ Est tamen inter ea notabile discrimen , quod penè in omnium sensus incurrit , scilicet , ut jam alibi animadvertimus , sacramenta quidem nemini tribuuntur , nisi qui censeatur implevisse conditionem quam Deus ab hominibus foedere suo exigit ? ( This is the doctrine that Mr. Blake will not be entreated to understand ; viz. that the very Covenanting on our parts , is the first and great condition imposed and required in the Covenant or promise of God ; and so when we sincerely covenant , we perform the condition of his Promise . Heart-covenanting is by consenting , and Consent joined to Assent is Justifing faith . ) At Conditionis impletio dupliciter considera●ur ; nimirum , vel in iis momentis quibus praestatur p●imùm ; vel in eo tempore quo conservatur & perseverat . Conditi nis autem Evangelicae ea natura est , ut praestari nequeat quin illico introducat eum à quo praestatur in Christi communionem & societatem Ecclesiae , atque adeò quin ei acquirat adoptionem per quam numeratur in Dei filiis . Joan , 4.11 . Cum vero conservatur atque persistit , nihil aliud facit nisi quòd easdem illas praerogativas retinet , ne iis excidamus . Baptismus autem in eum finem comparatus est , ut ea omnia obsignet , quatenus communicantur primùm . Coena verò — ut retineantur . ] Thes. ● . [ Sunt enim duo certè genera hominum , quae ad participationem foederis Evangelici à Deo admittuntur ; Adultorum scilicet & Infantium . At cuique istorum generum competit una tantummodo ratio introeundi in communionem foederis illius , & omnium rerum quae ex foedere pendent . Adultis scilicet fides , per quam Christi promissiones amplectuntur . Infantibus , conditio nascendi ex parentibus fidelibus . Thes. 11. pag. 51.  [ Ad vitam spiritualem quod attinet , adulti quidem non intrumittuntur in foederis Evangelici communionem sui nescii . Intromittuntur enim per fidem . Fides autem est actus quidam intellectûs , tanto cum acriore sui sensu conjunctus , quantò intellectus ipse facultas est praestantissima , & cum acerrimo sensu praeditus . — ] Thes. 12.  Baptismus autem propriè in eum finem destinatus est , ut vitam nobis esse indultam testificaretur . ] Thes. 13.  [ Vno verbo , Baptismo in nobis obsignatur Adoptio nostra . ] Thes. 15.  [ Primarius ejus & magìs proprius usus in eo consistit , ut ipsius peccati destructionem & abolitionem à Christo factam , actu nobis communicari testetur . Pag. 372.  Thes. 45.  [ Ideóque neque Sacramentum , neque quodquam ejusmodi seu signum seu tessera seu pignus aut arrhabo ulli traditur , nisi qui seize Verbo & Promissioni fidem habere profiteretur ] ( which is their common description of saving Faith. ) 

Pag. 78.  These 37.  [ Nec vero minùs ex eo constat , cur Infidelium liberi non baptizentur . Nam Evangelicum foedus quidem quatenus conditionatum est , ad omnes omnino homines spectat : est enim Christus omnium Redemptor , modò credant . At quatenus absolutum est , pertinet ad solos actu fideles ; est enim eorum Christus Redemptor tantùm , quia soli credidere . Quod enim foedus conditionatum appellatur , propterea quod ex praestatione Conditionis ejus executio pendet , id praestitâ conditione evadit absolutum . Jam verò quamdius foedus conditionatum est , promissiones quae foedere continentur , non pertinent actu ad eos qui Conditionem non praestiterunt . Ideo eos aliter non alloquintur , quam dicendo , [ Si credideris , salvus eris : si non credideris , manet ira Dei super te : ] Quoniam igitur Baptismus institutus est tantùm atque comparatus obsignandis Dei promissionibus in iis ad quos pertinent , nemo ex infidelibus baptizatur , qui non profiteatur seize actu credere & infidelitatem deposuisse . ] — Et pag. 79.  Thes. 40.  [ Quemadmodum enim qui credit actu , jure baptizatur & postquam baptizatus est , jus habet indubitatum ad salutem , Marc. 16.16 . sic etiam qui nascitur ex parentibus fidelibus itidem , jure baptismo tingitur , & postquam , etc. ] Thes. 38.  [ Si deficiant illi ab Ecclesiâ , aut vero ex eà , ob vitam turpiter actam , aut puritatem Religionis ejuratam , atque adeo in eo malo pertinaciam invictam , ejiciantur ; tum quia non censentur ampliùs esse fideles , non potest quin eorum liberi eâ praerogatiuâ excidant . ] 

Pet. Molinaeus of Tradition ( translat . Engl. ) pag. 62. saith , [ It is essential to the Sacrament to be taken for the Remission of sins , as it was first instituted by the Lord ) 

Mr. Crook in his Guide to Godliness , § 14 , 15.  Page 54. and in his Direct . to Happiness , Sect. 14 , 15. pag. 13 , 14. shows himself of the same mind . 

Mr. Liford of Admission to Sacr. saith , pag. 30. that , [ Alderman carnal persons , that are conscious to themselves of living in any known sin , aught to keep themselves back from the partaking of the Sacrament : and all that have not broken their league with their lusts , nor yet fully resolved to part with their darling sins , such persons are in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity : they have no part nor lot in this matter , because their heart is not right in the sight of God : they only cover iniquity with an outside holy profession . [ Andrea p. 33. ] All that profess Repentance towards God , and Faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ , ( should be admitted . ) All that having been baptised , and are able to examine themselves , and discern the Lords Body , cannot be charged to live scandalously in any sin contrary to their profession ; without giving further proof of real sanctification ] & p. 43.  The profession that he requires is , [ That men must repent & lead new lives , and that themselves do so , and intent to do so . So others commonly . 

Three of the most learned Godly Divines of Scotland , I have in the following Disputations cited . The 58.  Mr. Galespie , whose twenty Arguments Mr. Blake attempts a Confutation of , and I have before vindicated them . 

The 59  Mr. Rutherford , whose words I have after cited at large . 

The 60.  Mr. James Wood Professor at Aberdene , who declareth himself agreed with me in the Qualification necessary to Baptism , as I have afterwards cited his words . 

Any one that would have more , may peruse our English Divines that purposely write of Preparation to the Lords Supper , such as Bradshaw , Hildersham , Pemble , Dike , Bolton , and abundance more ; and they shall soon see that it is true Repentance and Faith that they require as necessary to a lawful Receiving , and the Profession of these to our Lawful Administering . 

But I will weary the Reader no longer with Citations ; but only shall add a few words of Mr. Black himself , and leave you to find out the sense . 

Mr. Blake of Sacraments , pag. 124. [ So that I conceit no Promise of these Ordinances made to such a Faith , but an actual investiture of every such believer in them . ] And if no Promise , than no Right to them by Pr●mise , or any Moral Grant. And if only actual investiture , they can make no just claim to that investiture before hand ; for the actual investiture being not yet existent , can give no right to itself : nor doth that investiture justify the seeking , or demanding , or possessing of it : for all possession is not lawful . 

Pag. 147.  [ Seeing Mr. Baxter calls upon me to declare myself further in this thing , I do believe and profess to hold , that he that upon hearing the Gospel preached , and the truth of it published and opened , shall professedly abjure all other opposite ways whatsoever , and choose the Christian way for salvation , promising to follow the Rules of it , is to be baptised , and his seed . ] 

Pag. 157.  How comes I pray you that future in ? In obligationibus ubi nullus certus statuitur dies , quovis die debetur . There is no day overtaken , but the Engagement is , for present . And he that professeth to consent to be a true believer at present , or the next minute , doth in sense profess himself a true believer at present . Pag. 147.  [ " His two first Arguments , drawn from Authority , the first of the Assembly of Divines , and others of a number of Fathers , are brought to prove that the Profession of a justifying Faith is required to Baptism : And what is that to me who never denied it , but in plain words have often affirmed it ? It is sufficiently employed where I require a Dogmatical faith to Baptism . 

Pag. 122.  [ That therefore which he calls the great Question between him and me , is no Question at all . It were madness to affirm that which with these limits be thus denies . ] And I have no mind to accuse Mr. Blake of madness . Seeing therefore he must either be of my mind , or be mad , I will make no doubt to think that he is of my mind in that : and that his insinuating and oft affirming that I deny the thing there in question , simply or without those limits , proceedeth from that great injustice which temerity oft causeth in passionate men . 

Pag. 389 [ 1.  In this case where the soul answers not to Sacramental Engagements , Sacraments are but as outward shadows , and bare empty signs , and set out by the Spirit of God in Scripture with all their rites and Ceremonies ( as other Ordinances of like nature ) in the most low , despicable and undervaluing words that is possible . Baptism in the letter is no better with the Apostle than putting away the filth of the flesh ; the cleansing of the hands , the feet , or face , from dirt or filth , is the same with it : The pharisees washing of hands , yea their washing of Cups , Platters , ( as low as it is laid by our Saviour ) was as efficacious and as acceptable . Circumcision also when it led not to , but from Christ , is called by the Apostle by the name of Concision , Phil. 3.2 . Any gash made in the flesh , or rend in the garment , as well pleaseth . ] 

Pag. 390.  [ Sacraments in this case are only aggravations of sin , and heightening of judgements . In case of Uncircumcision in time of the Law , and Non-baptism in these times , sins were no more than transgressions of the Law , but now they are breaches of Covenant . then they would have been merely rebellion against Sovereignty , but now they are Apostasy and Treachery . — ] 

[ 4.  When Conscience answers not to Sacramental Engagements , in participation of Sacraments , men subscribe to the equity of their own condemnation , and give assent to the sentence of death pronounced against them . ] Read also his sect . 6. throughout , showing how many sorts of men do forfeit their Covenant , and the mercies of it : And he concludes of them all [ Pag. 404.  These are the men which Table , subscribe the equity of their own condemnation , and justify the sentence of death pronounced against themselves . ] 

These and many the like passages of Mr. Blake's do seem to me to militate against his own opinions ( some of the former Directly , and the later Consequentially . ) Yet do I not charge him with Self-contradiction ; for its like he understandeth himself better than I do . But even from these last me thinks I have sufficient reason to demand , 1.  Whether it be not a man's duty to forbear Baptism or the Lord's supper , while he gets a fitter capacity , rather than by the claim of them to subscribe his own condemnation ? or whether the necessary order of his duty be not first to believe and repent , and then to claim these ordinances ? 2.  Whether it be worth the while to write or preach to persuade men to offer such a service to God as doth but condemn themselves ? and is no more acceptable to God than the pharisees washing cups , or than the cutting of their flesh , or the rent in the garment ? 3.  Seeing that saving faith is of another moral species than all other faith , and cannot be had without a supernatural work of the spirit , even a new creation ; Qu. Whether it be not cruelty in me to comply with that man's desires that would have Baptism or the Lord's Supper , without making a profession of saving faith , or giving any sign of it himself , and would engage himself to believe savingly the next minute , though he do not now , when I know before hand that he is most likely within one minute to break that engagement ; and so within a minute , even before he stir out of the room to become a perjured or treacherous man , that hath plunged himself into deeper misery , and subscribed to the justness of his condemnation ? Were it not more wisdom and mercy to stay ( as was aforesaid ) one hour longer , or a day , and try whether he will believe savingly before hand , rather than engage him to do it the next hour , who doth not so much as pretend to any Ability to perform his own promise , nor can show any promise from God that he will give him that Ability ; either Absolute , or Conditional . 

And thus I should have distmist Mr. Blake and his dispute , but that having touched on this last testimony , it mindeth me to clear myself from some imputations of self-contradiction which Mr. Blake charges upon me ; And I shall briefly try whether ever I pleaded his cause , or have put my weapons into his hand to defend it with . 

Mr. Blakes Charge of self-contradiction examined , and found groundless and abusive . The first pretended Self-contradiction which I observe ( by intimation at least ) charged on me by Mr. Blake , is pag. 114.  My words first cited defend a Conditional Covenant made to the non-elect ; and I say that this may be said to be sealed to some of them ; that is , those that hypocritically professing true faith , claim and receive the Sacrament . 

Well! And what have I said against this ? Why this , [ If men be taught once that it is a faith short of justifying and saving faith , which admitteth men to baptism , as having true right in foro Dei , it will make foul work in the Church . ] But where the contradictions ? Or what was it , I wonder , that occasioned the jealousy of it ? He that cannot , or is resolved he will not see any difference , 1. between a Reprobates claiming that which he hath no proper right to claim , and a man's claiming that which he hath right to claim : 2. and between sealing to a mere conditional promise , where the condition is not performed , ( and sealing to a conditional promise , where the condition is performed or professed so to be ) as that there is an actual or absolute obligation on the Promiser . 3. and between that sealing which is the end of the Sacrament , and that sealing which is notoriously deficient through the incapacity of the subject ; contrary to the appointed end and use of that Ordinance : 4.  And between the profession of a saving faith , and the profession of another kind of faith : I say he that can or will see no difference between these , no nor any two of these , let him accounted me and call me a self-contradicter , and spare not ; And I shall answer him when I have nothing else to do . 

Another Confutation that I am supposed to give myself , is cited by him . p. 148. thus [ no Minister can groundedly administer the Sacraments to any man but himself , because he can be certain of no man's justification , being not certain of the sincerity of their faith . And if he should adventure upon probabilities or charitable conjectures , than should he be guilty of profaning the Ordinance , and every time he mistaketh , he should set the Seal of God to a lie . ] I confess there is nothing of mine that can be so plausibly objected to me as a Contradiction to the present assertion , as these last words : but yet there is no just ground for that objection , if I be rightly understood . These words are plainly bend against their opinion that make Election or saving Grace to be the Title to Sacraments which the Church must judge of , and that not by the Profession of the Claimer , but as distrusting his word upon other evidences of Grace , as discoveries of the time and manner of Conversion , or the practice of those Duties wherein a stricter profession is manifested , or the like . The men that I oppose hold these Assertions . 1.  We must give the Sacrament to none but the godly in sincerity . 2.  We must not believe a man's Verbal Profession , though not contradicted . 3.  But we must require the visible proofs of his godliness . 4.  At least such as make it probable to us that he is godly . To these men I answer , 1.  That it is false that we must give the Sacraments to none but the truly godly : though its true that none else should require them . 2.  That we must give them to those that profess saving faith , though they have it not : For it is the Foundation of all human Converse that we give credit to men's words , when we have no just cause to dis-credit them , especially in matters out of our reach and within theirs , such as are the secrets of their own hearts : We must therefore take their Profession , unless it be contradicted by such palpable Evidences as Nullifieth it or maketh it invalid . 3.  That we have no other grounds to proceed on but this : and that on their grounds , they must profane God's Ordinance every time they mistake in the judgement of Charity , and apply it to ungodly men : But not so on ours , who must apply it to Professors . And therefore they have no warrant to make any further scrutiny into the sincerity of a man's grace , as sine qua non to their administration of the Sacrament ; seeing that a Verbal profession not evidently contradicted and invalidated by words or life , is the means of discovery by which we must be satisfied . But yet I never dreamt that we must not require profession itself of saving faith , and that as a probable sign of the thing professed , but that we must look after another kind of faith . 

And if Mr. Blake will not take up with bare profession of his dogmatical faith , he will oft profane the Ordinance too . For he knoweth not when it is in sincerity in any man And we know by their Ignorance that multitudes are without it . 

He addeth my Confession , [ That the Ignorance of this point hindered me long from administering the Lords Supper . ] But he tells not what point it was . Not that the ungodly might lawfully and rightfully claim it ; nor that I might lawfully give it to the professedly ungodly , or to any that profess not saving faith ; it was no such point . But that the Sacrament sealed not as from God , that [ This or that man is a Believer ] or [ that he is actually pardoned ] but only sealeth the conditional promise with such application to the person as is first to be made by his own Receiving ; and therefore if there be an error and falsehood , it is committed only by himself , and the Minister is not guilty , nor the Ordinance wholly in vain . And what 's this to the advantage of Mr. Blake's Cause ? Yet he addeth [ And I confess as ingeniously , that if he can work me to this opinion , I am resolved for present to baptise no Infant , as being unable to know the Parent's faith to justification . ] Answ. 1.  But if you be brought to my opinion , this Resolution will be changed . 2.  Are you resolved never to baptise more on the grounds that the Church of Christ hath always baptised on ? 3.  I here propound to you and the world the Reasons of my opinion . And then I shall leave to the judgement of wiser men than myself whether your rejection of this opinion be a greater disgrace to it or to you . 4.  What if you cannot know the Parents justifying faith ? Will it follow that you may not know a Profession of it ? 5.  You would do the world a courtesy to tell them , by what means you are more certain of the sincerity of a Dogmatical Faith , than we can be of a Justifying Faith ? Or will you upon consideration resolve yet never to baptise any more , not administer the Lords Supper , because you can never be certain that your Receivers have a Dogmatical Faith ? 

The next place where I am cited against myself , is pag. 150. because I speak of Saints that shall not be saved . Answ. And so I do still . But yet I still say that Analogum per se positum stat pro famosiore significato . And therefore the words [ Saints , Believers , etc. ] must ordinarily be understood of such as are justified , where there is no limitation , or special reason to the contrary . 

The next place where I observe myself cited against myself , is , p. 158.  Because I maintain that it is an Error in Mr. Tombs to say [ That the Covenant whereof baptism is the Seal , is only the the absolute covenant , made only to the Elect : Therefore Mr. Blake infers [ And if men in the state of nature be in that covenant that baptism sealeth , viz. the conditional Covenant ; then men in the state of nature and short of justifying faith , have right to baptism . ] To which I reply ; 1.  I have showed you at large how far men unsanctified are or are not in covenant with God ; and in what sense they have or have not right to baptism : And yet must we still use the undistinguished terms , as if I simply denied without distinction ? Yea , before you confess that you tell it abroad in your discourse , that I say none have right to baptism but they that have saving faith , and that you can hardly gain credit to your words . The way to gain credit were to speak truer , and specially in your discourse of other men behind their backs . A Right by any promise or mortal grant from God to them , I denied : but I affirmed Hypocrites to be the rightful objects of the Ministers Act , or that we may lawfully give it them , and that thus far they have such an ( improper ) right . And yet still you would make me believe that I simply deny them right . 2.  Your Consequence here is wholly groundless . It is one thing to say as I do [ That the conditional covenant is made to the non-elect ] And another thing to say as you term it [ that they are in the covenant ] For that word is very ambiguous . If your consequence be good from my Assertion , than you may as well prove that Turks , Jews , and Heathen may have the Sacraments given them . For I affirm that the conditional Covenant is made to them . 3.  The thing that I maintain against Mr. Tombs is , that the Sacrament sealeth not only the absolute Promise to the Elect ; but the conditional Promise ; and this in two sorts ; 1.  To true Believers who perform the condition , God sealeth effectually obliging himself Actually and confirming their faith . 2.  The same conditional promise he sealeth to intruding Hypocrites , but not so as to oblige himself to them , but conditionally still as the promise itself doth : Because the conditional promise giveth not actual right , or enduceth not on the Promiser an actual obligation till the condition be performed ; which is with true believers and no others . I desire both Mr. Tombs and you to know my meaning when I so plainly express it , before you trouble yourselves and others in contradicting it . 

Another supposed Contradiction is pag. 159. recited . He argued [ That faith on which Simon Magus was baptised , is that which admitteth to Baptism . But Simons faith fell short of saving and justifying . ] To this Mr. Blake says I give a sudden answer , viz. [ concedo totum , sed de sideratur conclusio ] And he adds [ He is certainly much to seek both in syllogism and common reason , that could not infer , and could not know that I left the Reader to infer that [ therefore ; A Faith that is short of justifying entitles to baptism ] and so I have the whole in question yielded , and that which was once said would make foul work in the Church if granted ] To this I reply . 1.  I shall not presume to say that you are much to seek either in Syllogism or common reason . ●ut I think it meet to say that I pity the world , and especially hasty inconsiderate Readers that must be troubled and abused by their writings that understand not what they speak to . I pray peruse your Arment again , and see whether any more will follow than this [ Therefore a faith short of saving or justifying admitteth to baptism . ] And this I granted , taking Simons faith to be an assent conjunct with a profession of saving faith ( as most Interpreters do that I have seen ; expounding [ he believed ] by [ be professed to believe , and had some conviction . ] ) But was the word [ entitled ] in your Argument ? And might I not well say desideratur conclusio ? The question which you would have concluded was that which now you conclude [ It entitleth to Baptism ] And then there is more in your Conclusion than in your Premises . Admitting is not Entitling . I granted you oft before that we may Admit an Hypocrite ( yea a stark Infidel ) if professing true faith , he require the Sacrament : But I denied that in strict or proper sense they had Title to it , or might demand it . I may justly and necessarily give , if required , what another unjustly requireth ; yet upon this gross oversight of my obvious sense , Mr. Blake goes away as with a full concession of his Cause : And no doubt in some men's eyes hath carried it . 

His two Arguments against me from my own words , p. 166.  I have answered before . 

The next touch of this nature I find pag. 167.  [ Profession being a good step in the way to sincerity , which a man would think Mr. Baxter would not dislike , who so far speaks the mind of Christ towards men , that if they will come but only to a visible Profession , he will not deny them admittance there , because they intent to go no further , but will let them come as near as they william ] Repl. And so I confidently say still : And what 's this to your Cause at all ? 

The next that I observe are cited , pag. 184. and 186.  In the latter , 188. he reciteth a passage of mine in the Saints Rest , where I say that [ the mere sober-professing to repent and believe in Christ , is a sufficient Evidence of their Interest to Church-membership , ( coram Ecclesiâ ) and admittance thereto by Baptism . ] 

Upon which Mr. Blake assumeth [ What have I spoke more than here is said ? and did I ever speak with more and higher Confidence ? I say , that a faith which is short of justifying gives title to Baptism : ] And he saith , [ such gives sufficient Interest to Church-membership , and consequently admittance to Baptism . ] Repl. I must needs say , that it is to be lamented that Passion or Inconsiderateness should carry you to such evident untruths . Did ever I say that [ such ] a faith gives evidence ? Did I there once mention such a faith ? Did I not expressly say , [ A sober Professing to repent and believe in Christ. ] And did you not set these words before your Readers eyes ? And yet will you in the next words persuade him that I talk of a faith short of justifying ? Did you think men would take no heed what they read ? It is the Profession of true faith and Repentance that I spoke of , and not your faith that is short of it , which came not into my thoughts . This dealing is not like to edify ; though with some it may be effectual to misled . 

Yet upon this abuse you ground a triumph , adding [ So that if my doctrine herein be loose , the Reader will hardly find his to be fast : and it hears not well to play fast and loose . ] It was loose ground that these words were built on . 

Pag. 184.  Another Confutation of myself is thus expressed , [ I desire Mr. Baxter to tell us how he hath mended the matter , and provided for the honour and lustre of the Christian Name , or made up at all , the gap of which he speaks . He says the Church is bound to baptise as largely , as I say men have Right to Baptism . ] Repl. Dear Brother , it is not well that your pages should contain so many such untruths . I would we had never meddled with controversy , if it cannot be managed without such guilt . You say that a Dogmatical faith entitles to Baptism . I say we ought not to Baptise men without the Profession of a saving faith . Is this the same with yours , or as large ? Is it all one to baptise them that will profess that they are willing to have Christ as he is offered in the Gospel , and them that will profess no such willingness at all ? Why do you expect that your Readers should believe your so frequent and evident misreports ? Your next words also are untrue , that I [ refuse none that you receive ] if you did practise according to your doctrine ; and that where [ you say they have Right , I say we are bound to baptise them without Right . ] A double untruth . First , It is not the same persons that we speak of . Secondly , I distinguished of Right , and told you , that if you will call that Right to another , which results from the command to me to baptise him if he demand it , such Right he hath . You next add [ How will this make Christianity look with any better face ? how much will Worcester-shire Congregations where this is received exceed other Congregations where unanimously it is denied ? ] Repl. diverse of your flings at the Worcester-shire Congregations might have been spared , without the least dishonour to your prudence , justice , charity , or piety . If you have a mind to be the Accuser of any Churches of Christ , you should descend to particulars , and deal with such people and in such cases that you know , and not print untruths of such Congregations , which the Country knoweth to be such , as you have done , pag. 142 , 143. upon the credit of your false reporters . If I have deserved such dealing from you the Christian Assemblies of Worcestershire have not . Restrain your indignation to me , and abuse not your brethren that meddle not with you . 

And what is it that is denied unanimously by other Congregations ? Surely not the necessity of professing a faith that 's more than Dogmatical ; at least I know no such Congregations , and I hope I shall never know such ; For all your frequent and confident intimations that yours is the common opinion of Divines , and mine is singular : If paper could blush , abundance of such passages would confute themselves , and prevent the delusion of your credulous reader , who will believe you to save the labour of a trial . 

Pag. 185.  The words of mine that are cited as against myself are these [ Vocation which is effectual only to bring men to an outward profession of faith , is larger than Election , and makes men such whom we are bound to baptise . ] true : How unhappy am I , that must contradict my opinion in the very words which contain it ! But still will you persuade men , that an outward professing of true saving faith is all one with another kind of faith ( no man I think knows what ) which you are busily promoting to be the Title to Sacraments ? 

I shall not stand to search Mr. Blake's book for more of my self-contradictions , or trouble the Reader with a further vindication : For in thus much he may see the face of the rest , and discern the judiciousness and equity of the Charge . 

But as Mr. Blake deals by me , so doth he by the Authors whom he allegeth for his opinions , as pag. 152.153 , 154 , 155. and elsewhere : He sticks not to cite them as owning his cause , who in the very words recited by him , do condemn it . For in those words they make the Church as visible to consist of professors as distinct from true believers , and know no members but true Christians and Hypocrites ( who therefore pretend to that Faith which they have not : or else how are they Hypocrites ? ) And what 's this to Mr. Blake's new visible members that profess only some other kind of faith ? or how will this warrant his new kind of Baptism , which must be administered upon the Profession of another sort of Faith ? 

The Lord illuminate us , and pardon all the wrong we have done to his Church and Truth , through our darkness and self-conceitedness . 

The third Disputation . Quest. Whether the Infants of Notoriously-ungodly baptised Parents have Right to be Baptised . Tertullian . Apologet. cap. 16.  Sed dices ; Etiam de nostris excedere quosdam à Regulâ Disciplinae : Desunt tum Christiani haberi penès nos . Philosophi verò illi cum talibus factis in nomine & honore sapientiae perseverant . Thes. Salmuriens . Vol. 3.  Pag. 59  Thes. 39  Sacramenta non conferuntur nisi iis qui vel fidem habent , vel saltem eam prae se ferunt , adeò ut nullis certis argumentis compertum esse possit eam esse ementitam . Aaron's Rod Blossoming . pag. 514.  I believe , no conscientious Minister would adventure to baptise one who hath manifest and infallible signs of Unregeneration . Sure , we cannot be answerable to God , if we should minister Baptism to a man whose works and words do manifestly declare him to be an unregenerated unconverted person . And if we may not Initiate such a one , how shall we bring him to the Lords Table ? Rutherford , Due Right of Presbyteries , pag. 231. n. 2.  But , saith Robinson , most of England are ignorant of the first Rudiments and Foundation of Religion ; and therefore cannot be a Church . 

Answ. Such are materially not the visible Church , and have not a Profession ; and are to be taught ; and if they wilfully remain in that darkness , are to be cast out . 

The third Disputation . Quest. Whether the Infants of Notoriously ungodly Baptised Parents have Right to be Baptised ? THE Question is of the greater moment , because about Matter of Practice , and that in a Point wherein the Honour of God on one side , and the Rights of men's Souls on the other , are so much concerned . It supposeth first , that Baptism is God's Ordinance , of continued Use , and that some are to be Baptised . Secondly , that it is a Benefit , or else we could not , in the sense now used , be said to have Right to it . Thirdly . It supposeth that some Infants have Right to be Baptised . This Question therefore is not to be disputed with the Anabaptiss , who deny the presupposed . And they that are so indifferent in the former , as to take it for an inconsiderable matter . Whether Infants be baptised , or not , must needs judge this Question of the Infants of the Ungodly , to be much more inconsiderable . Fourthly , Yet doth it not suppose that the Infants of any ungodly persons have this Right , as if it were only the Right of Notorious ones that were disputable : but the word [ Notorious ] is added to limit our present Dispute to that sort , for several Reasons ; at this time passing by the other , but not taking it for granted . Fifthly , Nor doth the Addition of the term [ Baptised ] to [ Parent's ] take it for granted that no children of unbaptised Parents have such Right ; But it limits the Question to that sort only , as fitter in several respects for our Dispute . 

For the explication of the terms ; 1.  By Infant we mean Children not yet come to the use of Reason ; so that as they are not sui Juris , but at another's dispose ; so they are uncapable naturally in any Contract to dispose of themselves , being unfit to give consent , through a natural defect of that understanding which is pre-requisite . By [ a natural Defect ] I mean of nature in itself considered , and not as corrupted by sin , nor as neglected sinfully by ourselves or others . So that I see not but that Idiots are in the same condition as Infant children . But of that let every one think as they see cause . In Law homo primae aetatis is an Infant , even after he can speak ; though as to the Etymology he be called an Infant , quia fari nescit , i e. loqui non potest , ut Isidor . lib. 11.2 . 

2.  By Parents we mean principally Natural Parents , those who begat those Infants ; but secondarily also ( as I suppose ) those that have Adopted them , or bought them , or received them as given or delivered to them , so that they any way become Their Own , and they have the dispose of them , and are enabled to enter them into Covenant , so as to oblige them on the highest terms ; Though I know it is not properly that these are called Parents ; The word [ Parent ] is primarily applicable to the Mother only , as not being à Parendo , but à Pariendo , and thence to the Father also , because of the Relation between Gigno & Pario ; and so 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 is sometime used for Genero . And though the word [ Parens ] be not usually applied to those that Adopt , yet Pater is : And not unfitly , if , as some suppose , the word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 came from 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , alo , to nourish ; for so men may do by children that are any way their own . But it is only the immediate Parents that we here mean ; though Festus saith , that Juris prudentes avos & proavos , avias & proavias parentum nomine appellari dicunt . And though the word Parens be sometime taken pro Consanguineo : And Hierom saith advers . Ruffin . lib. 2.  That militari vulgaríque consuetudine cognati & assines nominantur Parents . But of this more anon . 

The term [ Ungodly ) is it that needeth the most wary and exact Explication , as on which the greatest stress of the Controversy doth depend . It is not one only sense in which the words 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Pius & Impius , Godly and Ungodly , are used . Some think that Pius comes from an obsolete Greek word , now difused , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , to which 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 & 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 do refer ; and so that the primary signification is of one that worship's God wi●h the Fat of Sacrifice , as Abel did , with the best of his service and not the refuse or lean . Meliùs ad rem fuerit , saith Mertinius [ Pius derivare à 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , quod Cretensibus est Deus , ex 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : quia pius est qui Deo addictus est & devotus , eumque sequitur ; ut Angli Pium Godly , tanquam Divinum . Ità Objectum Pii indicaretur . Si ad actum respiciamus , idonra originatio erit 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , quip quae est vox religiosae operationis . ] Vide plura ibid. Our English word [ Godly ] is the most clear for Etymology and sense ; And for the right understanding of it , we must consider , 1.  What God is , and in what Relationn to Man he stands . 2.  What is required from Man towards God.  

1.  As God is in himself most perfectly Good , ( from whence some think in English he is called God ) , so is he to Man ; 1.  The Principal efficient Cause of all his Good ; 2.  And the chief Objective matter , and ultimate end ; so that in him alone can we be happy . He is our α and ω , our very All. he stands Related to Man as his Creator , Governor , Redeemer , and Preserver . 

2.  From whence Man is obliged to acknowledge God , in these Relations , whether Naturally or Supernaturally made known ; and to consent to them ; and to love and honour him as God , ( though it be not perfectly , which is now above his strength , yet must it be ) sincerely , even comparatively and superlatively above any Creature whatsoever . He that doth thus , is a Godly man , that is , a man that doth sincerely believe in God , the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , and is devoted to God.  

Besides this principal sense , there are some others common , both in the defect , and in the excess ; 1.  Among Heathens he is called Pious , 1. who is a devout honourer of their Gods , though Idols ; 2. or who is merciful to people in misery ; 3. or who is an Honourer of Parents and Superiors , or who is conscientious according to their insufficient light . 2.  Among Christians , 1.  Some call any man Godly , that is , zealous in Religious matters , though so unsound in the fundamentals , that he worshippeth he knows not what , or so ignorant about Gods very nature and his relations to him , that it is not God indeed as God that he worshippeth : and though he be actually incapable of true Love and Devotedness to God , for want of right conceiving of him , even in those respects that are essential to the Object of the Christian faith . 2.  Some call a man Godly that makes a sound Confession , and knows the Christian Doctrine , and saith he believeth it , though he notoriously manifest that his Will doth not consent , that the God whom he confesseth shall be his God , ( his Ruler and Felicity , ) nor the Christ whom he confesseth , shall be his Saviour on his own terms ; nor the Holy Ghost his Guide and Sanctifier . 3.  On the other side , Many will call no Man Godly , that is not noted for some eminent difference , in Parts and Zeal , from others that live about him . If they see him neglect some Duties that he is bound to , as not to come to some private Meetings that are used regularly and to Edification , or not to Read , or Hear so frequently or diligently as he should , or not to Pray in his family ( which in some Cases its possible a Godly man may neglect ) , or if he commit some sins , which yet its possible a Godly man may commit , they accounted him ungodly , though possibly it may be otherwise in the main ▪ so that no man is by them esteemed Godly , unless he go beyond the weakest sort of true Christians . As for them that call none Godly but their own parties , or sect-fellows , I will pass them , as not worthy our further mention . 

Among all these senses , it is the first in which we here take the word [ Godly ] so that it is only Christian Godliness that we mean , which is a sincere believing in God , the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , even with true intellectual Assent , and hearty Consent : from which heart-godliness , there follows that sincere Obedience to the will of God ( to first and second Table ) which is the proper fruit of it : and Repentance after disobedience known . It is therefore such a Godliness as is proper to them that have the promise of Justification and Salvation that we mean , comprehending Repentance towards God , and Faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ. Of the contrary to this only is the Question . 

4.  By ( Notoriously ) ungodly , we mean such as do evidently manifest their ungodly hearts , 1. either by verbal professing it ; 2. or by their rebellious ungodly lives , that they leave to those that converse with them , no just & reasonable ground to judge them in probability to be Godly , but are certainly known by those that live about them , yea , by the Church ( if they are members of any particular Church , ) who have an ordinary competent ability to discern , to be ungodly persons , that is , not to believe in God as aforesaid , but to be indeed contemners of God , the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost , as all are that are not Godly , though not all in a like degree . They that are notoriously known to be thus ungodly , or unholy , or unbelievers , are those here intended . 

5.  By ( Baptised ) Parents , we mean only such as have had the external sign joined to a Profession of the Christian faith , and Dedication to God ; and so have covenanted o'er tenus with God by themselves , or parents : and not those that have been sincerely Dedicated to him , and so have God re-engaged unto them : For it is a contradiction for to call such at the time of such Devotedness [ notoriously ungodly : ] and to say that they fall from it , is contrary to the judgement of those whom we now deal with , and therefore not to be expected . Some do so define Baptism , as to make it essentially to be Gods actual sealing and exhibiting , of an actual pardon to the person baptised . But we take it not thus : We speak only of those that have so formla●y performed and received the externals of that Ordinance , as that the Church doth justly take them for her baptised Members , though yet they werr not truly united to Christ , nor was God ever actually reconciled to them , as his People . 

So much for the Subject : For the predicate , we must first explain the term Right . 

Concerning which , I must refer you mostly to what I have said to Mr. Blake , pag. 5 SECT . 39 more fully than here I may stay to express myself . 

1.  In the properest sense , Right respecteth some Good which we have Right to ; and that Good is the matter of some Gift , or other civil Action , which may confer Right : so that a man may afterwards claim it as his own , or the Use or Profession of it as his Due , according to the Nature of the thing , and of the Grant. 2.  In a more diminute and lesle proper sense , a man is said to have Right which is accidentially in his Profession , without his unjust Usurpation , though he know not whether he shall keep it a moment , nor hath any civil right given him thereto . 3.  In a sense yet lesle proper , a man may be said to have Right to that Action , which it is another man's Duty to perform to him , or that Good which another man is bound to do to or for him , though properly he have no Title to it himself . 4.  In a sense , though proper , quoad relationis fundamentum , yet Catachrestical as to the Denomination of the thing ; a man is said to have right to an Evil : as to that punishment which according to Law and Justice in his Due , or which he is obliged to bear . 

According to the first of these senses , every man hath a Right to or in God's Benefits , to whom he hath Given them by any Promise , Covenant , Grant , or other Moral act ; which may be the Foundation of Right , called a Title . 

According to the second sense , all those have Right to God's blessing that have them in Possession , through a mere natural collation of Providence , without their sinful seizure . As if you see a man by the way lie naked , and cast your cloak over him , and say nothing to him : Though you may take it away again at your pleasure , and assure him not of the use of it for a moment , yet he hath right to possess it while you permit him . Thus every Pagan hath Right to his Life and Time , and Food and Raiment , while God doth providentially vouchsafe them to him . 

According to the third sense , All those have a Right to God's mercies , to whom we are bound as Instruments to conser them , though it be but by accident that we are so obilged , and though God be in no Covenant-engagement to the persons , nor give them any proper right or claim to the thing : So if God bid me Give to him that needeth : and because I know not all that need , he bids me judge upon probable appearances : Hereupon if a rich man go in rags and pretend necessity , it is my Duty to give to him ; and so far this Rich man hath a Right to my Alms , as that he is a rightful Object of it , as to the righteousness of my action . So if God bid me forgive him that wrongeth me , if he Repent : and then direct me to judge whether he repent by the Evidences ( there being no other way : ) and these Evidences being only probable , and not demonstrastive : here it is my duty to forgive him that repenteth not , if he seem to repent , and so he may have such an improper right to my forgiveness . So if a Heathen seem to be a true Christian , and yet dissemble , I am bound to use him as a Christian ; and and so far he may improperly be said to have right to any Christian Ordinance , which I am bound to dispense to him , If he claims this Ordinance of me , he sins against God , and requireth that which properly , and before God , he hath no right to , and which he ought not to claim : but yet he clams nothing but what I am bound to give him upon such a claim . You may see then that here may be three distinct questions according to this threefold sense [ of Right ] For the fourth I will pass , as not concerning our present business . ) 1.  Whether such subjects have any Right to Baptism by any gift or grant of God to themselves ! 2.  Whether they have right from God's providence putting them into possession of it . 3.  Whether it be a Minister's duty to baptise them ? And I think it necessary to handle all these , or at least the first and last distinctly , because that one dependeth on the other , and we know not which is ordinarily meant when this question is put . Only to the Explication of the last term , we must speak a word : viz. what is meant by that Baptism , the Right whereto we are now enquiring after ? It is one question whether they have Right to the thing signified , viz. Christ and his Benefits ; the pardon of sin , and Adoption , etc.  It is another question , whether they have Right to the bare sign , and the consequential Privileges with the Church , arising from their reputing such a man to be a true Christian. And another question , whether they have Right to Both these ? Also it is one thing to ask , Whether men have right to performance of their own part in Baptism , in part ? or in whole ? And another , Whether they have right to God's part ? We make no question but every man hath liberty given him to do his own part entirely , yea it is his Duty : And so every Infidel is bound to bring his child to Baptism ; that is , To cease his Infidelity , and to dedicate himself and child to Christ , and seal it with being Baptised . But this is nothing to prove that he hath Right to God's part in Baptism , that is , either to the Washing as God's seal and sign ; or to the cleansing signified , and other Benefits conveyed by it . 2.  Nor is it any thing to prove that he hath a Liberty to do the latter and external part of his own duty , without the internal and former precedent ; that is , to be baptised before he consent to the terms of the Covenant . As a man that is bound to consent in mind to any thing , and promise with the mouth , yet may not promise before he consent ; that is , Dissemble or Lye.  

I shall now briefly determine the Question as to each of the three forementioned sorts of right distinctly : And as to the first I take the Question to lie thus ( supposing it only the external Baptism that 's meant . ) 

Whether the Infant Children , especially natural , of men externally baptised , but now notoriously ungodly , have by any Gift of Covenant-grant from God , a right to external Baptism ? Which I determine Negatively ; They have no such right . 

And herein the justest order , it belongeth to the Affirmer to prove such a right . He that brings his claim , must show his Title . no more therefore can be required of me but this Argument . 

If such Infants can show no good Title to such Baptism , ( nor any for them ) then have they no Right to it . But they can show no good Title . Ergo ▪ etc.  

The Major is undeniable ; for Titulus est fundamentum Juris . For the Minor I argue thus : If they can show any good Title , it is either some grant of God written in his word , or seem not written . But neither written , nor not written : therefore none at all . 

Those sober persons that we have to do with , will not pled an unwritten grant . If any do so , they must make it evident to a Minister , before he can take it for currant . 

If there be any written grant , let them show it ; for we know of none . 

But yet we shall attempt the proof of the Negative , and then examine the Arguments which are usually brought for the Affirmative . 

If the Children of such Parents have such Right to Baptism , it is either for their own sake ( i.e. some Title or ground in themselves . ) 2. or for their immediate parents , 3. or their Ancestors , 4. or some Undertakers , 5. or the Church . These five grounds are pleaded by some : And though our Question directly speaketh only of the second ; and therefore if any of the rest be proved , it nothing makes against our Negative determination , because we take it Reduplicatiuè ( of the children of such Parents as theirs : ) yet we judge it most useful to our main end , that we touch upon each of these several Claims . 

And 1.  If the Infants of such Parents have any such Right from any thing in themselves , it is either from somewhat proper to themselves and some others such as they , or somewhat common to all Infants : But neither of these ; Ergo — 1.  For the first Member , I know nothing said but this : [ Possibly they may have some seed of Grace in them , we know not the contrary . ] Answ. 1.  As to us , it 's all one , non esse , & non apparere : we must have some Evidence of such a seed of Grace , or else we cannot discern it . 2.  Else we must baptise the children of all or any Heathen or Infidel ; because for aught we know , they may have some seed of Grace . 

For the second Member , it is thus argued by some : God requireth nothing but Consent on our parts , to our entrance into Covenant with him , seeing it is a Covenant of free Grace : but all Infants must by us be supposed to Consent : therefore all must be supposed to have Right to Baptism . ] The Major we grant . The Minor they would thus prove : It is a Rule in the Civil Law , That it is supposed that a man will be willing of his own Good ; And another Rule there is , That the Law supposeth a man to be what he ought to be , till the contrary appear ; therefore Infants , who make not the contrary appear , are by us to be judged virtual Consenters or Accepters of the Covenant ; and consequently to be Baptised . Answ. These Rules may hold in dealings between man and man , about such things as Nature may both discern to be Good , and desire ; but they cannot hold in the Case in hand ; 1.  Because Nature cannot sufficiently discern the Desirableness of the Blessings of the Covenant , compared with those things that must be renounced . 2.  Nor can it truly desire them without Grace . 3.  And the common Experience of the world telleth us , that the most of men , by far , do not truly consent , when they hear the terms of the Covenant . This therefore may not be supposed : For Nature's Inclination to our own Good , is no sufficient ground of the supposition : Nor yet any Obligation that can lie on us to charitable thoughts of infant 's Inclinations . For it is one of the Principles of our Religion , that Nature is so depraved , as that every man is the great Enemy of himself consequentially , as being inclined to the way of his own ruin ; till Christ the Physician of Nature do work a Cure. 4.  And if this Argument would hold , it would prove that all the Infants of the world have right to Baptism ; which is not to be supposed . 5.  Yea it wou●d prove that they have equal right with Christians , which is yet more evidently false . 6.  Infants in such Covenants are reputed to be as their Pa●●nt , who choose for them that cannot choose for themselves . If therefore the Parents consent not , it is supposed that the Child consen●s not ; and no parent can truly consent for his child that re useth for himself . 7.  The Covenant hath not only benefits on God's part to be conferred , but also duties on our part required ; and it cannot be supposed that all will faithfully perform such duties . So much for the first pretended Title . 

The second pretended Title of such Infants to Baptism , is upon the account of the Interest of their immediate Parents ; and because this is both the proper subject of our question , and also the great difficuly , and most insisted on , I shall say somewhat more to it : And I prove the Negative thus . 

1.  If notoriously ungodly Parents have no right themselves to the Benefits of the Covenant , nor to be Baptised if it were now to do : then cannot their children have a right upon the account of any interest of theirs . But the Antecedent is true : Therefore the validity of the consequence is evident ; in that no man can give that he hath none to give , nor can we derive any Interest from him that hath none himself . If any say , he may have an Interest for his child that hath none for himself ; I Reply . 1.  then the child hath not his interest in and with the Parent , nor as reputed a member of him . 2.  That Interest must be produced and proved . I have not yet heard what it should be save what the next Objection intimates . 

Why then may not the same be said of an Infidel , that he may have a right for his child , though none for himself ? It is objected , that being himself baptised , he once had right to Church-membership for himself and his child ; and though he hath lost this by Apostasy himself , yet there is no reason why his child should be a loser by his fall . Answ. 1.  According to this objection the children of all Infidels , Jews , Turks , and Heathens should have right for their Parent's sake , supposing those Parents to have been once baptised , and now to be Apostates . 2.  But those children were either born before their Parent's Apostasy , or after . If before , than I grant the Parent loseth not the child's right by Apostasy , because that right was fixed upon the child himself , upon the account of the Parents interest . And we may suppose him baptised thereupon , and so there is no cause for a doubt : For as the case is rare for a man that before was rightfully a Church-member to the outward appearance , to Apostatise between the Birth and Baptism ; so I will purposely eat that Controversy , Whether the child by such Apostasy loseth his right , or whether a Baptised Infant be supposed excommunicate in the Father's excommunication ? For my part , I affirm no such thing : But if the child be born after the Parent's Apostasy from faith or a godly life , than no man can say the child loseth any right by the Parent's sin ; for how can he los● that which he never had . If you say the Parent had it for himself and his child ; I answer , true , had he been sincere on supposition he had children ; but not for those children he had not , though if he continue in the faith till he have them , he than hath ●hose Privileges for himself and them ; they can be no subjects of right that had no existence ; I grant he may have a grant of such right to him and his seed , as a Prince may grant to a faithful subject to him and to his heirs : But 1.  This is on supposition that he will have heirs . 2.  That he forfeits no● his right before he hath heirs : otherwise as he apparently ●●s●th it to himself , so doth he to them : if he make an intercision , he stops the conveyance of the benefit by a prevention , so that it never comes to the Heir : But because it is the antecedent that requires all the proof [ that notoriously ungodly Parents have no Interest themselves to be Church-members , and to be baptised , if it were to be done again ] I shall prove it as followeth . 

1.  Argu. They that have not that faith which is the condition of the Covenant , and notoriously show that they have it not , have no right to Baptism . But such are all they who are notoriously ungodly . Ergo. etc.  

Or they that notoriously manifest that they consent not to the terms of the Covenant , have no right to Baptism . But , etc. Ergo.  

The Major is proved hence . 1.  What else is there to hinder any Heathen from the like Right ? 2.  Because that the probable Profession of such a further consent is necessary to justify baptising of them . 3.  Because mutual consent is necessary to a mutual Covenant ; and the Covenant must be mutual : no man hath right to God's part that refuseth his own . This is all so far past question , that I pass it over the more lightly . All the doubt than is of the Minor , [ Whether no man have the necessary condition of the baptismal Covenant on God's part that is notoriously ungodly ] or [ Whether all such ungodly men do notoriously manifest that they consent not to the terms of the Covenant ] I speak not here of any subsequent condition which God imposeth upon the Covenanter only for the future ; but only of the condition which God imposeth upon us that he may be in Covenant with us , and that it may be a bargain ; and that this is a true inconsistent with notorious ungodliness , I was going about at large to prove it ; But I remember that I have done it already in 26.  Arguments , against Mr. Blake's , and therefore I think it better for you & me that I refer you thither , than to write them here over again , or needlessly to add any more to the same purpose : If any say that though God require as a duty such a Faith as is inonsistent with notorious ungodliness , yet not as Absolutely necessary that he may be engaged to us in Covenant , or that we may have proper right to Baptism ; I answer , God hath but one Covenant of Grace which Baptism sealeth ; our sound believing is the condition of that one Covenant ; that is , that it may be a Mutual Actual Covenant : If then there be any other Covenant having other Conditions , we must wait till both Covenant and Conditions be made known . Were it worth the while , or a thing necessary , I would stand to prove the Negative , viz. that there is no Covenant sealed by Baptism which only promises Baptism as the Benefit , or any other mere Externals ; but that the Covenant which Baptism sealeth is only that which promises Remission , Salvation , and outward Mercies as appurtenances and means so far as necessary . 

Arg. 2.  They that have no right to Remission of sin , have no right given them by God to Baptism ; but the Notoriously Ungodly have no right to remission of sin . Ergo. etc. The Minor will not be denied . The Major is proved thus : God hath appointed no Baptism as his gift , but what is for remission of sin , as the thing sealed and exhibited by it . Therefore , They that have no right to Remission , have no right to Baptism . The Antecedent is undoubted ; The Consequent is grounded on this truth , that God hath made no Covenant to any man of the bare seals without the thing signified : show such a Promise if you affirm it . 2.  What God hath joined so nearly as the exhibiting sign and thing exhibited no man may lawfully put asunder : it 's a man's sin to take the sign without the thing signified . It is not probable therefore that God hath made any Promise of the naked sign without the thing signified : If God give right to such an ungodly man to be baptised , than he gives him right to be Baptised for Remission of sin ( for this is his express and affixed Use and signification , ) but he doth not give him right to be Baptised for the Remission of sin . Ergo. etc.  

The Minor I prove thus . If he give him Right to be baptised for the Remission of sin , then either for actual Remission ( to be sealed by Baptism ) or for Conditional future Remission ; but for neither of these . Ergo.  

Not for Actual Remission ; for then Notoriously Ungodly persons are Actually remitted ; which is not true : Nor for Conditional ; for then no more is given then all the World hath ( at least that hear the Gospel ) even persecuting Infidels ; and then all they may as well be baptised ; for God pardoneth all upon condition they repent and believe . 

Argu. 3  If God be not at all actually obliged in Covenant to any notorious ungodly man , then is he not obliged to give him Baptism . But God is not obliged so to him . Ergo.  

The Minor is unquestionable ; The Major is granted by most of our Divines , who make the contrary Doctrine Pelagianism , that God should be obliged to man in the state of Nature , in such a Covenant : If God be obliged to give them Baptism , then if he should not give it them , he breaks Promise with them ; But the Consequence is unsound ; Ergo , etc.  Nor doth he give them power to claim it from the Church-officers ; for they can show no Title . 

Argum. 4.  If God have given a Covenant-right to a notorious ungodly man to be baptised , then either to baptism only , or other blessings with it ; but neither of these , Ergo , etc.  The first will not be affirmed : What then be the other blessings ? Either they are special and spiritual , but that 's not defended ; or outward and common , which is like is meant ; for they call it an outward Covenant . Bu● as God hath given outward things but conditionally to Believers ; so there is no such Covenant of outward mercies alone that can be showed in the word which is now in force to us . 

Arg. 5.  According to the definition of most of our Divines , the outward washing alone without inward Grace , is not Baptism : Therefore if God give them right to the washing without the Grace , he gives them not right to Baptism : but this is but ad hominem . 

I do but superficially touch these things . 1.  Because ( as I said ) the Arguments to Mr. Blake are full . 2.  Because I am informed that all this is granted with those Divines with whom I have debated this point , and that they confess that none but sound Believers have engaged God in actual Covenant to them , but only in the common conditional Covenant , and consequently it is not by Covenant grant that the notoriously ungodly have right to Baptism , but by other ways which we are next to speak to . I am informed that this is all granted ; but then I must add , that they yield that such men have no true proper right at all : for such proper right is of the nature of the debitum , the dueness of the Benefit . So that a man may thence lay claim to it as his due . And the right ( between God and Man ) we receive only by Gods moral Gift , which is by some promise or grant by his word or revelation of his Will de debito habendi ; for this dueness or right is a moral thing , and must come by his moral act , such as among men we call political or civil . 

But mark how the other two sorts of right differ from this : That which follows Gods Physical disposal by Providence , gives a man no proper right of dueness , but only makes it non injustum , and I think not prope●l positively justum , that he should possess it : as if I see a man ready to die for cold , and cast a garment on him : only these two things follow ; first that is is not unjust for him to possess it ; 2.  That it is unjust for any other to deprive him of it ; but this is no dueness : or if he have any proper right , it is after the possession , and not before . 

And then the third sort of right which ariseth from a precept to others concerning the manner of their duty , is properly no right , as not giving a due or title to the Benefit , but only it makes my act of application to be just , and him to be the Object of a just Act ; not just because of his Title , from a gift of God ; but from a precept to me : so that as the three Instruments differ , Gift or Covenant , Natural disposal , and Precept , so do these three sorts of right differ : the first only being debitum , the second non injustum , the third justum : and the Subject of the third is but my act ▪ and not the person who is the Object . It is just that I obey God , and so do such an Act on him . 

Having said thus much for preparation , I shall anon speak more particularly to the two later sorts of right : but first we shall touch briefly the third pretended title , which some insist on , of such Infants proper right to baptism . 

The third was upon the account of their Ancestors true faith , though the immediate Parents weee notoriously ungodly They that pled this title , will not prove it good : 2.  I thus disprove it . 

Agrum . 1.  If the Promise to the faithful and their Seed to many generations , doth necessarily suppose an uninterrupted succession of faithful Progenitors of that seed , than that promise gives no right to the Infants of notoriously ungodly Parents . But the Antecedent is true : therefore so is the Consequent . The Consequent I suppose to be manifested before : the Antecedent I prove by these following Arguments : 1.  If the promise suppose not an uninterrupted succession of faithful Progenitors , then by virtue of the Promise to Noah all the world have Right to baptism . But the Consequent is false : therefore so is the Antecedent . If they urge the words of the second Commandment , it is certain that it is not a thousand generations since Noah . This Question is commonly put to our brethren in this case , [ Where shall we stop , and on what grounds shall we stop , if it extend not to all the world ? ] and they answer variously : One reverend Brother , Mr. Blake on the Covenant , pag. 140. saith [ He knows few that say the Predecessor gives right without the immediate Parent . But all concur in a joint way to communicate a Covenant Interest . ] This yields the necessity of a non-intercision . Others say , first out of Calvin and Ames , [ Vbi non prorsus interciditur Christianismi professio , & ubi praesumuntur esse Christiani . ] to which I answer ; If it be a profession of Christianity properly so called , than the right may come by the immediate parent , and there is no intercision . But if it be in a profession equivocally so called , that is , such as is not a probable sign of the thing professed , than I suppose I have proved that such a profession is indeed not a profession , gives no title , and such is that of every notorious ungodly parent . 2.  It is answered by others , that it must be by some Ancestors alive that will undertake their education . To which I reply ; then the Ancestor gives him not a right as an Ancestor , but as an Undertaker ( of which more anon ; ) though he be no fitter to be an Undertaker than another . Others say , that the children of Christians known or presumed to be such , living or dead , may baptised . Repl. then all the children under the Turks , whose Ancestors were known Christians , may be baptised ; and why not all the world , when Noah and Adam were known to be in Covenant ? or all this Nation , if they had been Heathens this hundred years , because their Ancestors were justly presumed to be Christians ? 

Argum. 2.  In the common sense of such a Covenant amongst men , it would necessarily suppose an uninterrupted succession of faithful Progenitors , that make no forfeiture before any right can be conveyed to their issue : therefore it must be so interpreted in our present case , seeing we must not go from the known use or sense of words , without some apparent reason , whereof here is none that I see ; And the Antecedent is a known case . If a Prince do convey certain privileges & Honours to a man and his Heirs and Posterity for ever , this word certainly implies this supposition or condition , that neither he nor any after him do make a forfeiture : for if they turn Traitors , the Covenant is broke , the Grant is void , and they cannot by that convey any such right to Posterity . 

Argum. 3.  If the promise aforesaid did not imply a necessary non-interruption of faithful Progenitors , than the Promise and threatening could not be verified : but the Consequent is not to be admitted ; therefore the Consequence is plain , in that as the Promise is to many generations of those that love God and keep his Commandments ; so the Threatening is , that he will visit the sins of the Fathers on the children to the third and fourth generation of , etc. Exod. 20.34 . where God proclaims it with his name ; and doubtless both the Threatening and the Promise is such , that it cannot be that the same persons are under both at once : being certainly therefore under the Threatening , they are from under the Promise . 

Argum 4.  The Threatening to the third and fourth generation is necessary to be understood on supposition , that there be an uninterrupted succession of wicked Progenitors : therefore by proportion so must the Promise be understood , as to a necessary succession of faithful Progenitors . 

Argum. 5.  The natural Interest that Ancestors have in such Posterity is not immediate , but mediante Parent proximo : therefore so is the Covenant-interest ; because it proceedeth on supposition of the Natural . We receive nothing from a Grandfather but by a Father , but what dependeth on his free will : an intercision therefore preventeth our Privileges . It is here objected , that it is harsh to affirm that the immediate Parents sin depriveth Posterity of the Benefit , though the Ancestors were never so godly ; for so the children should suffer for the Parent's sin . Ans. 1. the children never had right , therefore never lost it . 2.  it 's just that they suffer for the Parent's sin : when Parents have lost their right , they cannot convey it to others . Object . Paul saith of the Jews , They are beloved for the Father's sake . Answ. So far beloved , as that God will reclaim them in after-ages , and now convert a remnant : but not so far beloved , as that any child of an unbelieving Jew had right to Baptism for Abraham or any Ancestors sake , and that Love was from a part of the Covenant proper to Abraham's seed . Object . Th●re could not be a higher evidence of Apostasy , than to gi●e their children to a false God ; yet this did the children of Israel , and yet their Posterity had right to Circumcision . Answ. I will reserve the answer of this to the end , where we shall have further reason to consider it , and next proceed to the fourth pretended Title of such Infants . 

The fourth part of this Question is , Whether the Infants of notorious ungodly parents may not have right to Baptism , on the account of some Undertakers ? Answ. If this be so , it 's nothing against our Negative determination of the main Question , viz. Whether they have right for their Parent's sake ? 2.  We distinguish of Undertakers ; some are such as will undertake that another man shall bring up his child well : 2.  Some will undertake to do it themselves , yet not to educate it as their own , but as another man's , and at his disposal : neither of these undertake can give any right . 3.  But if the child do either by the total resignation of the Parent , or by adoption or the death of the Parents , or by purchase , or any other just means , become his Own that undertakes for him : so that the child is ejus juris , as his own children are , and at his dispose , than the Question is much harder . And for my part , I incline to judge that such a child hath Right upon that man's account : 1.  Because that in a Law-sense this man is his Father . 2.  Because all that God requireth in the free universal Covenant of Grace , to our participation of his Benefits , is our consent : and children do consent bo those whose they are : For they that owe them , or whose they are , have the disposal of them , and so of their Wills interpretatively ; and may among men make any Covenant for them which is for their good ( at least , ) and oblige them to the performance of conditions . 3.  Because God so determined it with Abraham , when he called him so solemnly to renew his Covenant , and so to the Israeliets after . Of which for brevity , see what I have said in my book of Baptism , chap. 29. pag. 101 , 102. which I need not here recite . Let every man see with his own eyes : but for my part , I resolve ( till I see better reasons for the contrary ) to admit no child to baptism , u●on the undertaking of any other susceptors , such as our Godfathers and Godmothers were , without a better Title than their susception : but if any will say , This child is mine , and at my disposal , though not mine by natural generation , I will not dare to refuse to Baptise it , if the person that presenteth it and devoteth it to God , be capable of so doing , as being himself a Believer . And I think that it is a considerable work of Charity to get the children of Infidels or such among us are nominal Christians and Infidels indeed , that they may have that benefit by you which they cannot have from their natural parents . 

The 5th . Title that is commonly pleaded for the Right of the children of notoriously ungodly Parents to baptism , is , upon the account of the Church's faith , and the Magistrates Authority over them . For this , it is pleaded , 1.  That the Magistrate or sovereign Ruler hath power to dispose of his Subjects , and therefore to make Covenants for them , and in their names , as much as a Parent hath : for the power of a Magistrate is greater than of a Parent , in that the Magistrate may put children to death , and so may not a Parent . 

Answ. 1.  The Sovereign hath a Governing power above a Parent : but it is not on that the great contract or right is grounded . But the Parent hath a greater propriety in the child than the Governor ; and so hath more Right to dispose of him in this case . The Sovereign's power is in order to the Good of the Commonwealth ; the Parents is for the Good of the Child directly . 2.  Bodin ( and some others ) think that the Roman Custom was good , that Parents should have power of Life and Death as to their Children : though few approve his Judgement or reasons . 3.  I doubt not but a Sovereign may use his Authority to procure the baptising of Children by the Parent's dedication of them to God. But still it must be modiante parent vel proparente , by procuring their consent , who have the nearest Interest in the child , and greater than the Magistrate can have ; though not greater ruling power . Obje . But there are some Rulers that are Domini as well as Rectores , and the people and all that they have are theirs ; so that there is no proprietary in the Nation but themselves : and in such a case it seems that they may dispose of the consent of their subjects . An. 1. ye● it 's lis sub judice , whether this be not mere unlawful Tyranny , or Usurpation , and so the Title Dorid because against the Law of God in nature . 2.  Or if any think that the example of Joseph , or of the Israelites buying children , will prove the contrary , yet 1.  It can be but to their Civils , as Goods , Lands , etc. their Right wherein is adventitious and accidental ; and not to the fruit of their bodies , where their right is so natural that none can take it by violence from them : I say therefore that here it cannot be without the Parents voluntary Alienation and Resignation of their Children to the Sovereign ; which they cannot do but upon weighty considerations . 2.  The Sovereign in this case hath the same right in Adult subjects , as in Infants , seeing they are all Vassals to him as their Lord And yet it is manifest in Scripture , that God will have the personal consent of the Adult , before they shall have any interest in his Covenant : Because when their Sovereign Lord hath all the right that is possible , he leaveth them the power of their own wills : And so as they have still naturally a nearer right in themselves ( than he hath ) which they cannot alienate ; so it seems they have in their children . 3.  At least this is nothing to almost all the world , where the Rulers claim no such absolute Dominion and Propriety . 4.  God in Scripture requireth Parents and not Rulers to circumcise their children , and to educate them : And Joshua would promise for no more but himself & his household to serve the Lord , and bids the people choose whom they would serve . Yet I will not deny but that a Ruler may use some sharp means to procure the consent of Parents , in some cases . And I also confess that this Argument , though lest insisted on , hath ( in my opinion ) much more plausible appearance of strength , and better deserves a further consideration , than the great and common Argument of the Parents . Right by such a Profession as consisteth with Notorious Ungodliness , upon which most build almost all their Cause . ●astly , I conceive that as a Governors Right is in the Commonwealth and main body of the Nation , enabling him to Rule them in the fear of God , so I will not deny but that he may call together the chief part of them , or a Representative body , and urging and procuring their consent , he may devote them by a National Covenant to G●d and promise himself to rule them in his fear . And I would this duty and the Scripture Patterns for it were better laid to heart . But still this leaves the Parent that nearer Natural Interest in his Individual children , on which God hath pleased rather to ground his Promises and Threaten to Infants . 

The second Argument is drawn from Mat. 28.19 , 20.  Go and disciple me all Nations , baptising them : From whence it is argued , that the Infants of notorious ungodly Parents being Members of a Discipled Nation , may therefore be baptised as such Members . Answ. 1.  If the nearer Interest of their Parents be not supposed necessary , than this Argument makes as much for the Right of the child of any Jew or Heathen , as of a Christian , for they may be Members of that Nation which is Discipled . 2.  But they must be Members of it quà tales , as discipled ; and that they are not till they are themselves Disciples . The Apostles are first commanded to Disciple Nations , and then to Baptise them on supposition that they be discipled : therefore they must baptise none but those that are discipled . They must endeavour the discipling of each Individual ; but if they prevail but with the greater and Ruling part , it may be called a Discipled Nation , and a Kingdom that is become the Kingdom of Christ : but yet as it is but for the sake of the chief part that the whole is so denominated , so it is only that part that is to be baptised ; seeing a bare denomination of the whole , gives not right to any part that hath none of the ground of that denomination . Nor did the ancient Churches so understand this Text : For when Constantine and Theodosius and other Christian Emperors had the Rule , they did not judge that all their Subjects should be baptised . 

The 3d. Argument is drawn from the Interest of the Church : They say , Those that are born within the Church , though of unworthy Parents , the Church may take them and present them to baptism . Answ. How are those born within the Church , whose Parents are no Members of the Church ? ( Of which more anon . ) If the Parent be utterly unworthy , and the child can have no Right upon his account , then certainly he is not to be reckoned in the Church . And if you mean , that all those that are born among the members of the Church , or where they have Civil Rule , may by them be presented to Baptism ; then the argument must be the same with that before , or so vain as to need no confutation : Unless the Church will accept the Children as their Own , according to the sense of the fourth forementioned Title ; and then any one Member may better do it than the whole Church . 

Having spoken to the five pretended Titles distinctly , and showed you how far they are any of them allowable , and how far not ; I shall proceed to the second Question in the beginning propounded , viz. [ Whether that the Eventual Disposal of God by a Physical Act of Providence , do give any Right to the children of notoriously ungodly Parents to be baptised ? ] And I need not say much to this : 1.  Because I know of none that pled this Right . 2.  Because it is but a non-injustum , and I think scarcely so much as a Justum much lesle a Debitum , that is here grounded . 3.  But especially , because it is unquestionably evident , that if this give any kind of Right , it is but to a Possession ad libitum Donatoris , after the reception ; and not at all to the first Reception . And therefore it cannot with the least show of Reason be pleaded beforehand to enable any man's claim to Baptism , nor to enable a Minister to baptise any , nor yet ex post facto to justify the Act of the Baptizer or of the Baptised . 

Yet how far it may prohibit any man to dispossess them of the state or privileges of the baptised , till God give them a clear warrant , is worthy consideration . 

3.  But it is the third Question concerning the third sort of Right that most of all concerneth us to discuss ; seeing as far as I can perceive , it is this that our brethren of the contrary judgement do intend to insist upon , as discerning some inconvenience in affirming , God to be any otherwise than conditionally engaged in Covenant with any Notorious ungodly men , yea or any that are unregenerate . To this therefore we must next speak . 

The Question is [ Whether it be Gods command , that Ministers should baptise Children of notoriously ungodly men ? ] Or [ Whether it be their duty ? ] Or [ Whether such Children be the Objects of our Just , and Justifiable Action of Baptising ? ] 

And I conclude the Question Negatively , supposing that we speak both of Parents natural and civil , and so that they come in upon no better account than the Title of such Parents , as is before explained . Here 1.  I grant , that if the natural Parents be ungodly , we may baptise on the the Title of their civil Parents , or Pro-parents ; I mean any that truly Own them as theirs . 2.  Much more if any one of the Parents be godly , though the other be ungodly . 3.  Also , If there be a probable profession of Godliness , though indeed there be not Sincerity , it is our duty to baptise the children of such . Because 1. we have no natural capacity of judging but according to evidence , and we have no evidence for a certain judgement concerning the estate of another man's heart . 2.  I have elsewhere made it appear ( and more abundantly might easily do ) that when God mentioneth any person qualified with such a Qualification which to us is uncertain to be the object of our Act , his meaning is that we should rationally and charitably judge of men according to evidence whether they are such or no , and so take them , and use them accordingly , the Apparere being here as the Esse to us . So when he bids us , if a Brother wrong us oft , and oft say It repenteth me , forgive him : it is all one with that other [ If he repent , forgive him . ] We know not certainly whether he repent or not ; but we must take him probably to repent , that giveth us the evidence of a probable profession . So if we are to baptise those that repent and believe , or their children , how can we judge of them but by a probable profession . 4.  It is therefore granted , that though such a degree of Ungodliness as is consistent with sincere Godliness , be Notorious , yet that 's not the subject of our Question : for that doth not denominate a man ( ungodly ) seeing it is from the predominant part that he must be denominated . The Doubt remaineth therefore abou● Ungodliness in the proper sense Notorious , as is before explained . And I shall now defend the Negative as followeth . 

Arg. 1.  We have no word of God commanding or Authorising us to baptise the children of the notoriously ungodly ( as theirs : ) Therefore is it not our duty , or lawful . 

What command or warrant is pretended from Scripture , we shall examine anon . 

Arg. 2.  We may not baptise them who are Notoriously without true Covenant Right to Baptism . But such are the children of notorious ungodly Parents . Ergo.  

The Minor is proved before ; the Major needs no proof , I think : We should give each his Right . 

Arg. 3.  If it be the very reason why we must Baptise the Ungodly and the●r Seed , who profess Godliness , because that by professing it they seem probably to be godly ; then must we not baptise them who do not seem probably to be godly ( or , if you had rather , to be true Believers : ) But the Antecedent is true . Therefore so is the Consequent . 

For the Antecedent , I have said enough for it to Mr. Blake . If it were not propter fidem significandam , that profession were required , but propter se as the condition of the Covenant : then 1.  God would not have said ( He that believeth and is baptised , etc.  And , if thou believe with all thy heart thou mayst be baptised : and , Repent and be baptised , etc. ) but rather ( if thou wilt but say thou believest thou mayst be baptised , etc. ) 2.  And then all that profess should be justified : For all that be in the Mutual Covenant with God actually , are justified . 3.  And then such profession would be of flat necessity to Salvation , as well as faith , which it is not , but on supposition of Opportunity , a Call , etc.  I think I may take it for granted , that Profession is required sub ratione signi , as a sign of the thing professed : nor can any man , I think , give a better reason of its necessity , though another after this may be , because God will have the outward man to serve him , by thus signifying by its operations what are the Elicit Acts and dispositions of the William  

The Consequence of the foresaid Mayor proposition is past doubt , I suppose . If any think otherwise , the next Argument may rectify them . 

Argu. 4.  He that is not to be judged a credible professed Christian or the child of such is not the just object of our act of baptising ( Or , We ought to baptise none but those whom we should judge true professed Christians , and their children ) But the notoriously Ungodly are not to be judged true professed Christians , nor their Children the Children of such : therefore not to be baptised . 

As the word [ Profession ] signifieth a pretended discovering of the mind ( with an intention to deceive ) so I confess it may be called a profession Physically or Metaphysically true : But it is not this natural Truth that we here mean : nor yet do I stretch the word so high as to comprehend the full gradual correspondency of the Act to the Object : but I plainly mean a [ Moral Truth ] opposed to [ a Lie ] or Falshood : ] And being speaking about moral-legal things , the terms must be necessarily understood according to the Subject : So that it were proper in this Case , If I simply maintained that such are [ Not Professors of Christianity ] at all ; because in a moral Law-sense they are not such . For no man is to give credit to a notorious lie ; so to speak , is equal to silence , as to any obligation that it can lay upon another , either to believe him , or to use him as one that is believed . My meaning therefore is , that we are not to baptise that man or his child , upon a profession which is notoriously false ; so that ourselves and the Congregation do certainly know , or have sufficient Reasons to be confident , that the man doth lie . 

For the proof of the Minor ( which I know will be denied ) thus I prove it : If either the Profession be evidently but Equivocally called a true Profession , or the Christianity professed be but equivocally called Christian●ty , than the notoriously ungodly are not to be judged true professed Christians . But the one of these is so with all notoriously ungodly persons . Ergo.  

The Major is past doubt , seeing there must be the true profession of true Christianity , that must justly denominate a man ( at age ) a true Professor of Christianity . If he notoriously want the first , he is morally no Professor : If he want the later , he professeth not christianity . To prove the Minor , we will begin with the later . We speak not now of any Accidentals that pertain not to the Being , but tend only to the wellbeing of a Christian. Now I hope it is past controversy among us all , that it is essential to our Christianity , that it be in the Intellect and Will , whatever we say of the outward Man : and for the Intellect , that we believe in God the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost : And it is essential to our believing in God , that we believe him to be our Creator , Chief Ruler , and chief End and Happiness . And to believe in the Son Essentially , containeth a believing that he is Jesus Christ our Lord , that is , that he is the Redeemer of the world , who shed his blood to save his people from their sins by pardon and sanctification , and who will raise them from the dead , and judge them to everlasting Blessedness : and who is their Lord and Ruler on this ground , and to this end ; to believe in the Holy Ghost essentially , containeth a believing that his Testimony of Christ was true , and that he is the Sanctifier of those that shall be saved . It is as much essential to Christianity , to consent that God the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost be such to us as we profess them to be , as aforesaid : which is included in believing in God , and in Jesus Christ , and in the Holy Ghost : And therefore the sum of the Covenant is [ I will be your God ( upon Redempition by Christ ) and you shall be my people ] Now the Notoriously Ungodly do either profess to believe and consent to all this , or but to part : If to All , than they lie , of which more anon : If but to part ; then 1. it is not the Christian Faith , no more than a heart , or a l●ver is a man ; it is but part of it : 2. and our Divines wil● say , that he that doth not believe and consent to the whole Essence of Christianity , doth not truly believe or consent to any Essential ( though for that I determine it not ) But were their Faith never so firm in any one part , it is not Christianity , or the Christian Faith , without the whole . If it be the Christian Faith to believe in God the Father only , than those that deny Christ , are Christians . If it be the Christian Faith to believe only in Christ , though they deny the Father , or the Holy Ghost , than men worse than Infidel's or most Heathens , are Christians . Indeed there is so necessary a connexion , that it is not possible truly to believe in God the Son , without believing in the Father and the Holy Ghost , and believing the Eternal Glory to which he hath Redeemed us and will lead us . If it be Christianity to believe all the Creed by mere Assent ; then first , the Devils are Christians ; for they believe and tremble . Secondly , and then it would be a Profession of Christianity to say , [ I do believe Christ to be my Lord , by right of Redemption , but his Laws are so strict , and cross to my pleasures , that I am resolved he shall not rule me , and I will venture all rather than I will take him for my Ruler on such terms . ] Or to say , [ I believe the Holy Ghost is the Sanctifier of God's Elect ; but I will not consent that he shall Sanctify me ] Or to say , [ I believe that Christ died to save his people from their sins , but he shall not save me from mine , because I cannot spare them . ] Who dare say that any of these were a Profession of Christianity ? We must believe with the heart , if we be Christians . Christianity is not a bare Opinion : It lieth in the covenant of the soul with God , and it is the consent of the Will that is that covenanting . It is therefore sometime expressed by loving Christ above all . They that said , [ This is the Heir ] believed in a sort with the Assent of the brain : but when they add , [ Come , let us kill him , that the Inheritance may be ours ] I think they showed that they professed not Christianity . He that saith , [ I will not have this man to reign or rule over me . ] disclaimeth Christianity . He that disclaimeth an Essential part , disclaimeth the whole . It is not the Being without these part . 

All this laid together , shows us that Christianity , or the Christian Faith , truly and properly so called , which denominateth a man properly a Christian , is specifically distinct ( as to a moral specification ) from the faith of the highest unregenerate man : ( When Mr. K. wrote a digression against me on a mistake that , I had denied this , I did not think that others would so call me out to the defence of it . ) And seeing that they differ by a moral specification , it is clear that they admit not of the same Definition ; and that the term [ Faith ] or [ Christianity ] applied to both these , cannot mean the same thing : but must here be an equivocal . Thus I have cleared it , that to profess the belief of one part of the Christian faith only , is not to profess the Christian faith , or to profess to be a Christian : and therefore such are not to be baptised , seeing we must baptise them into the name of the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , if we will baptise them with Christian Baptism . 

2.  Next I shall show that if any Notorious ungodly person do say he believes the whole , even in God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , such saying is not a true Profession , nor valid to its uses . To this end let us inquire what it is to Profess : Profiteor is publicè fateor . Fateor , inquit Perottus , est à fando , quasi vehementer loquor & affirmo ; Fateri enim est sponte aliquid affirmare : Confiteri aliquo modo coactum ; Profiteri , ad Gloriam aliquid prae se far . Martinius rather a 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 dicendus , fandus : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 fatenda , so 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 est sermo . Now the natural use of speech is to signify our mind to others . And the very essence of a Profession lieth in the open declaring of the mind , in the very signifying use of the words or actions . For it containeth ( as other signs do ) 1.  The thing signifying , or the matter of the sign , and that is either words , writings or other Actions capable of this use ( of which there are diverse . ) 2. the thing signified ; which is our Internal Assent and consent . 3.  The party to whom we signify it . 4.  The actual signification , or Aptitudinal : that is , that it be a sign Aptitudinal in itself , and actual , when rightly observed by others : in which Aptitude lieth the very formal nature of the sign . This being so , it is most evident that if it have not an Aptitude to signify our mind , it is not a sign . You may say , if he dissemble , yet he may make profession , yet profession is no sign of his mind . I answer , it is no true sign of the thing professed , but the end which he pretendeth to use it for is , to be a sign : and as a sign we expect and receive it ; and did we know the heart as God doth , we need not ask men whether they believe , but presently go to their hearts and see , and so baptise them or refuse them ( or their Children . ) It being then the very use that the Church makes of men's profession to signify men's minds , it is clear 1. that where there is nothing that we can justly take as the signification of a man's mind , that he believeth as a Christian , there is no moral profession of it : and where a man signifieth his mind that he doth not so believe , there he professeth not to believe : And if he make two contrary professions , one that he doth believe , and the other that he doth not , if we know one to be certain and undissembled , and the other to be false , the later is Hey-boyss , and the former to be received . All this being evident , it next followeth , that we show , that no Notorious ungodly man doth make true profession of Christianity : For 1.  If it be evident that he useth word's not understood , as a Parrot , then is it not a profession : For Ignorantis non est consensus : and so nec Professio : else a Parrot may be a Professor . 2.  He maketh openly the contrary Profession ; For he doth by words or deeds , or both , profess that he will not be ruled by Christ , that he will not be sanctified or released from his sin : that he will not take God and Glory to come for his chief Good , but the things of this life , and will obey the flesh before God. It it be in plain known sins , which they can find no vain excuse for , some of them will say words of equal force to these : but though most will not do so ; yet their Actions openly profess it . 

But because this is the thing that will be denied , I add further . 1.  Actions are capable of signifying a man's mind as well as words : though not ordinarily so soon , or easily , yet some Actions do ; yea , and much more certainly . 2.  God plainly tells us of some , that profess that they know God , yet in works they deny him : so that works can speak as plain as words , and deny God , and unsay what a deceitful tongue hath said . 3.  If these persons in question do not thus deny Christ by their works , or do not Profess , to be no Christians , then either it is because ungodliness is consistent with Christianity , or doth not comprehend or imply Infidelity , or else because the [ Notoriousness ] of this ungodliness is no Profession . The first cannot be said : For 1.  As Godliness in a Christian sense comprehendeth Christianity , and even the true acknowledgement of the Godhead itself ; so ungodliness containeth the disowning of God and the refusing of all true Love of him , or seeking him as our End , and it compriseth in it the refusal of Christ to bring us back to God , and of the Spirit to conform our souls and lives to his William As therefore God is the Ultimate End , and Christ as Mediator but the means or way ; and as loving God is a more excellent duty than believing in Christ in itself considered , so ungodliness which is contrary to the Love of God , is a greater sin than unbelief in itself , as to Jesus Christ the Mediator : yea and ever containeth this unbelief as its second and lower part , though it be denominated from the opposition to God , as the greater part of the sin . 2.  However no man will deny but that they are concomitant , and that every ungodly man is an unbeliever . 3.  Yea as ungodliness is contrary to our subjection to the Lord Redeemer , it is a real part of Infidelity itself . I may well conclude therefore that to be Notoriously ungodly , is to be Notoriously no Christian , but an Unbeliever . 

2.  And that this Notoriousness is a certain profession , is evident . For 1. the mind is declared by it : Christ himself telleth us that out of the heart come Murders , Adulteries , etc. and out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh . If you say , men may do such and such things against their will , I answer , 1.  then they are not Notoriously ungodly ; if they do not Notoriously show their wilfulness . 2.  The Will hath the command of the outward man 2.  And as it declareth the mind , so doth it certainly declare it . For first , else still it were not notorious ungodliness . 2.  Words may be easier counterfeited than Deeds , especially the scope of a man's life . 3.  And hence it is that the Lord Jesus himself when he comes to Judgement , will try more by Deeds than verbal Profession , and will reject such Professions when they are contradicted by evil actions , as Mat. 7.  Not every one that saith unto one Lord , Lord , shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven , but he that doth the will of my Father . Mat. 25.  Christ will convince those by their not feeding , clothing , etc. his members , that they were no true Believers , who still go about to justify themselves . And they that shall say , Lord have not we eat , drunk , etc.  Cast out Devils , & preached in thy name ; shall be answered with a Departed from me ye workers of iniquity , I know you not . Men shall all be judged according to their works . It is clear than that Notorious ungodliness is a Profession or signification of the very mind and will : yea and a profession most certain ; for it cannot be dissembled . He that is notoriously ungodly is most certainly no true Christian : But the profession which this contradicteth , is not so certain ; nay it is most certainly false . So that as God doth , so man must take men's works and lives for a Discovery of their mind , and judge them by it . 

I have stood the larger on this , because that profession of Christianity is the common title that is pleaded for such persons ; and therefore I have showed that they are not to be reputed for credible Professors . If it be not a probable sign , it is not to be taken for a valid profession : But words contradicted by the Notorious tenor of the life , are no probable sign , but these works are a certain sign of the contrary . Ergo.  

If any man yet do think that any words , though not probably signifying the mind , are a valid profession , and to be taken for a Title ; than it will follow , that if a man should laugh in your face , and foretell you that he will come and make a profession in scorn of Christ , or if he tell you that though he speak such words , it is not from his heart , but through fear , or to get some honour with men ; or if when he baptised his child in the name of Christ , he tell you that he intendeth not that he shall serve him ; or if he say of himself he will baptised in that name of the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , and renounce the world , flesh and Devil , but he intendeth not to stand to it , nor to do as he promises , etc. any of these must be taken for a Profession , and this man for a Christian : which no wise man I think will affirm . If an affirmation presently contradicted by words as express and certain , be not to be taken for a profession , then much lesle is an affirmation more certainly contradicted by the tenor of the life , yea and too oft by professed impenitency . 

The sum is this , We must not baptise him into the name of the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost ( or his children for his faith ) who we are sure doth not believe in the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost : But such is every Notorious Ungodly man , Ergo . 

Or we must not baptise him ( or his child ) as a Christian , that certainly declareth himself to be none . But so doth , etc Ergo. So much of the fourth Argument . 

Arg. 5.  We must not baptise those that certainly declare to us that they repent not ( nor any for their sakes : ) But all notorious ungodly men do certain●y declare that they repent not , ( unless equivocally : ) Ergo.  

The Major is proved , in that Repentance is a necessary condition in him that hath right to Baptism before ●od ; and the Profession of it necessary to him that we mu●● baptise . The Apostles required it . The Minor needeth no proof I think . 

Arg. 6.  We must not baptise him ( or any for his sak● ) that will not renounce the world , flesh , and the Devil ; o● that declareth certainly that he will not renounce th●m at that time . But such are all notorious ungodly men . Therefore the Church hath ever required this in Baptism . 

Arg. 7.  We may not baptise those whom we notoriously know to be at present uncapable of receiving remission of sins : ( for that is the use of the Ordinance according to God's institution . ) But such are all the notoriously ungodly . Therefore I need not here , I suppose , with those I deal with , answer the Antinomian's Objection from Rom. 4. of justifying the ungodly . I have said enough to that against Lud. Colvinus , and others . 

Arg. 8.  Men that be notoriously unfit for Marriage with Christ , to be solemnised , are unfit by us to be baptised , ( or any for them : ) But such are all the notoriously ungodly , Ergo , etc.  

Arg. 9  We may not baptise those that we know do notoriously dissemble in making the Baptismal Covenant . But such are all notoriously ungodly , Ergo , etc.  

Arg. 10.  We may not give him the Seal of the righteousness of Faith , who notoriously declareth that he hath not that Righteousness . But such are all notoriously ungodly , Ergo , etc.  

Arg. 11.  From Matth. 28.19 , 20.  Before we baptise men , ( or any for their sakes ) we must see in probability that they are made Disciple . But so are not the notoriously ungodly . Ergo , etc.  

Arg. 12.  Those that we must Baptise ( or any for their sakes ) must seem to believe with all their hearts , Acts 8.37 . And to receive the word gladly , Acts 2.38.39 , 41.  And to believe with a saving faith , Mark. 16.15 , 16.  Acts 16.31 , ●2 , 33.  But so do not any that are notoriously ungodly . Ergo.  

These Texts and many such like are our Directory whom to Baptise . 

Arg. 13.  From 1 Cor. 7.14 . Else were your children unclean ] If one of the immediate Parents be not a Believer , their children are unclean , and consequently not to be baptised . But notorious ungodly ones are not Believers . Ergo . 

As they must be Believers , that they may have Right , and be Holy : so must they seem Believers , that they may seem to have Right , and so be baptised by us warrantably . But such seem not to have Faith , who are notoriously Ungodly . 

It is Objected that this Text determineth of one way of Covenant-right to Infants , but doth not thereby deny all other . Answ. 1.  It is peremptory in the Negative [ Else were your children unclean ] as well as in the Affirmative [ but now are they Holy. ] 2.  It therefore excludeth expressly all other ways of interest in the Covenant by Birth-priviledge : Else how could that Negative be true ? But I confess it doth not exclude all means else of an after acquisition or reception of Covenant-right : For he that is born unclean , may become by purchase or contract the child of a Believer ▪ or at age may believe himself ; And then he ceaseth to be unclean . 3.  At least it seems yielded by th●m , that if both Parents be unbelievers , the child can have no Right A● theirs or on the●r account . 

it 's Objected that this was true of the Corinthians , whose Ancestors ●ere Infidels ▪ and themselves the first Converts , their children were unclean , if one of them were not a believer ▪ but it holdeth not of them that had pious Ancestors . Answ. 1.  This yieldeth the point which is now in question , that is , that On their Parent's account , such children have no right . 2.  It contradicteth the Apostle's express Affirmation , who saith that [ they are unclean : ] which can extend to no lesle than the denial of Holiness by B●rth-priviledge . 3.  Noah was the Progenitor remote of those Corinthians ; and he was not unclean . Yet that makes not them Holy : Else no man should be unholy . 

Arg. 14.  Rom. 11.  The Israelites and their children with them , are broken off because of Unbelief . Therefore Notorious Unbelievers , and their children , are to be judged as no Church-members , nor to be baptised . And that all Notorious Ungodly ones , are Notorious Unbelievers , I have proved , and may yet refute the ordinary Objections to the contrary . 

Arg. 15.  We may not lawfully baptise those children for their Parent's sake , whose Parents are ipso jure Excommunicated from the society of Christians as such , or are justly to be pronounced no Members of the Universal Church Visible or Invisible . But all Notoriously Ungodly are in one of these ranks . Ergo.  

To explain my meaning in this Argument , Observe 1. that I take not the common doctrine for true , that a particular Political or Organised Church , or incorporated Society of Christians , is a mere Homogeneal part of the universal Visible Church : All the Universal Church doth not consist of such Societies , no more than all this Commonwealth doth consist of Corporations . For a particular Church , is as a particular Body-corporate ; and all the Members of the Universal are not so : Though all aught to be so that can attain it , yet all cannot attain it , and all do not what they ought : Even in an Army a Soldier may be lifted by a General Officer into the Army in general , long before he is placed in any Regiment or Troop ; yea there are some that are Messengers , and for other employments , that are not to be of any Regiment . So sometime a man is baptised , as the Eunuch , before he be entered into any particular Church , perhaps long : And some were of Churches which are dissolved , and stay long before they can join themselves to others ▪ And some live as Merchants , in a movable travelling , condition : And some are bound for the good of the Commonwealth to be Ambassadors , or Agents , or Factors , etc. resident among Infidels , where is no Church : And some may be called to preach up and down among Infidels for their conversion , as the Apostles did , and fix themselves to no particular Church : And some may be too ignorant or neglective of their duty in incorporating with any : And some upon infirmity and scrupulosity hold off . So that its apparent that all the Visible Church is not thus Incorporated into particular Churches . 

2.  I do firmly believe that Baptism as Baptism , doth list , enter , or admit us only into the Universal Church directly , and not into any particular Church ; but yet consequentially it oft doth both : And as the Parent is , so is it supposed that the Infant is . If the Parent live an itinerant life , and bring his child to Baptism , that child is entered into the Universal Church only , except he leave the child resident in any particular Church , and desire it may be a member of it : But if the Parent be a member of a particular Church , when we Baptise his child , we receive it first into the universal Church , and then into that particular ( as an imperfect member : ) For we justly suppose it is the Parents desire , which is it that determineth this Case . 

3.  I firmly believe that the common opinion is an Error , that All that are cast out of a particular Church , are cast out of the universal . 

4.  Yea , or that he that is put out of one particular incorporated Church , must be avoided by all other such Churches . 

5.  Yet do I believe that it is a worse Error to say that all that are cast out of one such Church , may be received into communion by other Churches , or single Christians . 

6.  I do therefore distinguish of such Exclusion as we commonly call Excommunication , or casting out of Churches , or suspending from communion . 1.  As to the ground and cause of the Exclusion . 2.  As to the Terminus ad quem , or the in quantum , or intended effect of the Exclusion . 1.  It is one thing to be excluded on a cause that is supposed exclusive of Christianity itself : and another thing to be excluded on a cause that supposeth him uncapable of the Privilege of all incorporated Churches : and a third thing to be excluded on a cause that makes men uncapable of Member-ship with that one Church only , or some particulars , and not all . 2.  So as to the effect , It is one thing to be excluded from the number of Christians as such ; Another thing to be excluded from all Incorporated Churches as such : And a third thing to be excluded from one particular Church only , or some more on the like ground that are in the like case . Besides all this , I distinguish between an Exclusion upon the certain Nullity of the Title ; and a suspension while the Title is under trial , upon a just occasion of questioning it . From hence I hold as followeth . 

1.  That there may be just reason to cast a man out of a particular Church , who yet is not denied to join with other particular Churches . For example , if a member of this particular Church hold me to be no true Minister , and that he may not communicate with me , supposing him to mistake ; or if he hold it his duty to contradict the Doctrine and Practice of Infant-baptism , or the like , he may make himself utterly uncapable of communion with this Church , who yet may be capable of communion with other Churches . The like oft falls out where Churches differ about lesser Doctrines or Ceremonies , or Ordination of Pastors ; a man that will in a troubling zeal suppose himself bound to be a continual disquiet to that Church where the occasion is , may be cast out from that , and uncapable of joining with any of that same opinion and way , and not with others that are of his own way and Opinion . 

2.  A man may be cast out of a particular incorporated Church as such , and consequently be at present uncapable of being a member of any such particular Church on Earth , and yet not be cast out of the Universal Visible Church , or number of Christians , much lesle of the Invisible . As for example : If a man hold and maintain that there are no true Ministers in Office in any particular Church on earth by reason of an interruption in the succession of Ordination ; that man is become uncapable of being a member of any such Church : and yet while he holdeth the whole Doctrine of Christianity besides , and openly professeth it , and supposeth that private gifted-men may Teach and Baptise , he may still be a visible Christian , and therefore not fit to be cut off from the Universal Church of Christians . So in any the like Case . Quer. Whether this be not the Case of those that place all Church-power in the Mayor vote of the people , so that the Church must be governed only by such Vote , and the Pastor is but the mouth of the People , to act according to their Vote ? Whether men of this judgement , declaring and professing it , be capable of being members of any true incorporated Church on Earth ( though they may be members of such Societies as their own , of human invention , contrary to the Word , and to the very Essence of a true Political Church . ) 

3.  I also distinguish between the excluding of a man from communion as no true Christian , and excluding him as a scandalous or infectious Christian. As it was one thing for the Jews to remove the dead , and another to remove a Leper from the camp . And I suppose that 1.  Ordinarily we are not to exclude any from our communion for a scandalous sin openly repent of . 2.  Yet it is possible that it may be of so heinous a nature , that for the Credit of Religion , and the avoiding of all occasion of Reproach by those without , it is not meet to admit such an Offender into our communion , till after some convenient time and larger manifestation of our disowning their crime , and of their extraordinary repentance of it . But this is but temporary . 3.  It is possible also that a man may have such an itching zeal to propagate a false opinion , though consistent with Christianity , that we may be bound to exclude him our actual communion , to avoid the infection of the Church : As also that his crime may so induce others to imitation , that though it be consistent with Christianity , we must exclude him as an infectious Leper , because a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump . 

4.  I conceive that an open Apostate needs no decisive sentential Excommunication , but only declarative . We cut off no man from Christ , but declare who they be that cut off themselves from that Christianity which they seemed to have . 

5.  Yet I conceive that an actual Apostate , that is not totally an Infidel , but renounceth only some parts of the essentials of Christianity , and is loath to confess himself no Christian , and will intrude into the communion of Christians , whether to avoid shame , or disquiet of conscience , or danger , etc.  I say , such a One is the fittest object for the sentence of highest excommunication , even from the number of Christians , supposing him notoriously to be such . As if a man should call himself a Christian , and thrust into their communion , and yet maintain , that Christ is but a Prophet , such as Mahomet ; or as the Arrians , that he is not God , or that there is no Resurrection or Life to come , or that there is no Holy Ghost ; or that Christ is not to be obeyed when the Flesh is against it ; and that every man may live the life that best pleaseth his flesh ; or that he himself will obey his flesh before Christ , or not let go his sin for the hopes of Glory , at the command of God. Among these I reckon a Notorious ungodly man , who will in words call himself a Christian , but by a more certain discovery make known that indeed he is none . Here the Church is not only to declare him none , but to sentence him none : For a mere Declaration supposeth not a Controversy , but a Sentence or Decision doth : and his vain pretence and unjust intrusion made it a Controversy , as between him and the Church , though to the Church the Case be notorious . This man than is cast out as No-christian : when I conceive that such a man as David , Solomon , etc. ( were they now with us ) while they lay in that sin , should be removed from actual communion , as Lepers , or scandalous Christians , or ( at most ) as such as have given us reason to question their Godliness . 

6.  There is also a threefold suspension : The first is from some special act or part of communion only , ( as the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ) during the time of a man's just trial . A duty not being at all times a duty , it is meet that he forbear while he is under such trial , who hath given just occasion of suspicion and accusation . I mean here , only the trial whether they are guilty of the fault that they are accused of or not . This suspension is not penal , but the orderly doing of duties . Another suspension is , when the Crime is confessed , or proved . and the only thing in doubt is , Whether the person be penitent or impenitent ? supposing the Crime an heinous Scandal , the person may be excluded all special communion ; with this limitation , Till they manifest Repentance . And this is the most common censure , I think , that the Church hath use for . The third sort of suspension is , that beforementioned , when though we are satisfied of the persons Repentance , yet the heinousness of the Crime , or the scandalousness and occasion of Reproach to the Enemy , or the Infectiousness , may necessitate us to delay his Readmission . In these two later there is somewhat of Excommunication ▪ mixed with the suspension : In the former , not so . In these two later , we judge the person to have no Right at that time to enjoy communion , because no aptitude to possess it ; but not that he hath lost all Right to future communion . But yet his Right will not be plenary for the future , unless he repent and get an aptitude for communion . Bu● if we cast out a man as no true Christian , than we deny him to have any Right for the future ; that is , his chief Title is Dorid , and he must have a new Title , as the foundation of his Right , before he can have any Right : whereas the scandalous Christian hath his fundamental Title still ; but only hath a bar put in his way from present Possession . 

I have been the larger on this , that you may fully know the meaning of the Argument ; and on what ground all Objections are to be Answered . 

And now you see that I speak not of every sort of Excommunication here , but only that which justly excludeth from all Christian communion , as Christian : and not that which excludeth only from any or all particular Churches ( Though of this last I suspend my determination ) ; And I speak not of mere suspension at least , of the first or third sort . Indeed my opinion is this ▪ 1.  That all so excommunicated can give their children no right to Baptism ( nor be fit mediums of the conveyance of it ) 2.  That all justly suspended from communion of Christians , till they manifest Repentance , having given the Church great cause strongly to suspect them of utterly graceless Impenitency , should have their children , who are born while they are in that condition , suspended from Baptism ( unless they have a better Right than from them . ) 

Lastly note that I mention , not only actual Excommunication by sentence , but Excommunication ipso jure : For if it be Excommunication , all 's one ; and the later the most unquestionable . 

I now prove the Mayor thus : If such Infants cannot receive union and communion with the Universal Church , on the account of their Parent's Interest , than neither can they receive Baptism on that account . But the Antecedent is certain ; which I prove thus : Such Parents cannot be the means of conveying that to their Children , which they have not themselves . But they have no such Union and Communion themselves ; Ergo.  

I know in some cases ( as in working Grace on others ) a man may be a means of effecting that in another which he hath not himself . But that it is not so here , I think will be granted ; for the Parents Right is all the condition ( in Question now ) of the child's Right : and it is only this kind of Conveyance that we mean.  

The Consequence needs no proof : To be baptised , is to be put into union and communion with the visible Church . ( This is one inseparable use of it : ) therefore he that cannot be a fit medium to convey one , cannot for the other . 

For the Father and Mother to be put out , or judged out , and yet the child taken into the same body as a branch of them , and on their account , is plainly to Do and Undo , and contradict ourselves . 

To this it is said by some , That an Excommunicate man loseth but his Jus inre , and not adrem ; and retaineth still his fundamental Right ; and therefore as to this , is still a Church-member : he is but suspended from present benefit , and not cut off from all Title . To which I answer ; 1.  If this be true of all Excommunicate persons , then is it impossible so much as by a Declarative Excommunication , to cut off any from the Universal Church : If a man maintain that Christ is neither God , nor Redeemer , but a Prophet , second to Moses or Mahomet , and yet will call himself a Christian , and usurp communion , if we cast him out , he hath still a Fundamental Right . Can any man have a fundamental Righ● , that denyeth any Fundamental Truth ? But if any will say , That this is not Excommunication , but Declaring or Judging a man to be an Apostate : I reply , Rather than we will differ about the Name , call it what you please , as long as you know what we mean. He that notoriously showeth that he hath not Christ , hath no fundamental Right . Whether Matth. 18. and 2 Thes. 3.14 . 1 Cor. 5. speak of this or that sort of Excommunication , is little to our Question . 

It is further objected , [ Either the excommunicate persons sin divests the child , or the Church's Censure . But neither ; Ergo , etc. Not the former : for no sin but that of Nature descends to Posterity : Man transmits' not his personal Vices , Fault or Gild , no more than his Graces . ] 

Answ. As if the Question had been about divesting a child of a Right which he had before , and not rather of the conveying of a Right which he had not . We suppose the child born after the Parents are excommunicate : And had that child a Right be●ore he had a Being ? and so before it could be any subject of Right , you talk of uncloathing him that was born naked and never clothed . We rather suppose that the newborn child must then receive a Right from the excommunicate Parent , or have none : and therefore conclude it hath none , unless on some other Interest than theirs . 

It is further objected as to the Censure , [ I never read that Church-censures were like that plague laid on Gehazi , to cleave to him and his seed : See Deut. 24 16. ] 

Answ. Church censures deprive not the child of any Right that it had ; for we suppose it unborn : but they show the Father to be in an incapacity of conveying it that Right which it never had . I say therefore to your Argument , The sin of the Parent preventeth the child's Right ; and the Church censure declareth and judgeth it so prevented And on your grounds and arguing , why may not you say that the child of every Turk and Indian on earth hath Right ? for their Parents did no more divest them of it than these ; and their sins can no more be transmitted . 

But though it be not necessary to be asserted , to the upholding of the present Cause , yet I must tell you that I believe that Parents transmit more of their sin than of their Graces to Posterity ; and I am somewhat confident that you say what you can never prove , and deny a Gild which it better beseemed you to acknowledge and lament . 

Next to the proof of the Minor of the main Argument , viz. [ that notoriously ungodly persons are excommunicated from the society of Christians , as such , ipso Jure ; or are to be pronounced no members of the Universal Church , ] To be excommunicate ipso Jure , is when the Law is so express , and so fully applieth itself to the case of the offending person , that there may or must be an execution of it by the people , though there do no sentence of the Judge intervene ; when the plainness of the Law , and the notoriousness of the Case may warrant an execution without Judgement . And that it is so here , I prove thus . 

The Case is supposed Notorious , and the Law is plain , and commands all men to execute it , whether there be any Judgement or not : Therefore such are ipso Jure , excommunicate . 1.  In a lower sort of Excommunication , the mere Law may require our execution without a sentence : therefore much more in a grosser and plainer case . We must not eat with the scandalous , 1.  Cor. 5.11 . We must avoid them that cause Division , Rom. 16.17 . We must note such men as are disobedient , and have no company with them , that they may be ashamed : yea , we are flatly commanded in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ , that we withdraw ourselves from every brother that walketh disorderly , 2 Thes. 3.6 , 14.  All this we must do , though no Ecclesiastical Judge do sentence them , when the case is notorious . We must reject a known Heretic after the first and second admonition : we must turn away from wicked Livers , though they have a form of Godliness , 2 Tim. 3 : 5.  

2.  Concerning those that are not Christians : we are bid come out from among them , and separate ourselves , and touch no unclean thing , 2 Cor. 6.17 , 18 For what communion hath Light with darkness , and Christ with Belial , or a Believer with an Infidel ? ver . 14. we have the estates of Infidels , Apostates and ungodly men described to us , and we must judge them to be as they undoubtedly appear to be , and use them accordingly . John bids a woman , that [ If any come to them and bring not this doctrine , receive him not into your house , neither bid him God speed : for he that bideth him God speed , is partaker of his evil deeds . ] Here is an Excommunication ipso Jure : for he doth not name the persons , but leave them to discern them , and execute according to evidence . And these seem to be persons much in the case as now we have to do with : such as professed themselves Christians in name , and yet denied the fundamentals , and lived wickedly : v. 7.8 , 9 of Ep. 2.  [ Mary deceivers are entered into the World , who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh . This is a very Deceiver , and Antichrist ; whosoever transgresseth and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ hath not God. ] whether this was written to a Lady , or a Church , whether of the Gnostics or other Sect , it differs not much as to our case . Also God calls all his people , whom it did concern , to come out of Babylon , that they partake not of her sins , & receive not of her plagues , rev. 18.4 . But I need not prove , I hope , that we are not of the same body with known unbelievers ; and that unbelieving expresseth as small , if not a smaller evil than ungodliness , and is comprehended in it , I have already manifested : And it 's known that we are to eat the company of a wicked man , that will take on him the name of a Christian Brother , more than of an unbeliever that pretendeth not to be one of us : For with the later we may eat , 1 Cor. 10 27. though we may not communicate with him in his false worship ( ver . 16.17 , 18 , 20 , 21. ) but with the former we may not . 

And whether the ungodly be any more of our Body , or fit for our communion than Infidels that so profess themselves in words , let Scripture judge . When God separateth his own People from others , it is not only as from unbelevers , but he most freqently giveth the reason from their Pollutions ; so that it is from them as from the unclean . Leu. 20 24.  I am the Lord your God which have separated you from other People : ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and unclean , etc. which I have separated from you as unclean : And ye shall be holy unto me ; for I the Lord am holy , and have severed you from other People , that ye should be mine ] So answerable hereunto all God's People under the Gospel are called Saints as well as Believers : and Paul tells all the Corinthians , not only that they are changed from Infidelity to Faith , but [ such were some of you ( that is , wicked Livers ) ; but ye are washed , ye are sanctified , ye are justified , in the name of the Lord Jesus , and by the Spirit of our God , 1 Cor. 6 11. ] And he is blind that seeth not how in all the ceremonial Institutions of Moses , which were Types of Christ's cleansing his Church , the Lord doth most eminently declare his Purity , and hatred of sin , and the necessity of Holiness and Purity in his People , as well as the necessity of pardon by Christ : Answerable whereunto in the Gospel , Christ is as eminently declared the sanctifier as the Pardoner of men : He saveth his people from their sins , themselves ; and washeth , and sanctifieth , and cleanseth his Church , that he may present it spotless to God. Leu. 15.31 . & 12.2 , 3 , 5 , etc. Neh. 13.3 . & 9.2 . & 10.28 . Ezr. 6.21 . Exod. 33.16 . Leu. 5.2 . & 11. throughout . & 13.  & 14.  Num. 19  Isa. 52.1 . the Gospel-church is accordingly described : Put on thy beautiful Garments , OH Jerusalem the holy City : for henceforth then shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and unclean ] Ezek. 22.26 . [ Hircius Priests have violated my Law , and profaned my holy things : they have put no difference between the Holy and Profane , neither have they showed difference between the unclean and the clean . ] Ezek. 44.23 . Jer. 15.19 . [ If thou wilt take forth the precious from the vile , thou shalt be as my mouth ; let them return to thee , but return not thou to them . Eph. 5.5 . 2 Cor. 12.21 . Ezek. 36.29 . 

I think it is clear , that those whom Paul describeth , 2 Tim. 3. are to be avoided by all Christians , as not in the Christian body : and he describeth them by their unholiness , and particular vices ; and saith of their Teachers , that they are [ Men of corrupt minds , reprobate concerning the faith ] ; yet have their Disciples a form of Godliness . And doubtless [ Reprobates concerning the faith ] if so known , are not to be numbered with Christians . Those from whom we are to be separated here and hereafter , are styled oft [ The Ungodly ] Psal. 1  And as in some places the distinction is between Believers and Vnbelievers , so in others , between the righteous and wicked or ungodly , 1 Pet. 4.17 , 18. where all these are descriptions of the same men , [ ungodly and sinners ] , such as are not of the house of God [ men that know not God ] And it was the world of the Ungodly that God brought the Flood upon ; and to be an example to those that after should live ungodly , was Sodom and Gomorrah destroyed , 1 Pet. 2.5 , 6.  And John tell us , that in this the children of God are known from the children of the Devil ; he that doth wickedness is not of God.  

Note well the description of these , Judas 4.  On one side they pretended to be Christians , for they are said to be [ crept in ] among them ; [ to turn the Grace of God into lasciviousness ; ] they were [ spots in their Feasts , clouds without water , carried about of winds , without fruit , twice dead ] vers . 12.  It is apparent then that they were Baptised ones . Yet the Apostle excludeth them from the very number of Christians , calling them [ twice dead , plucked up by the roots , men that denied the only Lord God , and our Lord Jesus Christ , ver . 4.12 . ] And the Desciption of them , is , that they are ungodly Heretics , that taught and practised ungodliness : as you may see , ver . 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 17 , 18. walking after their own ungodly lusts , sensual , having not the spirit , of whom Enoch prophesied , saying . Behold the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his Saints , to execute Judgement on all , and to convince all that are ungodly , of all their ungodly deeds , which they have ungodly committed . ] And [ the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men who imprison the truth in unrighteousness , Rom. 1.18 . ] If Rom. 1 & 2. speak of Baptised persons turned Heretics , as some Expositors judge , than they are put in as vile a character , and as distant from Christians , as Heathens are . It is the world as distinct from the Church that , lie in wickedness ▪ 1 Jo. 5.19 . Psal. 50.16 . To the wicked saith God , What hast thou to do to declare my statutes , or that thou shouldst take my Covenant in thy mouth , seeing thou hatest Instruction , and castest my word behind thee ? ] The Sacrifice of the wicked is an Abomination to the Lord , prov. 21.27 . so then must his false promising in Baptism . So prov. 15.8 9.26 . whatever they may say with their mouths for God , and Christ , and the Faith , yet [ The transgression of the wicked saith within my heart , that there is no fear of God b●fore his e●ss , ] Ps. 36.1 . And David could see by the life of the fool , that he saith in his heart , There is no God : even when they do evil , and not good , and hate the people of God , and call not upon God , Psa. 14.  See Mal. 3.18 . Church censures are , as Tertul. speaks , praejudicium futuri judicii and therefore must go on the grounds of God's judgement ; which is [ to sever the wicked from the just , Mat. 13.49 . ] and that according to works ▪ & not mere words , as was said before , Eccl. 3.17 . prov. 15.29 . We are not to gather those into the Church , whom we know to be far from God , and he putteth away : but such are wicked . Psal. 119.119 . thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like dross , 155. ver . Salvation is far from the wicked ; They are estranged from the womb , Psal 58.3 . Acts 3.23 . every soul that will not hear that prophet shall be destroyed from among the people . 

All these passages , with multitudes more , show that the name of a Christian unworthily usurped , maketh not a notorious ungodly man to be in any capacity of a better esteem with God or the Church , or any good men therein , than are openly professed Infidels , especially that want the means which they enjoy : For all this pretence of theirs can give us no probability of any more than a superficial Assent , lesle than that of the Devils , and this is but knowing their Master's will , which prepareth these Rebels to be beaten with many stripes . And should that which makes them the greater sinners , give them right of admittance into the Church ? It is Agustines' Argument . lib de fide & oper . 

3.  The case is yet more clear that such are excommunicated ipso jure , when we consider that it is far more usual for God's Law to serve without a sentence , then man's : most of the matters of our lives are there determined to our hand , and we must obey the Law , whether there be any judgement of man to intervene , or not : God hath not left so much to the judicial Decision of man , as human Laws do . It is a great doubt whether there be any power , properly Decisive-judicial in the Church-guides or not ? but doubtless , it is more limitedly and imperfectly Decisive than is the power of Judges in the matters of the Commonwealth . So that if all the Rulers in the Church should forbear to Censure Notorious Apostates , Heretics , Ungodly ones , yea if they all command us to hold communion with them , because they call themselves Christians , we are nevertheless bound to disobey them , and to avoid such as to Religious communion : For else we should obey man against God , who hath directed many of these precepts to all Christians , and not only to the Governors of the Church . If the Guides will suffer the woman Jezabel to teach and seduce , and the Nicolaitans to abide among them , whom for their filthiness God did hate , it is the people's duty for all that to avoid them , if they will be Guiltless . Yea Cyprian tells the people that it belongs to them to forsake and to reject an unworthy Minister that is by others set over them , or doth intrude . I conclude therefore that as all Christians must ( beyond dispute ) use an open Infidel as such , though it belong not to the Church to judge them that are without , because the Law here serves turn without a judgement , the case being past controversy : so also a Notorious ungodly man , though pretending to Christianity , and entertained by the Church , is to be avoided by every good Christian , as being ipso jure excommunicated by God.  

Most of the Objections that I have heard against this , are from men that not understanding this phrase of Excommunication ipso jure , through their unacquaintedness with Law-terms , have supposed that we meant no more but de jure , or that they merited Excommuication , or it was their due : But ipso jure means ex vi solius Legis , sine sententia Judicis : It's common for Legislators in several Cases , either where Judges or other Officers are needless , or cannot be had , or may not be stayed for , to enable the subject to do execution , without any more judgement . And so we are bound to avoid such Notorious ungodly ones , as being as Notoriously no Christians . 

2.  But if all this were unproved , yet still it is sufficient to our purpose in hand , that the Church-guides are at present bound to Excommunicate them . And sure they cannot at one and the same time be bound to cast out him and take in his child upon his Right into the number of Christians . 

it 's Objected , The Excommunicate are members under cure . Ans. Those that are but pro tempore suspended from some particular acts or parts of communion , are so ; and those that are only cast out of an Incorporated Church , and not the Universal , or from among Christians as Christians . But for the rest that are so cast out , the case is otherwise . Many different acts of the Church , and cases of the persons , are usually confounded under this one word [ Excommunication . ] 

Object . Austin complains of one that had Excommunicated one Classicanus , and with him his whole Family ; which he dislikes , because the son must not suffer for the father's sin . 

Answ. What is this to our business ? We pled not for Excommunicating any child for the Parent's sin ; but for not Admitting them at first into communion , when the Parents have lost their Right , and the child is born after . 2.  What if by the Law of the Land a Traitor's Estate be forfeit ? if his Heir therefore receive not that which he could not give him because he had lost it , will you say that this is contrary to God's Ordination , that the Son shall not suffer for the Parent's sin ? The Son may yet have some privilege , from a Father , which he could not have , were that Father an Infidel or excommunicate person ; and therefore all the world have not the same Privileges as the Church . So much of that Argument . 

Arg. 16.  Those whom we may justly Baptise ( supposing them of age and natural capacity ) we may justly admit to the Lords Supper while they are no worse than they were at Baptism . But we may not admit a notorious ungodly person to the Lords Supper : Therefore we may not justly Baptise such : And consequently , not their children upon their account . 

The Major is plain : no Church-member ought to be kept from Church-communion in the Lord's Supper , but upon some just Accusation of a crime which he is since guilty of , more than he was at his Admittance . But the Baptised are Church members . Ergo , etc.  

It is by one objected , that this is the Anabaptiss Argument ( or one to this purpose ) to keep out Infants , because they are not to be admitted to the Lords Supper . Answ. That is for want of natural capacity to use the Ordinance ; and not for want of a Right , if they had such capacity . But for men at age , I suppose it past doubt that you may admit them to the Supper on the same qualifications as to state worthiness , on which you may admit them to Baptism . Object . The Baptised are Incipientes ; the Communicants Proficientes ; Therefore there must be more in all Communicants than is requisite in the Baptised . Answ. There aught to be more , because they ought to grow in grace . But 1. it is not requisite that they be in any other state than the Baptised : Nor 2.  Is it absolutely necessary that they have any further degree of grace . For 1. the Lords Supper is the means of increasing grace , and doth not ever suppose it increased . 2.  The Apostles admitted the new baptised into their communion , to breaking of bread and prayer presently , Act. 3. and 4.  Indeed there is requisite in the Receiving , and before , thoughts suitable to that Ordinance , according to its difference from other Ordinances ; and so there is in each Ordinance according to its nature : And in that sense , as to some acts , it 's as true that there is somewhat more required also in Baptism , then in receiving the Lord Supper . But that 's nothing to the case . 

The Minor is granted me by almost all , on supposition that we can have a Classis to exclude the offender : And many grant that every Minister may suspend one from the Lords Supper in this case , by forbearing his own act . I wonder how so palpable a mistake did come to be so common with wise men , as that a single Pastor ( at least when he is the sole Governor of that Church ) may not exclude on just occasions ? Doubtless they may without a Classis take in men into the Universal Church ( for a Classis was not called for every man's Baptism : ) Therefore if one man may be the sole Ruler of a particular Church ( of which there 's little reason to doubt ) why may he not do the Office of a Ruler ? But there 's much to be said for this on a fitter occasion . See Gilesp . Aaron's Rod. l. 3. c. 15. pag. 541.  

The last Consequence I take for granted , on what is said before , and the mere nothing that is said against it ; viz. that if the Parents be in such a state in which they may not be admitted to baptism , were it then to do , then may not the children be admitted on their right or Interest , because they are to come in as theirs . 

Argu. 17.  Those that are Notoriously the children of the Devil , may not be baptised , nor their Infants on their account ; But the Notoriously ungodly are Notoriously the children of the Devil : Ergo.  

I prove the Mayor : 1.  Baptism is ordained to admit all the baptised to be visible children of God : those that are Notoriously the children of the Devil , cannot be admitted to be ( at that time ) the visible children of God. Therefore they may not be Baptised . 

For the proof of the Major , see Galliard , 3.26 , 27 , 28 29.  For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus : For as many of you as have been baptised into Christ , have put on Christ : And if ye be Christ's , then are ye Abraham's seed , and heirs according to promised . The Minor is plain . 

For the Minor of the main Argument , see 1 John 3.7 , 8 , 9 , 10.  Let no man deceive you ; he that doth righteousness is Righteous : He that committeth sin is of the Devil . In this the children of God are manifest , and the children of the Devil . Whosoever doth not Righteousness is not of God. — ] This Text proves also the inconsistencie of these two Estates . 

Argu. 18.  He that will not be Christ's servant , may not be baptised ( nor others on his account ) But notorious ungodly ones , while such will not be Christ's servants . Ergo. etc.  

The Major is proved , in that it is part of Christianity in the Essence of it : He is to be believed in , and accepted as Lord and King : All his Subjects are his servants . The Minor is proved from Rom. 6.16 . Know ye not that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey , his servants ye are to whom ye obey ? whether of sin unto death , or of obedience unto righteousness . 

Argu. 19  He that will not hear Christ as the Prophet of the Church , may not be baptised : But notorious ungodly ones will not hear Christ as the Prophet of the Church : Therefore ought not to be baptised : ( nor any on their account . ) 

The Major is proved 1 , In that it is part of Christianity : And to be baptised into his name , is to take him as our Prophet . 2.  Such should be cut off , Acts , 3.23 . ( Mr. Gilespie and others expound Moses cutting off , of Excommunication : ) therefore not admitted in such a condition . 

Argu. 20.  If notoriously ungodly baptised Parents are notoriously uncapable of presenting and dedicating their children to Christ , & covenanting with him on their behalf , then are they Notoriously uncapable of Interesting their children in the Covenant or Baptism ( Or , then may we not baptise them on their account ) But the Antecedent is true ; as I prove thus . 1.  A man that notoriously refuseth to accept of Christ himself , and to take him as he is offered , to covenant truly with him , is Notoriously uncapable of doing the same on the behalf of another : For he that hath no true faith for himself , cannot have it for his child : ( though perhaps he may be content that his child let go some sins for Christ , which he cannot spare himself . ) but , etc. Ergo.  

2.  He that is , Notoriously a perfidious Breaker of his own verbal covenant , is while such , uncapable of covenanting with Christ for another . For such a man's word is not to be taken ; he hath forfeited his credit , till he repent and return to his fidelity : But such are all the notorious Ungodly . Ergo. etc.  

The Consequence of the main Argument , is clearly good , because he that brings any child to be baptised , must covenant for it with Christ ; for it is a mutual Covenant that must be entered in Baptism . The child cannot consent or covenant by itself , therefore it must do it by others , and that must be those that present it , as having Right on their Account : And he that is not Willing for himself , cannot Consent for another . 

Argu. 21.  From the second Commandment , with all those other Texts that express Gods differencing the seed of the wicked and godly . If it be God's will that there shall be visible notes of his displeasure on the children of the Notoriously ungodly , as theirs , in comparison of the children of the godly , than we ought not to baptise them . But the Antecedent is true ; Therefore so is the Consequent . 

Here note , 1.  That we speak not of any children of ungodly men , who at age renounce their Parents ways , and themselves fear God ( of whom Ezek. 18. speaks : ) but only of them , while Infants , and as theirs . 2.  In the Antecedent I mean that God hath so visibly noted out the children of the Notoriously ungodly , as such , to lie under his displeasure , that he would have the Church and all take notice of it , and esteem of them accordingly . The reason of the Consequent is , because Baptising puts them among those that are visibly under God's favour , the Church being called the Body of Christ , the House of the Living God , etc.  But those that be visibly from under his special favour , should not be put into such a Body . 

The Antecedent I prove 1. from the second Commandment : where note 1. that the parties differenced are the Posterity of them that hate God on one side , and on the other those that love him and keep his Commandments : Not only between Professors of Faith , or of Infidelity , but between godly and ungodly : it being usual in Scripture to call the ungodly Haters of God , and justly ; and it is those that love him not , and keep not his Commandments , that are called haters of him . 2.  Note , that it is a visible mark of his favour which he there putteth on the seed of the godly , from whence we may well gather their Church-membership , as I have showed elsewhere . Therefore it is a visible note of his disfavour which he putteth on the Notoriously ungodly ; from whence we may gather that they are not to be visible Church-members . 3.  Note also that this is in the Decalogue , and a standing determination of God , and not ceremonial or transitory . 

Note also how the Scripture all along concurs . The seed of Cain are called the children of men , though its like they acknowledged God to be their Maker , who might have heard Adam tell them of the creation . And indeed it is ungodliness and wickedness that God drowned the World for . Yet are these children of Cain as an excommunicate brood , whom the children of God might not join with . The Infants of all the wicked of the world are drowned with their Parents in the Flood : The Infants of Sodom and Gomorrah are destroyed with their Parents , who are said by Judas to suffer the vengeance of eternal fire , as an example ( not of original sin ) but to those that after should live ungodly . The children of the Egyptians are destroyed for their Parents sins , while Israel's are preserved . The children of Da●han and Abiram , and their confederates were swallowed up with them for their Rebellion : yet did their parents confess the true God , and were circumcised . Achans' children were all stoned to death and burned for his sin , Josh. 7.15.26 . It was God's command to Israel , that if any City were reduced and drawn away to serve other gods , that City , infants and all should be destroyed , Deut. 13.12 , 13. etc.  God commanded Israel to put to death all the Infants of all the Nations that were given them for Inheritance , Deut. 20.16 , 17. which was for the Parent's abomination . The Amalekite's infants must all be slain : So are all the Males among the little ones of the Midianites , Numb . 31.17 . The children of Daniels Accusers are cast into the Den of Lions , Dan. 6.24 . And Babylones little ones must be dashed against the stones , Psal. 137.9 . The wicked are cursed in the fruit of their body , yea , It is cursed , Deut. 28.18.32.41 . Christ would have gathered the children of Jerusalem great and small , but did not , because they would not . On that Generation he brought all the righteous blood that was shed from Abel ; and takes witness from their own mouths , that They were the children of them that killed the Prophets . Now I think , if the children of the notoriously ungodly lie under God's visible displeasure thus far , they should not by Baptism ( as theirs ) be taken into that society that are visibly in his favour , and distinguished from all the world as a Peculiar people , a Holy Priesthood , a Royal Nation , the Children of God , the Body and Spouse of Christ , and the Temple of the Holy Ghost . 

Argu. 22.  That Doctrine is not found which confoundeth the Catechumeni , as to their description , which the rightful members of the Church . But such is the Doctrine that we oppose ; yea worse . For the Catechumeni might understand and believe the fundamentals ( which is all the Title that these men can produce by their profession : But they were not to be admitted into the Church till they had more , even resolutions ( expressed ) to obey : Nay , many such without the Church had some willingness to learn , and waited long on teaching to that end : But so will not many of these in question . I pled not for any Error of the Ancients , in keeping men from Baptism that were fit for it ; but only mention such as were but in preparation to such fitness . 

Argum. 23.  That Doctrine is at lest much to be suspected , which by contradicting the very Natural Principles of Religion , doth tend strongly to disgrace Jesus Christ , and tempt the world to Infidelity . But such is the Doctrine which we oppose . Ergo.  

For the proof of the Minor , Note , 1.  That it is a natural certain Verity , that the Righteous Lord loveth Righteousness , and that he is a hater of sin in whomsoever , and delighteth in that Holiness which is his very Image ; and that God is no Accepter of persons , but in every Nation , he that feareth him , and worketh Righteousness , is accepted of him . 

2.  Note , That the Doctrine which we oppose , holdeth , that Jesus Christ doth set so much by the bare believing that He is the Son of God , yea the verbal profession of it , and so little by Holiness , that if men will but make that profession , let them live how they will , let them be Adulterers , Murderers of Fathers or Mothers , perjured to God and Man , etc. yet they loose not their Right to this Privilege , that even the children of their bodies shall be of the family of Christ upon their Interest or Account : yea though themselves will not so much as soberly promise to amend , yea though they be Persecutors of any that would reform them , or any other way notoriously ungodly . Doth not this strongly tempt men to imagine that Jesus Christ came not to cure souls , and bring men back to God , and save them from sin , but to seek himself and his own honour , and that he preferred the acknowledgement of his dignity before the Interest of God , and men's souls ? Doth it not tempt men to think that Christianity is no better than the other Religions of the world , when it owneth such Monsters as the Children of the Church ? When we justly condemn a Seneca , Cicero , Fabrit●us , Socrates , etc. as miserable for not believing in Christ , whom they never heard of ( most of them ; ) and privilege the children of one worse than Nero , Surdanapalus , Machiavelli , and that for the sake of such a Parent ▪ and as a member of him , to be in Covenant with Christ , and of the beloved Society , and Household of Faith : In my opinion this will he a horrid stumbling block to those without , and give them such cause to blaspheme our holy profession , as our Lord never gave them , who came purposely into the world to destroy the works of the Devil , and to bring back revolted man to the Holy Image and obedience of his Maker , and who professed himself but the Way to the Father , and therefore established and valued faith in himself , but in order to the acknowledgement and love of God , and so of Godliness and Holiness , as its end and a greater good ; yea that hath purchased us by his blood to a glory which doth consist in the fruition of God , in the perfection of Holiness , and hath sent forth his spirit into the souls of men to be in office their Sanctifier , and to make such wondrous changes on men's hearts , as shameth all the rest of the Religions of the world : yea who hath made his Kingdom to consist in Righteousness , and Peace , and Joy in the Holy Ghost ; and the heavenly wisdom to be first Pure , then Peaceable , Gentle , easy to be entreated , full of mercy and good fruits , and who hath sanctified to himself a peculiar people , zealous of good works , and makes so strict and holy a Law to guide them as he hath done . In my opinion , so loose a doctrine should not be pinned on the sleeve of so Holy a Saviour . 

Argum. 24.  That doctrine and practice is not by good Christians to be received , which ( besides the forementioned evidence of Scripture ) contradicteth the doctrine and practice of all the Primitive Church . But such is this . Ergo.  

I admire that grave men among us , and Godly , who will stretch their wits to the uttermost to defend that which is the more common opinion of Divines of best repute among whom they live , before they will differ from them , can yet make so small a matter of differing from the Fathers , and universal consent of the Primitive Churches , ( as far as we have any means to disprove it . ) That it was their Judgement and practice to refuse to baptise any Notorious ungodly person , while such , appears past all doubt . 1.  By their requiring a profession of Repentance . 2.  And a profession of Believing in the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , and renouncing the world , the flesh and the Devil , and promising a new life . 3.  By their Judging the Baptised to be in a state of salvation , which was on supposition of their true sanctification . 4.  By their too much care in delaying the Catechumeni ( in later times ) lest they should be unmeet . 

Let me recite the testimonies of one or two of our own , and one of those Ancients , each of the highest Authority in the present case . 

1.  Mr. Gilespie , Aaron's Rod. l. 3. ch . 15 pag. 544. saith , [ It were a Profanation of the Sacrament of Baptism , to Baptise a Catechumene , a Jew , or a Pagan , professing a Resolution to turn Christian , he being manifestly under the power of abominable Reigning sins , and being still a profane and wicked liver , although he were able to give a sound and orthodox Confession of Faith. ] From whence he argueth , that therefore the same men are not to be admitted to the Lords Supper . 

2.  Spanhemius Epist. ad D. Buch. pa. 14. gives three reasons to prove that Athrists , Epicures , Profane men , qui vitam inter flagitia traducunt , & aperte ostendunt se non habere fidem , quâ creditur , nec spiritum sanctificationis secundum ullum ejus gradum , quamdiu in ista impietate perstant , nec poenitentiam tum profitentur tum spondent , may not lawfully be baptised . 

And our Divines commonly say , In Baptism we engage ourselves to a holy Life : those therefore which live not holily are covenant-breakers , and herefore have not Right to the benefits of the covenant . See Piscat . in Mat. 3.  Obser. ex v. 6 8.10 . & in Mat. 28. v. 19  & Davenane is Col. 2.12 . Peter Martyr in Rom. 6.3 . Zanch. in Ephes. 5. loc . de Bapt. cap. 3 Thes. 37. many more I omit . 

3.  The Doctrine of the Ancients I have given a touch of elsewhere , as to these points . All that I shall now say is to desire the learned Reader ( that hath not done it ) to peruse all over that book of Augustine de fide & operibus , which is wholly written on this subject . There were then some Christians , whose opinion was , that if a Heathen lived in whoredom , when he turned Christian , he was not to be refused Baptism till he would promise Reformation , and would put away his whore ; but because that the Apostles baptised upon believing , and required obedience afterwards , and works are to be the consequent fruit of Faith , therefore the Pastor should first baptise them on their profession of Faith , and then help them on to obedience afterwards . Yet were these men so far from imagining that it was not Justifying faith that is required to Baptism that upon that supposition , they run into another error , which Augustine takes to be their worst and the root of the rest ; and that was , That this Belief in Christ was the foundation , ( meaning a dogmatical faith ) and that an evil life of such baptised believers was but hay and stubble built on the foundation , and such should be saved , though as by fire . Against all this Augustine wrote that Book , and proves that such may neither be saved nor baptised , and that Faith is another thing , and Obedience of another necessity than they imagined . The Reading of this Book I expect will do more in this present Argument , to persuade most dissenters , than the perusing of all my Arguments , because of the Authority of Augustine , and especially of the Church , whose Practice he discovereth . 

If it be said that this concerneth not Infants , I answer , I suppose it will be but few that will not by what is said , be persuaded , that no man in an estate unfit for Baptism , can convey a right to his Infants to be baptised . Read also Augustin . Epist. 23. ad Bonifac. where is much worthy observation . And ad Laurent Euchrid . c.  

We come next to answer the chief Arguments of the Dissenters , which are not already answered in what went before , in way of defence to the several Arguments as we propounded them . 

Argum. 1.  The children of Notorious ungodly parents had right to circumcision , before Christ's Incarnation : therefore the children of such have right to Baptism since . 

This is the great Argument , besides which there is scarce any that hath a show of difficulty . 

Answ. 1.  It is certain that the Fabric of the Jewish Polity , especially the grounds and Reasons of all God's Institutions of those times , are so imperfectly known by us , that it is utterly unfit to reduce so many clear Gospel Arguments to one dark one from those Laws . For it is a most necessary Rule , that in all our Disquisitionss , we must reduce Uncertainties to Certainties , and not Certainties to Uncertainties : our Argument must be à notioribus ad mi●ùs nota . Mr. Blake confesseth it very dangerous to argue from mere analogue , and professeth that he doth not so , but from the ground of the Institution : And how dark are those grounds in some Cases to us ? 

2.  I yet see no proof of the Proposition , that then such Infants of notoriously ungodly parents had ( on their account ) a right to Circumcision . 

Where first note , that we must first denominate men Godly or Ungodly , as principally in their respect to God himself , so next from their respect to the Rule of Godliness then in force ; which being not the same in many things then as now it is , Godliness was not in the exercise , the same materially then in all things as it is now . The sum of it was , to take the Lord that Redeemed them from bondage to be their God , and to give themselves in consent to be his people , and obey his Laws . 

Now let us see where is their proof of the proposition . They say , all Israelites whatsoever were to be Circumcised , by right ; I answer , that 's no proof : Let us look to the Institution , Gen. 17.7 , 8 , 9 , 10. and there we shall find , 1.  That the Covenant goes before the Seal ; and this Covenant is , that God will be a God to them , which they were on their parts to take him to be . 2.  This Covenant is with Abraham and his seed after him . 3.  Next follows an Injunction that he and his seed do keep God's Covenant . 4.  And then is Circumcision Instituted ( though called the Covenant , yet but ) the Token of the Covenant , as it is called ver . 11.  By all which it appeareth that the seal Instituted supposeth the Covenant Instituted , and the seal applied supposeth the Covenant entered , and then by that it is signed between God and them : As if the Prince confer such Lands and honours on a Noble man and his seed in all generations , and require every Heir to come , and upon taking the Oath of Allegiance , to receive the great seal for the confirming of his Title : This supposeth that this Noble man and all his seed , that expect that benefit , do continue their Allegiance ; that for all this Grant , If any of them turn Traitor , his Posterity can receive no right from him , but it is prevented . 

Moreover , it is known that every Israelite was oft to renew this Covenant with God : yea all the Body of the People often together did it in Moses days , and they owned God continually in Sacrifices , and other Holy Worship . Moreover consider , that the People at that time seem to be generally or mostly such as were not of the strain that now we are enquiring about , viz. Notoriously ungodly . To evidence this , observ. 1  That they had holy , excellent Teachers , Moses , Aaron , etc. and God among them in signs and wonders . 2.  They were generally zealous in their way of Religiousness , which was very costly and laborious in comparison of what is now commonly done . 3.  That they had most strict Laws , prohibiting all uncleanness ; yea even Ceremonial , to teach them the evil of the greater Moral uncleanness . 4.  They are oft called a Holy and peculiar people : and God frequently charges them to hold to it , and remember that he was a Holy and Jealous God. 5.  There were more severe penalties then , and lesle indulgence to Offenders then is under the Gospel . 6.  Even Balaam testifieth for them , that God saw not iniquity in Jacob , nor transgression in Israel ; that is no such Idolatry or ungodliness as was among the Heathen . 7.  Note that the visible sins which they are most at that time accused of , and destroyed for , seem to be but either some particular Facts under Temptation , or some sad discoveries of their Mutabil●y and wavering not in the main ; Whether they should renounce their God ( or at least they did not actually and visibly renounce him ) but about his Power in a straight and difficult case , or some the like : From which a man could not conclude them notoriously ungodly , though their sin was very great , and God that knew their hearts might discern ungodliness in them , and men might suspect them , and fear the worst . 8.  Note also , that even for such particular sins before they could manifest fixed impenitency and obstinacy , or a course of ungodliness , God usually let lose against them his Jealousy , and by some destroying Calamities cut them off . 9  When the Psalmist doth aggravate their sin Psal 78. and 104. it is particular sins , and unstedfastness of heart , but still with professions of Repentance and Returning under their frequent afflictions . 10.  Yet I must desire that none here mistake me , as if I would free the Israelites from any charge that God layeth on them by his Prophets : I speak not now of their times of greatest Apostasy and Rebellion : And I know that afterwards , when the Princes and Rulers were evil or negligent , than the Church must needs be defiled , and the Laws of God unexecuted . And perhaps I may misinterpret some texts of Scripture to a more gentle sense than others do , or then is meet : Of this let every man judge as he please : it 's no time now to call all such texts to accounted . If any be offended at my charitable thoughts of the body of the Jews ( Gods only peculiar people on earth ) let them blot out these fore going considerations , or take them as non dicta ; for I lay not the stress of my Cause upon them . But the Principal thing which I would have observed is this . That by God's Political Law of this Commonwealth , all Notorious ungodly persons were to be put to death ; yea , and many far short of that degree . I know it is a controversy among Divines , what is meant by all those places , that speak of [ Cutting off from his people . ] Mr. Gilespie with others think it is meant of Excommunication . Others think it is meant of the Magistrates punishing them with death , or Gods doing it extraordinarily if the Magistrate should be negligent . The main reason brought against this Exposition , is , that it seems too bloody . But it must be considered how terrible the Law was , and how God designed in it the manifestation of his Jealousy , Holiness and hatred of sin . If every man that did aught presumptuously might be cut off from the Church , why not from the Living ? The Apostle in Acts 3.23 . reciting that of Moses , saith , [ He that will not hear that Prophet shall be destroyed from the People . ] However let that phrase mean what it will , we have proof enough beside , that not only all notorious Ungodly ones , but also many Godly ones that fell into gross sin , were all to be put to death . From whence I argue thus : 

If it was the Law of God that all such persons should be presently put to death , than was it not the will of God , that their Infants should have Right to Circumcision for their sakes , no nor on any other account : But the Antecedent is true , therefore the Consequent . 

The Reason of the Consequence is this : Either th●se men's children were born before the parents turned ungodly , or after . If before then were they circumcised the eighth day , as the children of the Godly . If after , than it was against God's Law , that they should be born , much lesle circumcised . For if God's Law had been fulfilled , the parents had been put to death , ( we speak of both parents ) and then how could they have had a child ? 

All the doubt then lying in the Antecedent , I shall from Scripture put it is past doubt . Let us look over all the Commandments , and see whether Death were not to be inflicted for the gross breach of them , except the last , which is secret in the heart . 

For the first Commandment , see Deut. 13.  If a Prophet wrought wonders to entice to worship strange Gods , or if the nearest kinsman secretly enticed them to it [ to thrust them out of the way which the Lord commanded them to walk in , ver . 5. ] he must be put to death . If a City be withdrawn by such , they are all to be put to death ; Children , dattle , and Goods were to be destroyed and consumed . 

Deut. 20.18 . They were not to save alive any person , no not Infants , of the Cities that God delivered them to dwell in , lest they teach them to do according to their abominations . 

Exod. 22.20 . He that sacrificeth to any God , save the Lord only , shall utterly be destroyed . 

The breach of the second Commandment is punished with Death , Exod. 32.26.27 , 28.  The Priests of Baal are slain , 1 Kin. 18.40 . 2 Kin. 10.21.22 , to 29.  & 23.5 , 19 , 20.  Yea , in one word , he that would not be Godly positively , was put to death , 2 Chron. 15.12 , 13.  It is spoken in their commendations , that they entered into a Covenant , to seek the Lord God of their Fathers with all their heart , and with all their soul ; that whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel , should be put to death , whether small or great , whether man or woman . ] 

Leu. 24.15 , 16.  Whosoever blasphemeth the name of the Lord , was to be put to death : So ver . 23.  

Every one that did any work on the sabbath , or defiled it , was to be put to death , Exod. 31.14 , 15.  & 35.2 . 

He that smitteth or curseth his Father or Mother , must be put to death , Exod , 21.15 . 

Murderers , Man-stealers , Incestuous , Sodomites , Adulteres , Wizards were to be put to death , Exod. 21.  Leu. 20. yea and those that turn after Wizards . Any Prophet that shall presume to speak a word in God's name , which he hath not commanded him to speak , or that speaketh in the name of other Gods , must die , Deut. 13.20 . In some cases Fornicators must die , Deut. 22.  Every man that forsaken God and broke his Covenant was to be stoned to death , Deut. 17.2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6.  

Many the like passages might be cited ; but I will conclude with two or three of chief note for this purpose . 

Deut. 21.18 , 19 , 20 , 21.  If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son , which will not obey the voice of his father , or the voice of his mother , and that when they have chastened him will not harken unto them , then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him , and bring him out unto the Elders of his City , and to the Gate of his place : and they shall say unto the Elders of his City , This our son is stubborn and rebellious , he will not obey our voice , he is a Glutton and a Drunkard : And all the men of his City shall stone him with stones that he die : So shall you put away evil from among you , and all Israel shall hear and fear . ] 

Here I suppose it will be granted , that it is the Parents duty to restrain their children from all ungodliness ; and that Gluttony and Drunkenness are but instanced in , as part , in stead of all the rest . And if all children must be put to death that will not be ruled for good by their Parents , then when they are dead they will beget no children who may claim Right to Circumcision for their sakes . 

But if any say , that this extendeth not to those that are from under their Parent's tutorage or Government , I answer , First , Sure the same sin deserveth the same punishment afterwards from the Magistrate , if they are obstinate against his pious precepts . Secondly , but to put the case out of doubt , see Deut. 17.12 . And the man that will do presumptuously , and will not harken unto the Priest , that standeth to minister there before the Lord thy God , or unto the Judge , even that man shall die , and thou shalt put away the evil from Israel , and all the people shall hear and fear , and do no more presumptuously . ] To these Deut. 29.19 , 20.  From all which it is evident , that as Impenitency or Obstinacy in sin is the great cause of Excommunication now , so was it then to be punished with Death ; and consequently that the evident discoveries of a state of Ungodliness ( and many more ) were then punished with Death according to Gods Law.  

And then it must needs follow , that no child of a man Notoriously ungodly , born of his procreation in that condition , had right to Circumcision : For dead men do not procreate . 

And whether [ Cutting off from his people ] be meant of capital punishment , such places as Exod. 31.14 , 15. would make one doubt : [ ye shall keep the Sabbath therefore , for it is holy unto you : every one that defileth it , shall surely be put to death : for whosoever doth any work therein , that soul shall be cut off from amongst his people . ] See also Levit. 20.17 , 18.  

And if it be meant of Excommunication , if the parent be [ cut off from his people , ] then cannot his son for any Interest of his , be ●nnumerated to that people , and entered among them . 

The first Observation and this last laid together , clear the whole Cause , viz. that the Magistrate was not to force any barely to be Circumcised , but to enter into God's Covenant , and so to be circumcised : and therefore was he not to force any out of the Covenant to be circumcised : and then , that he was to cut off the Covenant-breakers , or notoriously ungodly ones . 

11.  The next Observation that I would give towards the Answering of this Objection , is , that it could not be expected that any Magistrate , Priest , or other in Power , should hinder any Israëlite from circumcising his children . For to circumcise them was every man's Duty , and to baptise them is every man's Duty in the world now : that is , to give up himself and his child in sincere Covenant to God , and seal it , as he hath appointed : but not dissemblingly to use the sign , without the Covenanting and Resignation on his part . Now if any Israëlite were unfit for this Ordinance , it being the Magistrates duty to put him to death , or cut him off , he could not judge him unfit , and so forbid him the Ordinance , without condemning himself . The first thing that lay upon him was , to cut him off for the sin which caused his unfitness . 

12.  Note also that Circumcision much differed from Baptism in this , that it was not the Priests work but Parents to circumcise his children : this being so , no wonder if there were not the scruples about the persons fitness and worthiness , and the children's right , as now there is in Baptism . For what man is so prone to scruple or question his own Right or his children's , as another may be ? And the same reason that should move a Parent to question his Right , would move him also to Repent and Recover his Right . no wonder therefore if the Execution answered not God's Institution . 

To all this it is objected , that we read not that any Infants were kept back , or that God blamed them for it . 

Answ. 1.  I have given sufficient Reasons . 2.  God would rather blame them for that sin which caused their unfitness , it being not the Circumcising then , in the Baptism now , that he is against directly , but the ungodliness ; and therefore would not have the ordinances forborn , but on supposition that the sin will not be forborn : that 's the disease that he would have them heal both then and now . 

Obj. Joshua is commanded by God to Circumcise them , and accordingly he doth Circumcise all the people : yet no doubt many of them were Notoriously ungodly . Josh. 5.  Answer 1  Joshuah did but command it to be done . 2.  I have given the reason why all should be Circumcised . 3.  It is unproved that any one of them were know to Joshuah to be ungodly . To clear this further , I will add two more observations . 

13.  Note that all those that were charged with Murmuring , Unbelief , etc. in the wilderness , were all destroyed there , and also that for 40 years their Children had been uncircumcised . Only Caleb and Joshua were left . So that those of 40 or 30 or 20 years of age must be Circumcised on the account of their own Covenanting , and not pled the right of their Parents . 

14.  Note also , that the very examples of God's Judgements do intimate that Notorious Ungodliness was not so common among them as some imagine . Multitudes are thought very Godly now , that murmur in lesser straits than they were then in , and that are palpably guilty of much unbelief , or lesle temptations . All Israel was put to the worse for the sake of one Achan , that plundered no man unjustly , but only thought to rescue some desirable treasures from the flames : I wish that no soldiers would now do worse that are reputed extraordinarily Godly , and are never blemished by such actions in their own eyes or any others . I will not stand to add more , because I have been so long . 

If any man Judge that all this is no sufficient answer to their Argument from Circumcision , I further add . 2.  Though this be my own thoughts , yet it is not a few of those Divines that are Godly and Learned , that give one of these two following answers . 

1.  That External and Ceremonial Purity was then most openly looked at , which was but a Type of the spiritual purity under the Gospel : and therefore no wonder if God that then permitted Polygamy without reproof , permitted the circumcision of all Jews , yea encouraged it , seeing that the Body of that People were God's visible Heritage , as a Type of the Catholic visible Church now . The Magistrates therefore might compel them as Jews to be Circumcised , but so may not ours compel us as Englishmen . 

2.  That Circumcision was not only appointed to be the seal of the Covenant of grace , but also a peculiar Covenant annexed to Abraham and his seed : and that not all , but those only that were to possess the land of Canaan : And therefore as it was not all the people that God had on earth that were promised to possess the land of Canaan , but only the Israelites , and those proselytes that came over to inhabit among them ; so neither was Circumcision commanded to all , nor was necessary to them : but to a Jew it was necessary as a Jew , how ungodly soever . 

Though this be none of my answer , yet among many Improbable opinions , I see not but the Thesis which I deny , is much more improbable than this is ; and therefore if I needs must hold one , I see not but that I should rather hold this . 

Nor will this weaken our Argument for Infant-baptism , fetched from the Infant Church-membership of the Jews ( which is the great objection ) as long as the whole species of Infants are of distinct consideration from a Jews Infant , as such ; and as long as the grand Covenant of grace , and the peculiar promise to the Jews , are so distinct ; yea and Church-membership , and Circumcision so distinct as they are , Let them leave us to make good our Arguments in this . 

Argu. 2.  We may lawfully Baptise the Infants of any Church-members . Notoriously ungodly persons are Church-members , therefore we may lawfully Baptise their Infants . 

Ans. 1.  I deny the Major . Because some Church-members are in such a condition as that the first thing you are bound to do with them , is to cast them out , ( or suspend them till then ) When you are bound presently to cast him out , you are not at the same time to give him the Sacrament of the Lords Supper , nor his Infants on his account the Sacrament of Baptism . 

Indeed if they had Right to Church-membership , their Infants might have so too . 

2 I deny the Minor. Other ungodly persons are visible members : but notorious ungodly ones are not , They are pso jure excommunicate , not merely as meriting i● , but on the Notoriousness of their incapacity , and the pleasure of the Legislator , as is afore declared . 

Obj. The Notorious ungodly were Church-members among the Jews , therefore they may be s● now . 

Answ. 1.  Prove the Antecedent . 2.  The question is not what men mis-judged them , but how God esteemed or pronounced them . 3.  God would not have them to be Church-members , while such , whom he commanded the Magistrate to put to death . But , etc. Ergo.  

Obj They were not to be excommunicate or put away from the Passover . Answ. 1.  He that is stoned to death is excommunicate and put away from the Passover . He that is cut off from the living , is put out of the Church on earth . 2.  I will not waste time to prove Jewish excommunication , till I know of some tolerable answer given to that which Mr. , Gilespie ( beside many others ) hath written so largely already . 

Argum. 3.  Infants in Covenant have right to Baptism The Infants of Notorious Ungodly Parents are in Covenant . Ergo.  

Ans. I have in my account to Mr. Blake , told you so fully , how far they are in Covenant , and how far not , that I must refer you thither , and not here recite it . I deny that God is actually engaged to them in the covenant of Grace , which Baptism sealeth ; but conditionally only , and so he is to Infidels that persecute it . Though they may be engaged more to God by their own Verbal covenant to him ; but that altereth not the case . 

Argu. 4.  Dogmatical faith giveth Right to Baptism . Notoous ungodly Parents have a Dogmatical faith . Ergo. etc.  

Answ. I have said so much to Mr. Blake on this , that I need not now to add any more . 

Obje . Simon Magus had a faith which gave him right to baptism . But Simon Magus was then a Notorious ungodly man ; therefore a Notorious ungodly man may have a faith that may entitle him and his to baptism . Ans. See what is said to this in the place before cited . Further 1  I yield that Simon had a faith of superficial Assent , such as the Devils have in a greater measure : and that he professed more than he had ; and that hereupon the Apostle was warranted to baptise him . 2.  But I deny the Minor that he was then notoriously ungodly . Consider well of Psalm . 50.16 . 

Argu. 5.  Josiah was lawfully Circumcised upon the Right of Manasseh and Ammon ; but Manasseh and Ammon were Notoriously ungodly : Ergo.  

Ans Either Josiah was born before his Father Ammon proved Notoriously ungodly , or after . If before , than he received not his right from a Notoriously ungodly Parent . If after , 1.  then was it contrary to God's Laws , and so could be no true Right . For by God's Laws Manasseh and Ammon should have been put to death . And if it be said that these Laws were not to be executed on the Sovereign ; I answer , the want of a power of execution doth not hinder , but that they notoriously lost their Right , though they kept possession , and therefore could convey no Right . It follows therefore that either Josiah was circumcised without Right ( if it be first proved that his father was such at the time of his birth ) : or else that he had his right some other way , intimated in the General answer to the Jews case . And to them that think the former a hard saying , I shall anon show that the rule holds good in this case that Quod fieri non debet , factum valet . 

Argu. 6.  Deut. 24 16.  The Children shall not be put to death for the Father's sin ; and we read not that Ecclesiastical censure should be more severe . The child of a Thief is not committed with him to prison ; and I see no reason that he is committed with him to Satan : therefore there is right to Baptism in the child of an excommunicate person . 

Answ. The question is not of excommunicating a child , or committing him to Satan , but of addmitting him into the Church at first : The Parent cannot convey to the child the Right with he hath lost ; we speak only of the Children born after the Parents are excommunicated vel sententiâ vel ipso Jure . But of this enough ( I think ) before : the state of the question is by these Arguers strangely overlookt . 

Argu. 7.  Those that the Apostles Baptised had been ungodly immediately before , only at the present they did profess Repentance : And so do many of these that you call Notoriously ungodly . Ergo.  

Answ. 1.  If it be a probably serious and credible profession ( fit for that name ) then are they not Notoriously ungodly . 2.  According both to Scripture , and Reason , and common use , a man's first or second profession may be credited . But if he frequently break his word , his credit is lost : he is not capable at present of covenanting again , till he have by actual Reformation recovered his credit . I have such Neighbours as this twenty years together have been constant drunkards , and lament it , and promise Reformation when they have done , and yet once a week or fortnight usually are still drunk . To take these men's oft breaking words were to delude Scripture and all Discipline , and cross common Reason . 

Yet here we must carefully distinguish between Repentance for such gross sins , as continued in , are inconsistent with true Grace ; and Repentance for such infirmities as may stand with Grace , not only to live in , but not to have , or manifest a particular Repentance of : As those which are not convinced to be sins : etc.  We speak now of the first . 

Argum. 8.  By denying them Baptism , we may exasperate the wicked to engage themselves against Christ , and us . 

Answ. The Primitive Church under Heathen Princes had much more cause to fear this than we have : and yet it did not change their course . I take not such carnal Reasons to be worthy to have place among the servants of such a Master who fears not his enemies , and will make them bend and return to him , but will not himself bend and return to them . 

The truth is , had we Magistrates that would so severely punish notorious ungodliness , as ( I think ) they should do according to God's Laws ▪ that most of this Controversy would be ended : and instead of driving men from God's Ordinances , they should be driven from such ungodliness . But when Magistrates are so tender of hurting men's Bodies , that they let their souls perish , or are so much against formality and outside Reformation , that they had rather men were Heathens , and openly wicked , and sinned with Body and Soul too , than with the Soul alone ; this puts us upon a necessity of doing the more in a separation by Church power , than else we should do . 

Arg. 9  If no Children of notorious ungodly parents have Right to Baptism , 1. then is their Baptism Dorid . 2.  And then ours is Dorid which we received , on supposition of the Right of such parents . And 3. then must many be baptised again ; For if Ministers had no power to do it , it must needs be Dorid . The determination of this Question about the nullity of Baptism , depends upon the true definition of Baptism : some only put God's part and the Ministers into the definition , and not the receivers act of profession , covenanting or self-resigning to Christ ; taking him to be no Agent in the Essentials of the Ordinance , but a recipient ; and that the Acts on his part are only Integrals , or Duties necessary to his participation of the benefits of the Covenant . If this definition hold ( most common with our Divines ) than the resolution is most easy . For the Minister performed all that was essential to Baptism : And therefore that which is undone , is only the man's duty on his own or child's behalf : that which was well done ( as to the act ) is not to be done again , that is , the Ministerial Baptism ( though sinfully misapplyed ; ) but that which was undone ; that is ▪ 1. the persons duty ; 2. and thereupon Gods Grant ( actually ) of the benefits . According to this definition of baptism , if through error a Pagan be baptised in the true form , it is not Dorid as to that form of the Ordinance , nor to be done again when he is converted ; but only his own duty was Dorid , and to be done again For example ; if one that cannot speak our Language should be thought to profess faith in Christ by signs , and be baptised thereupon , and it after appear that it was no such profession , but contrary : so if we should mistake a Pagans' child for a Christians . I pretend not to decide the Question , Whether this be the rightest definition of Baptism , or best Answer to the present Doubt ; but if this hold ( as it is common ) all is clear against the pretended Nullity or rebaptising . 

2.  If it hold not , let the Objectors answer themselves , who say that a Dogmatical faith gives right to Baptism : We have abundance of people that have not so much as a Dogmatical Faith ; that know not who Christ is , nor what he hath done ; nor are they in most places ( since the Directory was in use ) called to profess their faith when they offer their children to Baptism ; Are the children of these persons to be rebaptised ? or themselves , if it were their case ? or is the Administration of the Lords Supper to such a Nullity , or only unprofitable ? I have had the aged here , that have said , Christ the Son of God was the Sun in the Firmament : yet they have had both Sacraments . Answer this for yourselves . 

3.  But suppose the persons covenanting be essential to Baptism , let us so far advantage the Objectors as to deal with them on that ground . 

Answ. 1.  I distinguish between [ the Nullity of the external part , commonly called , Baptism , containing the Ministerial Administration , and the persons Reception of the Water and Washing , with his profession , or external covenant to God ; ] And [ the Nullity of God's Engagement or Covenant to the sinner actually ; and so of the sinner's Reception of the Benefits of Baptism ] Among which Benefits I distinguish , [ the special and spiritual , as pardon , Adoption , etc. ] from the more common and external , such as are [ the external Privileges of the Visible Church . ] Whereupon I answer first to the Matter in these following Propositions : and then to the Argument , as in form . 

Pr●po . 1.  If any essential part of the exterior Ordinance be wanting , than it is Dorid : As if the party he not ( more or lesle ) washed . If he be not baptised into the Name of the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost , ( at least implicitly , if not by full Verbal expression ) If the party use but the bare name of God , while he professeth , or openly discovereth that it is not indeed God the Father , Son or Holy Ghost that he meaneth . If he openly put in any exception against any essential part of the Christian Faith or Covenant ; as to say , I will only be pardoned by Christ , but not sanctified ; then , I conceive , it is no Baptism . But if there be all the exterior Essentials , there the exterior Baptism is not Dorid nor to be repeated . 2.  The foresaid exterior Baptism is effectual to the engaging or obliging of the person so baptised : And so his own part of the Covenant is not Dorid . A Dissembling promise bindeth the Promiser in Law : for his dissimulation cannot hinder his own Obligation , though it may another's . Nemini debetur commodum ex proprio delicto ; 3.  But if there be not sincerity in the Covenanter , beyond all this , his Baptism is not available to the pardon of his sin , or to convey to him a R●ght from God in any of the Covenant benefits ( directly as given to him ) common or special . 4.  Nor should the Minister or People believe this man , if by Notorious Ungodliness he give them reason to take his present Profession to be false , and himself now to dissemble . 5.  But yet seeing a Natural Profession it is , though false ; and the falsehood is not declared by him at that time in the Ordinance , but disclaimed , but only is declared before he comes thither , therefore it seems to me , that there is the whole external Essence of Baptism , and therefore it is not Dorid , nor to be Repeated : But if that person do afterwards come to the sense of his own Dissimulation , and of the want of Truth in his Profession and Covenanting , he is to do then that which he did omit before , that is , to Covenant Truly ; but not that which he did perform before , that is , to be externally Baptised . Such a person therefore should in the face of the Congregation , when he comes to Repentance , bewail ( with the rest of the sins of his life ) that falseness in the Baptismal Covenant , and there unfeignedly renew it : To which end , among others , in the ancient Churches , it was usual in Confirmation to renew the Covenant more solemnly , where any flaw was found in the Baptism , which yet did not prove a Nullity . 6.  And for external Church Privileges , I conceive , that as God doth not by Covenant give this person a right to them , so it is the Ministers and People's Duty to deny them to the Parent himself , while he continueth notoriously ungodly : and the Error of wrong baptising him , ( or continuing him in the Church till now ) will not oblige them to continue communion with him . But yet being admitted by Baptism , he should be solemnly cast out . But if the Guides of the Church be faulty and will not cast him out , then must the people distinguish between communion with him as a Christian in general , and as a member of that particular Church ; as also between communion Moral , and merely Natural ; and so , First , they must avoid ●hristian communion with him in ordinary ways wherein they are free ; as all private or voluntary open familiarity : Secondly , But if he intrude ( by the Pastor's approbation ) into Public communion , in Prayer , Praises , or Sacrament , they ought not to withdraw from the communion of the church , because of his presence First , because they have the Liberty of esteeming him as they please ; Secondly , because it is not their fault , but the Pastors . Thirdly , and therefore it is but a Physical and not a Moral communion that they have with him . Fourthly , because they are bound to hold communion with the Church in the use of Ordinances . 

And as for the Infant on that account baptised , i● is so few acts of communion that an Infant is capable of , that the question seems to be of no great moment , how far we should have communion with them . But I conceive , we should take them as baptised persons externally , and so far members of the Church , though wrongfully admitted . 

7.  To which purpose , it is not altogether inconsiderable , that the Minister being by Office the Baptizer , and so the Judge of his own Actions , whom he ought to Baptise , and whom not ; the action is not Dorid , though he mistake in his Judgement , and apply the Ordinance to one that he should have refused . For he doth but an act belonging to his Office , though he do it amiss , or on a wrong subject . As if a Judge do pass sentence mistakingly , yet may it be valid , as to some execution ; For though he have no power given him directly to pass a wrong Judgement , yet in order to passing a right Judgement , he hath power to follow his own discretion , and to pass such a Judgement as shall ( at least in tantum ) stand , though it prove wrong . I confess the Ministerial Power somewhat differeth from a strict Decisive Judicial power ; but yet there is so much resemblance as may serve to illustrate the matter in hand . 

Object . then if a Minister Baptise a Heathen , it is not Dorid , because he is Judge whom to baptise . 

Answ. 1.  On the grounds we now go on , it it a contradiction to baptise a Heathen , that by a present profession is such . For Baptising essentially containeth the persons external Covenant , or Profession of Believing in , and Dedication to the Father , Son and Holy Ghost . If there be not by the person and Minister such a Dedication , it is not Baptism : for if the bare external Washing were Baptism , than we were every day baptised . Now he that is Baptised into the Name of the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , doth thereby renounce Heathenism so far : Though whether his Profession shall be credited , dependeth on the probability of its verity or falsity . But on the first mentioned Definition of Baptism , it will be granted you , that Baptising a Heathen is not a Nullity , as to the outward Baptism , though it be unprofitable and sinful . But to go on former grounds , I further answer , 2.  It is one thing for a Judge to mis-judge a Cause that belongeth to his Judgement ; and another to mis-judge a cause that is wholly exempted from his Judgement , and belongeth not to him . In the former , his Judgement may stand , in diverse cases , because he was made Judge . In the later it is wholly Dorid , for he is but a Private man , and hath nothing to do in the business : and therefore whether he judge right or wrong , it is Dorid ; As if a Judge go to another Bench , or into another Circuit , which is out of his Commission : So here , where a man layeth claim to Baptism , and professeth himself a Christian the Minister is to judge whether he do it truly , or falsely ; and therefore though he mistake , the Baptism is not Dorid ; For though the man be notoriously ungodly yet it is supposed that the Notoriousness is not absolutely unquestionable , and that the person doth not profess it when he comes to Baptism , but deny it , by professing Faith and Repentance ; and so though the Church have sufficient ground to discredit that profession , by reason of h●ss contradicting Life , yet a Controversy it is , while the person claims a Right in Baptism for his child ; and being a Controversy , the Pastor is judge . But if he baptise a Heathen that makes no Profession of Christianity , true or false , than he meddleth in a matter exempted from his Power , and out of his Commission , and contrary to it , and that which can be no Controversy fit for his determination : and therefore it is Dorid , and indeed no Baptism . 

Object . If the Pastor be thus Judge , how can you say as before , That the Notoriously Ungodly are ipso Jure Excommunicated ? 

Answ. 1.  Ministers are limited in their judgement by the Law of God , which telleth how far they may or may not Judge , and how far it shall or shall not be effectual . The people are not absolutely tied to follow their judgement when they err . 2.  God hath directed his Precepts for the avoiding of notorious ungodly ones to every Christian directly ; and not only to the Pastors directly , and to the people only from them ; so that if a Pastor command us to have communion and familiarity with such , we are yet to avoid them ( as far as was before expressed ) for all that , because God's command is contrary to the Pastors . And the Law openly declareth that such are not true Christians ( or Believers ; ) and therefore a Pastor's sentence cannot make them such : His erring judgement may do more to bring a man into the Church than to keep him in ; and in keeping him in as to possession , it may do more to the conveyance of those Privileges which are to come merely from his own hands and administration , than those wherein the people are to be instruments : Because he is more the Determiner of his own Actions , such as are baptising , administering the Lords Supper , etc. than of theirs : For his own Erring Judgement may ligare , etsi non obligare , entangle him in a kind of necessity of sinning , till that Judgement be changed ; but it cannot tie them , nor so necessitate them to sin , though it may bring them under some inconveniences ; and for Order and the Peace of the Church , they must quietly , peaceably , and submissively descent . By the Law of the Land , the King's Judges in his Courts and Assizes ; were the lawful Judges of a Traitor that was brought before them ; and yet in some notorious Cases I suppose he is condemned ipso Jure , and any man that can come at him might lawfully stab him without Judgement , yea is bound to do it : as if they had stood by and seen the King's Person assaulted , as the Lord Mayor of London did by Wat Tyler : Or if it were not in defence , but in avenging of the Treason , if heinous ; and in several Cases they might kill them in a forcible apprehension if they resist , as they did by the Powder-traitors here near us at Holbetch House . But what need I mention these things , when it is so commonly known that in several Cases the Law enableth us for to Execute without Judgement , and yet this is no denial of the Authority of a Judge . So much to the matter of this Argument . 

And now in Sum to the Argument as in Form , 1.  I deny the first Consequence , if it speak of the Nullity of the External Baptism , and not only of the Effect , and of God's Engagement to them . 

2.  And consequently I deny the two later Consequences . 

3.  Yea if our Parent's Infant-baptism were null , it followeth not that so is their children's , which they had on their account . For our Parents might get a Personal Right in Christ and the Covenant after their Baptism , before they presented us in Baptism , though themselves had not been Baptised . 4.  And I believe it will be no easy matter to prove that our Parents ( any , or many at least ) were notoriously ungodly at our birth . 5.  Lastly , if all this satisfy not , but any man will yet needs believe , that it is an unavoidable consequence of our Doctrine , that [ The Baptism of the Infants of Notoriously Ungodly Parents is null ] though I am not of h●s mind , yet I think it is a lesle dangerous opinion , and lesle improbable than theirs whom we now oppose . I know no such great ill effects it would have , if a man that mistakingly did suppose his Baptism Dorid , to satisfy his Conscience were baptised again , without denying the baptism of Infants , or any unpeaceable disturbing of the Church in the management thereof . I confess I never had any Damning or Excommunicating thoughts in my mind against Cyprian , Firmilian , and the rest of the African Bishops and Churches , who rebaptised those that were baptised by Heretics , and in Council determined it necessary , and were so zealous for it . And , though while I captivated my judgement to a Party and to admired persons , I embraced the new Exposition of Acts 19 which Beza thankfully professeth to have received from Marúixius , who as some say was the first Inventor of it ; yet I must confess , that both before I knew what other men held , and since I better know who expound it otherwise , and on what grounds , I can no longer think that is the meaning of the Text , especially when I impartially peruse the words themselves . Calvin did not think that the 5th vers● was Paul's words of John's Hearers , but Luke's words of Paul's Hearers : and had no way to avoid the Exposition which admitted their rebaptising , but by supposing that Paul did not Baptise them again with Water , but with the Holy Ghost only . ( and that of that , the fifth verse is meant . ) I never read that John Baptist did Baptise in the name of the Lord Jesus expressly and denominatively , but only as Paul here speaks , that they should believe on him that should come after , whom Paul here Expositorily denominateth the Lord Jesus . And the words [ When they heard this ] seem to me plainly to refer to Paul's saying , as the thing which they heard . Also the Connexion of the fifth verse to the sixth shows it : For else there is no reason given of Paul's proceeding to that Imposition of Hands , nor any satisfaction to the doubt at which he stuck , or which he propounded . And I confess , if I must be swayed by men , I had rather think well of the judgement of the Fathers , and Church of all Ages , who , for aught I find , do all ( that have written of it ) with one consent place a greater difference than we do between John's Baptism and Christ's , and did expound this Text so as to assert that these 12 Disciples were baptised again by Paul , or on his Preaching . And for that great and unanswerable Argument wherewith Beza and others do seek to maintain the necessity of their sense , I confess it rather persuades me to the contrary : For whereas they imagine it intolerable for us to conclude or think that Christ was not Baptised with Christian Baptism , which himself did institute or command , I must needs say , I think it much more probable that he was not , seeing the Christ an Baptism is Essentially a Covenanting and Sealing of our Covenant with God the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost , as our Creator , Redeemer , and Sanctifier , and appointed to be God's Seal of his washing away our sins by Christ's blood ; all which I know Christ was not capable of ; And I suppose it more credible that Christ himself should be the Instituter of such an Evangelical Ordinance than John ; and that he came to fulfil all Legal Righteousness , rather than that Evangelical Righteousness which consisteth in obeying himself , by doing those things which he hath appointed to redeemed sinners as such for their recovery . But of this let every man judge as he is illuminated . If I err , my danger and deserved reproach , I think , is no greater than the Ancient Fathers and the Church for so many hundred years that were of the same mind : Even they that were nearer to that Age when these matters of Fact were done . 

But for our case , its apparent there 's no need of Rebaptising ; for there is no Nullity . 

I have done with the Argument , but yet there is one Question more that may not be passed over , though but on the by ; and that is , Whether the Baptism of all those persons be not Dorid , and they to be Rebaptised , who were baptised by such as were Notoriously or Secretly unordained men , and no true Ministers ? To which I only say in brief , no : 1.  If they were not known to be no Ministers , it was no fault of ours : we waited in God's appointed way for his Ordinances ; and therefore though they were sins to them , they are valid blessings to us , that were not guilty . 2.  If they were Notoriously no Ministers , though it might be our Parent's sin that we were presented to such for Baptism , yet it is not Dorid : For in these Relations these Instruments are not Essential to the Relation , nor to the Ordinance at all ; Though I would be loath , as the Fathers and Papists did , to allow a Lay person ( yea a woman saith Tertullian ) to baptise in case of Necessity : yet should I not be very hasty to Rebaptise such , supposinig that they had all the substance of the Ordinance , as being baptised into the name of the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost . 

Argu. 10.  Whoever ought in Duty to dedicate his Child to God , in the holy Covenant , ought also to Baptise him . But all notorious ungodly men ought so to dedicate their children to God Ergo , etc.  

Answ. I grant the Conclusion : It is every man's duty on earth that hears the Gospel , to be baptised , and give up his children ( if he have any ) to Christ in Baptism : that is to believe and consent to the Covenant of Grace , and so to be baptised . But it followeth not that it is their Duty to be Externally Baptised without Faith and such Consent . 

2.  Note also that this Argument as well proves that all the Children of persecuting Heathens should be baptised , as ungodly pretended Christians : For it is their Duty too . 

Object . But when they present their Children , they do their Duty , though but part of their Duty ; and we ought not to refuse any part of a man's Duty . 

Answ. 1.  It is not a duty , but a sin to do the External later part without the former Internal part . It is a duty to intend to relieve the poor , and perhaps to express it by promise , but to promise without any intent to perform it , is to lie , and so to sin . The tongue must not go before and without the heart , because the action of both is a duty . It were better say nothing at all . 2.  The Sacrament of Baptism is not appointed to be affixed to every kind of duty , but to our dedication to God , and God's acceptance of us . 

Object . If their Profession may engage them , then may we seal it by baptism ; but it may engage them . Ergo. etc.  

Answ. I deny the Consequence . A false dissembling may oblige the Promiser : but Baptism was not appointed to seal every notorious false promise . It is also Gods Seal as well as man's : Circumcision is his sign , and called his Covenant , Gen. 17.  And Abraham received it as a seal , Rom. 4.  And it signifieth God's action of washing the soul by the blood of Christ. Therefore where we are sure God disclaimeth it , and withdraweth his Action , there may we not apply the Mutual Seal and Sign . 

Object . We see in New England the sad effects of denying baptism to the children of the unregenerate , now they are all come to be obstinate Infidels . 

Answ. Th●s is more than I have heard any good testimony of , and therefore am not bound to believe it , Secondly , They in N. England , as we hear do refuse to baptise all that are not children of the members of their own Churches ; but so do not we : they baptise not the members of the Universal Church , unless they be in a particular Church ; but we do otherwise . And it 's reported that they required positive proof of Conversion , beyond a profession of faith and Repentance ; but so do not we . Thirdly , Mens obstinacy in sin , and proceeding worse , will not warrant us to take an unlawful course in pretence to do them good . Fourthly , Do you give us any reason to believe that a notorious ungodly person in your Church is in any better a state than an Infidel ? Nay , that they are not in a state much worse ? It is they therefore that should chiefly move you to compassion . Can you so lament the estate of the lesle miserable , and not of the more miserable ? 

Object . But it is good that at least in words they confess Christ.  

Answ. Either you speak of a Good of Duty , or a Good of Means : For the first , it is a Duty , and so good to confess Christ with heart and tongue ; but if with the tongue alone , it is a sin , and no duty ; Indeed the tongue conjunct with the heart doth part of the duty ; but separated , it loseth the Goodness . And as a means , First , to their own salvation , it is not good , but rather condemneth them . Secondly , As to God's honour , if he make it a means in providence thereto , that 's no thanks to them . 

And if you did not now speak of the Notoriously Ungodly , but should suppose men to be near to the Kingdom of God , it doth not follow that therefore they must be baptised , because they have some good in them , ( for some good must go before the nearest aptitude ) nor yet that this good is the effect of Baptism in the unlawfully baptised ; or if it were occasioned by Baptism , it followeth not that therefore unmeet persons should in hope of it be baptised . Use God's means to his appointed Ends , and do not frame a course of means of your own heads for God's ends . For it is the means of his appointment and blessing that must succeed . 

Though I have done with the Question itself , yet I suppose it is not the least matter ; in reference to our practice , that is yet behind , though I shall dispatch it in brief . 

What the better are we to know that we may not baptise the children of the Notoriously ungodly , till we know who these are ; Let us therefore answer this Question , Whom must we take for Notoriously ungodly ? 

As in all that is gone before , I doubt not but I shall be thought too rigid ; so in this which followeth I as little question , but I shall be censured as too loose in my Doctrine , and charitable beyond the warrant of reason . But Truth is Truth , which I will search after as well as I can . 

And first on the Negative , I lay down these Propositions . 

Proposition . 1.  In General , We are not Certain of every man's ungodliness , whom we probably , strongly , and groundedly suspect to be ungodly . We may have more reason of fear than of hope concerning them , and yet not be able to conclude that they are certainly ungodly . Secondly , In General , It is not easy judging of the certainty of men's ungodliness at a distance , nor by some actual gross sins , till we have spoken to them , and admonished them , and discern what degree of obstinacy , and impentency , and wilfulness they are guilty of , or till we understand this certainly by those that have admonished them , and heard their Answers . Thirdly , It is hard judging of the certainty of a man's ungodliness by one , or two , or a few Actions , without knowing the course and scope of a man's life . Fourthly , I think it is few among a thousand of the common people that we can say are certainly ungodly , though we have reason to think that the most by far are so . more particularly Fifthly , A man must be guilty of more sin than Noah was , than Peter was in denying and forswearing Christ , that is notoriously ungodly : Yea than Lot was , who was drunk two nights together , and committed Incest with his own Daughters twice , & that after the miraculous destruction of Sodom , of his own Wife & his own miraculous deliverance . 

The Opinion of most of our Divines , is , that a man that is Notoriously Ungodly ( in the sense in hand ) or unsanctified , must be a greater sinner than Solomon was , 1 King. 11.  He loved many strange women of the Nations which God forbade the Israelites to join with ( such as Ez●a caused them to put away after Marriage : ) He kept three hundred Concubines , besides seven hundred Wives : When he was old his Wives turned away his heart after other gods , and his heart was not perfect with the Lord , as Davids was . He went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Sidonians , and after Milcom the abomination of the Amonites ; and he did evil in the sight of the Lord He built an high place for Chemosh the abomination of Moab in the hill that is before Jerusalem , and for Molech the abomination of the children of Ammon . And likewise did he for all his strange Wives , which burned Incense , and sacrificed to their gods . And the Lord was a●gry with him , because his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel , which appeared to him twice , and had commanded him that he should not go after other gods , but he kept not that which the Lord commanded : he kept not the Covenant nor Statutes of the Lord  

Perhaps you will Object , If this be not Notorious ungodliness , what is ? The sin was more heinous than Drunkenness , Fornication , yea or Murder itself ; to be an Idolater , and to set it up to defile the Land : and it was a sin lived in who knows how long ? besides his fleshly life , in having three hundred Concubines and seven hundred wives : If all this may stand with Godliness , than we cannot know any man to be ungodly , & then you will harden all the wicked in their presumption . Answ. 1.  If I should but look on it as a thing uncertain whether Solomon had true grace at that time , or whether any intercision were made in his Justification and true Sanctification , I should incur the heavy censure of many Divines . If I question not the certainty of his grace and perseverance , than I am supposed to make every common scandalous sinner to be fit for the reputation of a Saint , and to contradict the Apostle , who saith , If ye live after the flesh ye shall die ; and neither Whoremonger , nor Idolater shall inherit the Kingdom of God. What is to be done in this strait ? I will tell you plainly what I think safest , and let men think what they please . 1.  It is not improbable that Solomon committed much of this sin merely under temptation to please his Wives . 2.  And that more of it lay in tolerating their Idolatry , than in his own committing it . 3.  And that he did in other things continue his worship of the true God. 4.  And that he repented and wrote the Book Ecclesiastes on his Repentance , though the History make no mention of it . 5.  Yet because the Holy Ghost doth so expressly charge him with having his own heart turned after other gods , and going after them , and building high places to them , and his heart . turning from the Lord ] and because the very setting up of so many Idols for others ( his 700 Wives ) is itself so heinous , I think it is undeniable that he was an Idolater , and lived in that sin , besides his living with 300 Concubines , and taking so fully the pleasure of his flesh , as in Ecclesiastes he doth confess . We are certain that all these are heinous sins , and hazardous to a man's salvation . 

7.  If the Devil tempt any wicked man upon the consideration of this Example , to presume that he is in a state of Grace , and to think with himself [ why may not I live in whoredom , or drunkenness , or worldliness , and yet be in a justified estate , as well as Solomon , who did worse , ] he may do well to bethink himself that 1.  It is certain that he that liveth after the flesh shall die , and that such gross sinners shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. But we are not certain whether Solomon were justified and in a state of salvation at that time : it is a Controversy among wise godly learned men ; and many of the Ancient Father's thought that he was not . 3.  And therefore any prudent man will take heed of venturing his salvation upon such uncertainty ; and will look more at the certainty which is on the other side , of perishing if he live in such sins . 4.  And he may do well to consider , that though Godliness be the same in all Ages in the main , and equally necessary , yet some sins may be more damning at some time than other . In those days of Solomon God had for some just reasons permitted or connived at the multiplicity of Wives , and little is said against Concubines : he had in his promises to his people made the most full and express mention of temporal blessings , as Children , long Life , prosperity , etc. and in his threatenings most expressly mentioned temporal evils : Spiritual and Eternal things were mentioned more obscurely and sparingly . This Honour was reserved to Christ and the Gospel , to bring Life and Immortalty ( more ) to light , and to promise Spiritual and Eternal blessings , and threaten Spiritual and Eternal misery , more expressly and fully : And consequently some sins of the flesh might not then be so certain marks of ungodliness as now : and as it is a greater measure of spiritual refining and purity that is promised and justly expected under the Gospel , so a greater measure must be looked after , by every man in himself , and by the Guides of the Church in its members ; and we must go directly to Jesus Christ for our Direction in such Cases . So much to prevent the hurt of the wicked by this Example . 

Yet I thought it necessary to make mention of it , 1. because it is objected by the opposers of Discipline , whose Objections must be answered . 2. and because there is something in it ( at lest ad hominem ) that the over-censorious have reason to consider of , as to the point in hand . How far we must take notice of such Examples in Discipline , we shall further show anon . The rest of our propositions for the Negative shall be introduced by way of Answer to some Questions . 

Quest. 7.  May we not take a man for Notoriously Ungodly , that hath been oft drunk , or oft committed fornication ? Answ. The Practice is ungodly , and his Case sad ; but we cannot certainly say he is graceless on that account alone , unless he live in it impenitently . Let was twice drunk and incestuous : And it is not possible for us to say just how oft a man may commit such a sin , and yet have true grace . 

Quest. 8.  May we not be certain that he is graceless or ungodly , that is a frequent Swearer ? 

Answ. It is a very dangerous case ; but simply considered , no certain evidence of the point in question . For 1.  We know many that we see great signs of Grace in , and that are well reputed of as eminent for Godliness , that do frequently commit as great sins as some kind of rash swearing seems to be : For example , it is too rare to meet with a person so conscionable that will not frequently backbite , and with some malice or envy speak evil of those that differ from them in Judgement , or that they take to be against them , or that they are fallen out with : They will ordinarily censure them unjustly , and secretly endeavour to disgrace them , and take away their good name , and love those that join with them in it : So how many Professors will rashly rail and lie in their passions ? How few will take well a Reproof , but rather defend their sin ? How many in these times that we doubt not to be godly , have been guilty of disobedience to their Guides , and of Schism , and doing much to the hurt of the Church : A very great sin . 2.  Peter , Let , and its like David , did oft commit greater sins . 

Quest. 9  But what if they live many years in Sweeting , or the like sin , is not that a certain sign of Ungodliness ? 

Answ. It is very sinful and dangerous . But. 1. we know not what information or Conviction they have had of it , which much varies the Case . In some countries , where some oaths are grown customary , and of no great ill repute , it is possible for a godly man to be long guilty of them , as it is known that many well reputed of for Godliness , are in Scotland . 

Reputation doth much with many even that are Godly , to make sin seem great or small : with us now a Swearer is reputed so great a sinner , that he is reckoned with Adulterers , and Drunkards ; but Censoriousness , Backbiting , Church-division , disobeying those that rule over us in the Lord , spiritual Pride , etc. that are greater than some swearing , do not so brand a man , nor make him odious with us . But God judgeth not of sin thus by the custom of Countries , but according to the nature of the thing . In England a Sabbath-breaker is taken for a sin inconsistent with Grace : In the Low-countrieses , Helvetia , France and most other of the Reform Churches , much of it taken for no sin at all , but we are censured for superstitious herein . Every one is not ungodly there that life's and dies in that sin , without particular Repentance . Men that have not heard much of the evil of some petty oaths , may not understand the evil of them ; and custom may do much . And it is not inconsiderable , as to the extenuation of some men's sin , that it 's not a little doubtful whether it be indeed swearing , if a man do use those words which are the ordinary matter of an oath , and doth not know it to be an oath , nor intent the form of an oath in it : As if one use the terms of an oath in Latin or another Language which he understands not , he is not formally a Swearer : And if men do know it , and yet do not at that time intent any such thing as a calling any creature to witness , or appealing to them as sufficient to avenge a lie , but only use a customary term inobservantly , it is a sin ; but whether formally swearing , may be questioned . But if it be the Name of God that they abuse in swearing , or if they indeed put any creature in his stead , appealing to it as the Avenger of a lie or perjury , that is a heinous sin , and cannot easily be done in ignorance . 2.  It is judged by Divines that David lay a twelve month in his sin of Adultery and Murder unrepented of : Certain it is that he was long contriving and executing that horrid murder of Vriah , that his own shame might be covered , and he might enjoy his wife ▪ How long Asah or Solomon , sinned we know not : Nor can any man possibly determine just how long a man may live in the practice of such a sin , and yet have true special Grace , and a state of Justification . 

Qu. 10.  But what if they are Neglecters of God's Worship , as Prayer in their families , or the keeping of the Sabbath , or public hearing the Word , or godly discourse ; is it possible that in such there should be saving Grace ? They that love God will seek him in his Worship . 

Answ. It is not enough for the certain knowledge of a man's ungodliness , or gracelesness , to know that he neglecteth this duty of outward worship , unless it be known with what mind , and on what reasons he neglecteth it . For example , Many a man neglecteth Prayer in his Family , as supposing himself unable to perform it ; and that this alone is not a certain sign of gracelesness , appeareth thus . 1.  God hath not said that all that neglect it are graceless , or shall perish : As for the Text of Jer. [ Pour out thy wrath on the Heathens tha● know thee not , and the Families that call not on thy name ] it 's past question that by Families is meant Tribes or Nations , and calling on God's name , is put for [ Owning and Worshipping the true God ] without any mention of the special sort of prayer in a Family ( though I believe the dueness of that may be hence gathered . ) 2.  Many that we have reason to hope are godly , have of late years given over Family prayer , as supposing ( though very blindly ) that it is not a duty required by God. 3.  Many godly people do as much neglect Teaching their Families as some of these in question do Praying in their Families , and yet it is more expressly commanded , Deut. 6 & 11 , etc.  And for the Observation of the Sabbath , I answered before , that most of the Godly in the Reform Churches ( as far as I can learn by their writings , or by Report ) are against it in strictness : And therefore I suppose that sin is consistent with godliness And for [ Godly Discourse ] I would no godly people were not so neglective of it , that their company becomes too unprofitable thereby . Some are much disabled to good discourse by natural impediments , as Bashfulness , etc. want of words through ill Education , and disuse may hinder much . It is only those that privately live and converse with people , that will be able to judge of them certainly on this account , and not all such neither . 

And Lastly , For hearing the Word , it will not alone make a certain discovery : For 1. we know not what may keep a man away till we speak with him . 2.  it 's possible for a godly man to be of the opinion of the Separatists , that think it unlawful to hear our Ministers , or in our Assemblies , and having , no other to join with , may hear none at all ; as I have known it the case of some in the Bishop's times . So that the Certainty of Ungodliness is not discernible by this alone . 

Quest. 11.  But there are some that will scorn and deride or revile the Godly , yea and persecute them , where they have power : Is not that a certain Note of one Graceless ? 

Answ. It is one thing to scorn or persecute a Godly man , and another to scorn at Godliness : Or , it is one thing to persecute and scorn a man as he is Godly , directly on that account , and another thing to scorn and persecute him for something else ; as upon some personal falling out , or for some sin , or false opinion , or the like cause . The later can be no certain discovery of an Ungodly man  

Quest. 12.  But what if they deride and persecute Godliness itself , or a man because he is Godly ? 

Answ. It is certainly a heinous sin : But we must distinguish between the deriding of a man for the Essentials of Christianity , or for Godliness , as such ; and deriding him for some doctrine or practice of Godliness , which is not essential : also between a known Truth and Duty , and an unknown . It is too possible for a Godly man to persecute and deride the Godly for some Truths which he took to be Errors , or some Duties which he mistake to be Sins , or to be no Duties ; or for the manner of some Duties which he took to be wrong . Alas ay how common is it for the Separatists and Anabaptists ( many of them ) to deride our Ministry , Assembles and Duties : and many among us to deride theirs ? And they are the bitterest taunts and persecutions that come from blind zeal . These times have by sad experience convinced us , that men seeming otherwise Godly may both scorn ( in press and pulpit ) persecute and kill each other . As one Godly man may persecute another for some Truths and Duties , which he knows not to be such ; so in particular , it is possible that such may imagine that private Meetings tend to schism or proud singularity , and so may deride them : Or he may by strangeness to them entertain some false report of the stricter Professors of Religion , as if they were proud , humorous , schismatics , disobedient , and differed only in these things , and not in true piety from others . And I believe I have known some in former times that were such ; who had such thoughts as these of all the Godly that were not conformable , and of others that used any private Meetings , living where they had little acquaintance with any of them , save two or three that by scandals increased their prejudice , and hearing no better language of them , these persons would reproach them as bitterly as most that ever I heard , and yet themselves lived not only uprightly to men , but so piously , that they seemed to hate all profaneness , and spent more time in secret prayer and reading , then most I have known . It is not therefore all scorn or persecution of Godly persons , Doctrines , or Duties that will prove a man to be Notoriously Graceless or Ungodly . 

But again , left any Ungodly person take occasion of presumption from all this , let me add this much more : 1.  Though another cannot know such to be certainly ungodly , yet they may know it by themselves ; who know their own ends and reasons better than we can do . And ( alas ! ) the souls of such are never the safer , because we are bound to judge charitably of them . This is but to prevent our wronging them , but it will not prevent their damnation . 2.  Though we know them not to be certainly ungodly , yet God doth : and it is he that must judge them . And therefore he will put many a thousand out of heaven , whom we may not put out of the Church . When the Tares and Wheat are so mixed , that we cannot pluck up the Tares without plucking up the Wheat ( that is , in doubtful inevident cases ) there we must let both grow till the time of harvest ( both in forbearing persecution by the sword , and Excommunication : ) but than God will sever the wicked from the just , and gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend , and them that work iniquity , and cast them out into the lake of fire . 3.  And ourselves may see cause enough to bewail the misery of many as too probable , whom yet we cannot certainly conclude to be miserable : yea , we have cause to call them out of our communion : of which more anon . I must therefore entreat two sorts of Readers that they do not misinterpret these foregoing passages . First , The Ungodly are desired to beware that they pervert not this to their own delusion nor to the opening of their mouths against the teaching and censures of the Church . I cannot but foresee that such will be prone to draw venom out of necessary truths ; and to say , I may be godly and be saved , though I pray not in my family , though I swear , or be drunk , etc.  But such must know , 1.  That [ they cannot be saved , if in the bent of their lives they live after the flesh , and if God be not dearer to them than all the world , and if their hearts be not more on heaven than on earth , and if the main aim and business of their lives be not for God and the life to come ; nor can they be Godly or saved unless they truly hate their sin , and long to be rid of it , and are willing to be at the cost and labour of using Gods means by which they may be rid of it ; unless in the bent of their lives they overcome gross sin , and live not in it , and groan under their infirmities desiring to be rid of them feeling the need of a Saviour , and flying to his blood for pardon , and to his word and spirit for cure . ] All this must be in every one at age , that will be saved . Now though we may be uncertain of a man's ungodliness by one or more such falls as Peter's or Davids were , when the bend of his life appeareth to be holy ; yet if the bent of your lives be carnal , and you have not all this that I have now mentioned , than you may be sure that you are Graceless , though you never commit any scandalous sin ; much more when you live in them . 2.  And remember that you may know your own hearts and secret lives , when we cannot . it 's no comfort to you therefore that a Minister is not certain of your Gracelesness , if you be indeed Graceless : what if we must hope the best , who know not the worst ? alas this will be no relief to your souls . 

Nor should you be offended , if Ministers in preaching and personal reproof , do speak terror to you for all this : For 1. they preach to you as described in a graceless state and not named . 2.  They must tell you what every sin deserves , and whither it leads , and tell you of the sad probabilites of your damnable state , though they have not a certainty . 

2.  I foresee also that some Godly people will think that these passages , though true , may accidentally harden the wicked in their sin , and therefore that this will do more harm than good . To whom I say , 1.  That the wicked will draw evil from the most certain truths , and all must not be concealed which they will abuse . 2.  Yet I must confess , that my own heart made this Objection ; which caused me to think this Paper myself unfit to be published ; and so I did this two years lay it by : And had I not understood that from the Copy which I sent one friend , so many are communicated , and at such a distance into the hands of strangers , and that somewhat defective , and had I not been acquainted that they will print it , if I will not , it might have yielded still to this Objection for aught I know : for had I been left to my own choice , I should have laid it in the dark . 

Now for the Affirmative , I will show you , whom we may take for Notoriously ungodly : and then I will show you whom we must judge probably to be godly , and whether we must not exclude some persons , and refuse their Infants , who yet are not Notoriously ungodly . 

1.  A man that ( not inconsiderately , or in a Temptation but ) deliberately and obstinately denieth any fundamental Article of the Christian faith , is notoriously ungodly : for he cannot have a godly heart , that excludeth the necessary principles of Godliness from his head . I mean those Truths without which there is no salvation ; for surely without them there can be no Grace . He that denieth thus the God head , or the Goodness , Wisdom , or Power of God ; or the Incarnation , Holiness , Death , Ransom of man thereby , Resurrection , Rule , or Judgement of Jesus Christ , or the everlasting life that he giveth to Believers , or the necessity of our holiness and Obedience to him : He that denieth the Holy Ghost , the Truth of his Miracles by which he sealed Christ's Doctrine , or the necessity of his Sanctification : this man is Notoriously ungodly , if he Notoriously deny these : for he professeth ungodliness itself ; So doth he that denieth Christ hath any Church on earth , and that denieth to have communion with his Church . 

2.  That man is notoriously ungodly , that is notoriously utterly ignorant of God and his son Jesus Christ , of the Goodness , Wisdom or Power of God ; of the Incarnation , Death and Resurrection of Christ , and his Redemption of us hereby : of the necessity of Faith and Holiness , and of the evil of sin , and of the everlasting blessedness that is promised to the Saints . I will now only say , ( excluding not the rest ) that the Ignorance of any one of these is inconsistent with true Godliness . But I must tell you anon , that there is need of much wariness in judgeing of such Ignorance . 

3.  All those are Notoriously ungodly , that do Notoriously , upon Deliberation , and with Obstinacy , profess that they will not take God for their God and Governor ; or that they will not take Christ for their Redeemer and Lord , nor be Ruled by him , nor Trust in him for pardon and salvation ; or that they will not believe his word , nor will be sanctified by his Spirit . 

4.  All those are Notoriously ungodly , that deliberately , and ordinarily , when they are themselves , do Notoriously profess that they set more by the Pleasures , Profits , or Honours of this world , than by the promised Blessedness in the life to come : and that they will not part with these for the hopes of that Blessedness . 

5.  All those are such also , who , though in the general they will say , that they will be Ruled by God , saved by Christ , Sanctified by the Holy Ghost , and guided by God's Laws , yet when it comes to particulars , do deliberately in their ordinary frame profess that they will not part with their known sins , at the command of God , but resolve to displease him rather than obey . 

6.  Such also are all those , that though in general they profess to prefer Heaven before Earth , yet when it comes to practice and trial , do Notoriously , and deliberately in their Habituated frame profess , that they will not let go particular known sins for the hopes of Heaven . 

7.  Such also are all they , who living in gross sin , and being convinced of it , will not promise a sincere endeavour to reform : nor will remove from or put away the removable occasions which draw them to sin : nor will be persuaded to use those known means which God hath commanded for the curing of their sin ; as to hear the Word , to change their Company , to confess their sin , and take shame to themselves , and profess Repentance . They that Notoriously thus refuse Reformation , when by Ministers or discreet Christians they are urged to it , or that refuse Gods means which they are convinced he requireth of them , and this obstinately , are notoriously ungodly , though they do not profess it in words : For though it be exceeding hard to determine how great , many , or long , the sins of a true Believer may be , yet we are certain that he cannot manifest such a Love to them , or Habituated unwillingness to be cured of them . For that will not stand with true Repentance . 

8.  All those are Notoriously ungodly , that profess or express notoriously a Hatred of those that would draw them from their sins , ( not for their harsh or indiscreet management of a reproof , nor upon a mere mistaken conceit that the Reprover oweth him ill will , but ) on that very account , because they would draw them from known sin . For this is Notorious impenitency , and shows a Love of sin , and the Reign of it in the William  

9  All those are Notoriously ungodly , who do by Scorns , threatenings , Persecutions , or otherwise Notoriously express a Deliberate , Habituated Hatred prevailing in their hearts , against God , Christ , the Spirit , the Scripture , or Godly men because they are godly , that is , because they do Believe , love God , and live a Holy life , and obey God in those things which they are convinced that he commands . For this shows that Ungodliness prevaileth in the heart . 

10.  All those are Notoriously ungodly , that being convinced that its a Duty to pray , to hear the Word , to mind the Life to come , and prefer it before this , and to live a holy Life , do yet so far dislike all this , or any of this , that they profess themselves resolved never to practise it , and that they will venture their souls , come on 't what will , rather than they will make so much ado , or live such a life ; yea , though they will not profess this , yet if they will not on the contrary be persuaded to profess that they resolve to live such a life , and will not be drawn actually to the practice of it in their endeavours ; thereby manifesting that it is not so much for want of Ability , as from a predominant unwillingness to be Holy in Heart and Life : I say , if this be Notorious , then is it Notorious that these people are ungodly : and accordingly to be judged and used by the Church . 

Though I understand that many think that it is too rigid to go so far as I have already done in maintaining the Negative of the former Question ; yet I think it necessary to go further , and to determine , that [ It is our Duty to refuse to baptise the Children of more th●n the Notoriously Ungodly . ] 

If you would know who else it is that we must exclude or refuse , remember that before I told you of Excommunication from 1.  A particular Church ; for some reason proper thereto or to some more , but not common to all . 2.  From all Incorporated Congregations , as such . 3.  From the society of Christians , as such : and that this last is either for a time because of the scandalousness of the sin , and the credit of the Gospel with those without , though we may yet see signs of Repentance in the sinner . 2.  Or for the Infectiousness of the sin as a Leprosy : As if a man take himself bound to persuade all men to some greater and dangerous Error , which yet may stand with Grace and Salvation , but makes it very difficult and much hindereth it ; and if no means can convince this man of his Error , nor take him off ; this is a kind of a Heretic , who must be excluded from all Christian Communion ▪ but is not certainly and notoriously graceless . 3.  There is also exclusion from the society of all Christians , upon an evident Proof that the man is no true Christian ; that is , that he is Notoriously an Unbeliever or Ungodly person : This I have spoken to all this while . 4.  But then there is also an exclusion upon a violent Presumption , or very strong Probability , though short of a Certainty that such a man is graceless or ungodly . 

Hereupon I lay down what I take to be the Truth , in the Propositions following . 

Proposition 1.  I may not deny the right of the Infant to Baptism merely because the Parents are excluded from one or more particular Churches : because Baptism doth necessarily and directly enter them among the number of Christians , but not into any one particular Church . And therefore I will not forbid or dissuade the baptising of such . 

Pr●position 2.  Yet do I take it to be no duty of mine to baptise any such more than any other Ministers , further than I have a special Call or Reason : For Example : Here live some hundred in this Parish , that upon public Proposal , Whether they take me for their Pastor , and themselves for members of this Church ? do disown it , or not own it , when they are told that their owning or declaring it shall be taken as the sign to know it ; I take myself no more bound to baptise their children than any strangers else : For I cannot be their Pastor whether they will or not ; nor can I take them for any special charge of mine , that will not take themselves to be so , nor take me for their Pastor . Therefore they can no more blame me than any stranger , if I refuse to baptise their children : Though yet I deny not their right to Baptism . 

I am not bound to baptise all the children in the Country ; and therefore not theirs . 

Proposition 3.  It ordinarily falls out that a Minister hath more work to do in his own special charge than five men are able to do : So that he cannot bestow so much time as to Baptise the children of others and to take an account of them concerning their Faith or Profession ( such as is more necessary from strangers , and refusers of Discipline , than others ) without neglecting some duty to his own Charge the while : While I am speaking to them , there are twenty poor souls of my own Charge that call for my help . And I am more strictly tied to those of my special charge than to others . 

Proposition 4.  Yet in case that , for the avoiding of offence , or for an advantage to win them to a better temper , or the like reason , I see any special cause for it , I doubt not but I must rather omit a lesser duty to my own Charge , than a greater to others . 

Proposition 5.  If a man reject Church-communion , or withdraw himself from one Church upon a reason common to all Churches as Incorporated , ( as for Example , because he will not be under any Discipline ) he gives us reason to question his very Christianity : And therefore we must call him to accounted on what grounds he doth this : And if the grounds are found such as are consistent with Christianity , we may not deny the right of his Infants to Baptism : though ourselves may have no Call to baptise them . 

Proposition 6.  If the Parents do either produce no Title to the baptising of their child , that is , do not seem Christians or Godly ; Or if they give us grounds of a violent presumption that their profession is false and sergeant , in either of these cases , as we are to exclude them from Christian communion , so are we to refuse the baptising of their children , that is , to suspend both , till such a Title be showed , or till the grounds of that strong presumption be removed : Although we may not declare such persons to be no members of the universal Church , nor absolutely deny their children to have any Right in the Covenant , or fundamentally and remotely to Baptism ; as not being certain , that their Parents are in a Graceless ungodly state . 

This last Proposition is it that I am now to give my Reasons of . For indeed it is a matter of such exceeding difficulty , to conclude another man to be certainly graceless , that it is not one of multitudes , nay , it is but few of the commonly scandalous gross sinners that we should be able to prove it by ( which I desire the Cesorious well to consider of . ) But yet a strong presumption we may have of more that they are graceless , and thereupon may suspend them and their Children , as is said before . 

Arg. 1.  If the Parent have given just cause for us to question his own Christianity , and Right to Christian communion thereupon , then hath he given us sufficient cause to question his child's right to Baptism : ( and so to suspend the baptising it : ) But the Antecedent is confessed : For our dissenting brethren in this case will suspend , yea excommunicate the Parent . Ergo . 

The reason of the Consequence is clear , in that the Right of the Infant to Baptism is merely on the Parent's account , and on supposition of his Right to Membership of the Universal Church . If therefore his Right be justly questioned , and ●e suspended , than the Infants Right must be questioned , and it suspended on the same ground . For Baptism Sealeth a right of Union , and putteth into actual communion of the Body Catholic . 

Argum. 2.  We ought not to dispense God's Seals and Church-priviledges to any without a produced Title : ( Else we must give them to all , that we can . ) But for the baptism of such men's children , as are aforementioned , there can be , or is , no Title produced ; Ergo.  

The Major , is further clear , in that Non esse & non Apparere , are to us all one : For it must be discernible to us by some evidence . or else it is naturally impossible for us to know it . 

For the Minor , its clear that if the Parent's Title to membership be questionable the Infants is so too : because the ground is the same , and it is from the Parent that the Infant must derive it : and no man can give that which he hath not . 

Argum 3.  In civil Administrations , and according to the Rules of right Reason , a very high probability , commonly called Violenta Praesumptio , sufficeth to sentence and execution : especially when it is but in the withdrawing or suspending of a Privilege . Therefore it must be so here . Because 1. here is no reason to put a difference . 2.  Because our distance from other men's hearts , doth in most cases make us uncapable of more . Impenitency and infidelity lie within : and we cannot know them but by their signs and fruits . And 3.  It is their fault in giving occasion of such presumption , and in being so like the ungodly , if we deny them the Privileges of the Godly ; and not our fault . The Antecedent is clearly known . If a man be known to bear another malice , and be found standing by him with a bloody sword , the person being murdered , the Judge will justly condemn him for the murder ; though yet it be not absolutely certain that he did it . If a man be found nudus in lecto cum nuda , he shall be judged a Fornicator or Adulterer , though it be uncertain . So in other cases . 

Argum. 4.  If such violent presumption must not stand for sufficient proof for such suspension of parent and child , than all Discipline ( and all civil justice , if it be not so there ) will be eluded . For then , ( as no vice almost , or but few , will be punished among men , nor few men have right ) so , almost no ungodly or scandalous sinners , or few that aught , will be excluded or suspended : And the fruit of Discipline , its like , will be judged scarce worth the trouble , so few causes will be brought , as will bring it to be strange . 

But Discipline must not be so eluded . Ergo.  

Argum. 5.  Christ telleth us , that by their Fruits we should know them : therefore by fruits of Godliness or ungodliness we must judge of men as Godly or Ungodly , as to these acts of administration and communion . We must judge that to be a Vine which hath Grapes , and that to be no Thistle that hath Figgs . We judge not usually of the certainty of men's Impenitency , or Infidelity , but of the strong probability . it 's possible a man's own words may be false . 

Argum. 6.  We must admit of a weak presumption , or probability for admitting men to Privileges : therefore we may admit of strong presumption for denying them . If we must take a probability in one , then in the other : only allowing the difference , as aforesaid , that we must have a stronger presumption for denying , than for granting is necessary . For we must be content with lesle evidence for a man , than against a man  

Quest. 1.  But what is that we may take for a sufficient reason of a man's claim ? And. 2 Quest ▪ What must we take for a violent presumption , of the unsoundness of his claim ? 

To the first I say in brief ; 1.  If a Heathen that yesterday was guilty of the grossest sin , do come to me this day , and with seeming sorrow confess his fault , and with seeming seriousness profess to believe in God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost ; that is , to believe all the essential Articles of Christian Religion , and profess his consent to take God for his only God , and portion ; Christ for his only Redeemer , and the Holy Ghost for his Sanctifier , renouncing the World , Flesh , and Devil ; I shall take this Verbal profession for a sufficient Reason of his claim , unless any just Bar of exception be put in against him to invalidate it . 

2.  The same Title I shall take for valid for the Baptism of his Infants . 

3.  If a man have made the same profession , and after long continuance in the Church doth offer his Child to Christ in Baptism , and offer to renew that profession , and enter his child into the same Covenant , I shall suppose his claim just , till some sufficient reason be brought to prove it unjust . 

1.  I find that the Apostles took such a profession as a sufficient proof of the justice of the claim , at the Parents own baptism : Not as being itself the Condition ( called by many , the Title ) but as being such an evidence of the Title to us , as we are bound to accept . 2.  In equity and reason if the condition of a man's interest ( or his Title , as they call it ) do lie in the heart , out of man's reach , we must take his own profession as evidence sufficient , unless he give himself the lie , and give us other reason to discredit him . If a man say he is a Believer , and profess himself to be a godly man , that is , a Lover and Honourer of God ; I will take him for a Believer , and a godly man , till I can disprove his profession . I am not not bound to believe an evident Lie : but I am bound to believe a man till the falsehood of his speeches be evident . Charity believeth all ( such ) things ; and thinketh not evil without sufficient evidence . I need not go to a man's life for his evidence of his first Title . And for his Right to after-communion and privileges ; though other men's Testimony of a Godly conversation be a good confirmation , yet I am not always bound to seek or require that , nor yet to have a personal knowledge of it : But if any from his life will bring a cross evidence to disprove his own verbal profession of faith and obedience , I will take it into consideration . 

And I could wish that all Christians would proceed according to this Rule , and call no man ungodly when they cannot prove h●m to be such , at least , so far as to a strong presumption : But that they would take all for Godly that say they are Godly , till they can disprove them . I know they will say , than you will miscall men , and call those Godly that are not , and then you must not difference the Precious from the Vile : this is large charity indeed . To which I answer 1.  We call them but what they seem ; and 2. what God warranteth us to call them , the Apostles telling such themselves , that they [ were all the Sons of God by faith , heirs , saints , justified , etc. ] Gal. 3. CITIZEN  Cor. 1.1 . & 6.2 . We difference as far as we have evidence to lead us ; and further we must not . As I said before , we must imitate God in this : where the mixture is such that the Tares cannot be pulled up without pulling up the Corn , both must grow together till the Harvest : we must not think to difference so exactly , and search and sift so near to the bran , as God will then do . If the case be so uncertain and inevident , that we may on such Grounds condemn the Righteous with the wicked , we must let Righteous and wicked go together as if all were Righteous , and call the whole field a Corn field , for all the Tares . 

Obj. then must we judge falsely , for we must judge men to be what they are not . Answ. 1.  If it were so , it is no sin in you , but in them that profess falsely . When ever you judge the most glorious hypocrite to be Godly , you judge falsely ; but not sinfully : for every mistake is not our sin . 2.  But I say you are not to judge falsely neither . For you are not to judge that it is certain that these are Godly men , but only that its probable . And note well , that there is a difference to be made within the Church , between the better and worse Members , as well as between the Church and those without . And observe , that there are diverse degrees of this probability of men's sincerity : some do so fully second their profession by a Godly life , that we have a very strong confidence of their sincerity ( though not a certainty ) . Some do give us some good hopes , but not so strong a persuasion . Some are so dull and negligent , and faulty in their lives , that we have much fear of their perdition , though we are bound because of their profession , to keep up some hopes of them , as being not without some probability of their honesty . I doubt the common sort of Christians are but such as these . And therefore we may even in the Church preach for men's Conversion and Regeneration : because though we know not certainly who they be that are unregenerate , yet we know that many such there are that profess Religion , and have great cause of fear and jealousy concerning many in particular . So that we must place a great difference between those whom we must permit in the same Church-communion and must administer the same Sacraments to : we rejoice in our hopes of some : we have much fear of the condemnation of others . Yet if it come not to a strong or violent presumption grounded on sufficient evidence , we may not suspend or cast them out . 

In a word , it is a verbal profession seemingly serious , and not again contradicted by a cross profession of word or action , that is the evidence of men's Interest in Church-priviledges , particularly of the Baptism of their Infants . 

Quest. What take you for a sufficient disproof of a verbal profession ? or a ground for such a violent presumption that a man doth lie and dissemble , and is no Christian ? 

Answ. I mentioned you ten particulars before , on which we may judge men Notoriously ungodly . Look over those again , and ye may see what to take for a violent presumption . 

1.  A man that denyeth any Essential part of Christian Religion , though we are uncertain whether he do it resolvedly and deliberately , yet if he will not upon sufficient invitation , reverse that denial , and profess Repentance of it ; Or if upon a just call a man refuse to profess his Belief of the Christian faith ; It is ground of a violent presumption that he is no Christian or godly man  

2.  Those that are not only unable to give any account of their knowledge of the Essentials of Religion , but also do by their contrary answers ( when we put them but to affirm or deny ) show that they understand them not , and this often , though its possible they may be amazed , or oblivious , yet it 's a violent presumption that they are utterly ignorant of the Essentials . 

And here I advice all to be very tender how they exclude people on point of mere ignorance , if they 1. are but able in private , to those that they are familiar with , to give a tolerable account of essentials . 2.  Or if they answer truly with a [ yea ] or a [ Nay ] when you contrive the matter into your question . 3.  And if they be diligent in the use of means , and willing to Learn and live uprightly . And to this purpose consider of these things following . 1 Fundamentals or essentials are but few . 2.  Many poor people are of such natural bashfulness , or hesitancy , that they cannot speak what they know . 3.  Specially when Rustical education increaseth it . 4.  And especially when it is in public , or to a Minister whom they reverence . 5.  There are indigested ruder Conceptions , which may be found , and yet not form ready for expression , even in some that can speak well . We see some Ministers in Examinations too deficient : And the best find sometime a light which they cannot utter : and the force of a reason in their minds , which is no whit ready for the tongue . 6.  Scripture examples in this point observed would moderate us . What did the Apostles require ? 7.  He that gives a true [ Yea ] or a [ Nay ] shows that he believes the Truth . 8.  He that in his life seeks heaven before earth , shows that he knows it to be better than earth . I speak these things but to moderate some men . I add 9  It is commonly as much the Ministers fault , that he hath not a satisfactory Answer , as the persons . I have noted it , that most Ministers , either speak roughly or indiscreetly , discouragingly , provokingly , or of things not essential ; and that it is a matter requiring greater wisdom than most have , to draw out the minds of the most ignorant sort of our people . 10.  And if they know not the essentials , may we not help them to a tolerable knowledge of them at the present , before we part with them ? At least , we should try . 

3.  While men do wilfully delay upon a sufficient Call to profess their Consent to the matters in the third Article ( forementioned ) viz. to take God for their God , Christ for their Saviour , the Spirit for their Sanctifier , the Word for their Rule , we must delay our using them as Godly . 

4.  He that professeth to esteem this world more than that to come , add reverseth it not , though we know not certainly whether he spoke it deliberately , must be presumed ungodly till he reverse it . 

5.  He that professeth not to leave his known sins , but rather to venture on God's displeasure , though its possible he may speak it hastily in a temptation , yet is to be presumed ungodly till he manifest Repentance , that he is now of another mind . 

6.  So they that profess that they will venture or lose their Interest in Heaven , rather than forsake their sins , till they repent manifestly of this , are to be presumed to be ungodly . 

7.  So they that live constantly in the commission of gross sins , though they profess Repentance , and promise Reformation , yet have over and over broke their promises , and still continue in the sin , such men's words are not any more to be credited ( else all Discipline may be eluded ) till they actually reform : And though we cannot certainly tell just how much gross sin may stand with Grace : yet because we must judge by probable evidence , and the Apostle telleth us that such shall not inherit the Kingdom of God , and that if we live after the Flesh we shall die , we must presume that men are what they appear to be . Had we such a man as Solomon in his sin to deal with , we ought to use him as an ungodly man , I think . So those that have lately committed scandalous Notorious sin , and will not on sufficient persuasion manifest any satisfactory repentance for it : we must presume them ungodly till they will manifest repentance : For we know , except they repent they shall perish ; and an undiscovered repentance is to us as none . And our Divines at Dort conclude , that though a Godly man loose not his Justification by gross sinning , yet he contracts such an incapacity of coming to heaven in that state that must be removed by repentance , or else he could not be saved . 

8.  Those that will not harken to them that would admonish them , but refuse to obey their counsel for the forsaking of known sin , and also despise and abuse them merely for that : Though its possible this may be as As● did in a temptation , yet we must presume till he repenteth , that he is ungodly ; for we know , that he that being oft reproved hardeneth his neck , shall be destroyed without remedy : specially when it is a Minister of acknowledged sobriety and authority that doth reprove ; and the Reproof hath nothing in it that should seem injurious . 

9  Those that do deride or slander or persecute the generality of Godly men about them , for their apparent Godly practices , in matters of weight in Religion : though its possible in a Temptation they may do it upon some misreports and mis-apprehensions , yet till they manifest repentance , we have sufficient reason to presume that they are ungodly men . So for those that evidently endeavour the disgrace or extirpation of Godliness . 

10.  Those that either profess to take a godly life as an unnecessary , or that being convinced , or having full evidence which might convince them , do yet refuse to hear the word , to pray at all , to seek heaven in the first place , to hold communion with any Christian Church , or to be guided by the Ministers of Christ according to his Word , while they refuse to perform these necessary parts of Christian duty , after due admonition , and give no tolerable reason of their refusal , are groundedly to be presumed to be persons ungodly . 

Object . But ( I know some dissenting brethren will say ) what a Labyrinth do you bring the Church into on your grounds ? while we must judge of men's sincerity , we are left at uncertainty ; and who knows among all these difficulties whom to judge godly , and whom ungodly ? Thus Ministers are made Lords of the Consciences of men , or enabled to tyrannize . 

Answ. 1.  Where the case is most Notorious , there needeth no Judge . Where the Probabilities are such as require a Determiner , it is the Ministers Office : and a main part of his work , of necessity to the Church , and not to be called or accounted Tyranny . 2.  But , it is an easy matter to cavil at large against almost any cause ; Destructive arguing is the easiest . But incommodum non solvit Argumentum . The thing I would see is a better way . Do our brethren's Grounds afford us any better footing ? Quest. 1.  Will you take any verbal profession as a title , or not ? If any whatsoever ; then if a man tell you I will come such a day , and in scorn to Christ profess Christianity , or if he tell you when he hath done , I did but dissemble , for fear or favour , or if he deride while he doth it , or contradict it in other words , you will take it for good . Or if a man come drunk to present his child in Baptism ( as they have done to me to require it ) Or if he fall a swearing and cursing at the Ordinance : Or say , I will never be ruled by Christ or Scripture : If any profession must serve , than these ; But I hope not so . If not any whatever ; then , 1.  Tell us how you will distinguish ; will you not reject all that is apparently lying ? How will you difference between Truth and a lie ? what cross evidence will you take for currant ? tell us that we may also know . If only words , than what if a man worship actively the Sun or Moon , while verbally he makes the Christian profession ? will it not disable and discredit his profession with you ? what if he have for twenty years ( OH that I had none such near me ) been drunk , once a week or fortnight , and sometime thrice a week , and still confess it and promise amendment ? Is his word to be taken ? 2.  If you were to baptise an Aged man , that comes new into Christianity would not you be the judges whether his profession seemed serious or not ? and proceed on mere probabilities , as well as we ? 3.  Do you not in admitting persons to the Lords Supper , make yourselves judges whether his profession be serious , yea and take in his conversation for evidence ? and are you not put in all this upon the same uncertainties , and to the use of probabilities as we ? 4.  So you do , I suppose in excommunication for impenitency : Or at least , in case of absolution of the penitent , will not you be judges on probable grounds , whether his Repentance seem serious ? and take a violent presumption as ground for some determinations ? Yet I hope in all this you are no tyrants . There is a necessity of a standing Ministry to decide such matters , and rule the Church : therefore are such matters to be decided by them . 

The fourth Disputation . Whether any besides Regenerate Believers have a Right to the Sacraments given them by God , and may thereupon require them and receive them . WE take it for granted , that the Right of Infants is upon the account of their Parent's Faith , and Dedication of themselves and theirs to God ; and that they are uncapable themselves of requiring the Sacraments : And therefore we shall make but little mention of them in this Dispute ; but manage it with special respect to the Adult , seeing the Case of Infants will be that way best resolved . 

We mention [ Regenerate Believers ] to signify those men who perform that Faith which is the condition of the Gospel-promise ; commonly called justifying or saving Faith.  

By Sacraments we mean Baptism , or the Lord's Supper . 

The principal thing that needeth Explication , is the word [ Right . ] And it signifieth diverse things according to the several Objects and Acts to which it is related . 1.  A man may give Right to a Benefit , and another receive it diverse ways . Either by a Premiant Law , if he be a Superior in Rule ; or by a Testament , promise , or other Donation or Deed of Gift ; or by Sale , Exchange , or other contract by way of commutation . The last is nothing to our case , as the Right is made over to us ; for we could not purchase it , though the Right that Christ hath to convey it , may be fitly said to be due in Commutative Justice , as being purchased by him . The Right which we have to Benefits from God , is always by free Donation ( for we are capable of no other ; ) and by a Donation that partaketh of the nature of a Law : This Deed of Gift is called a Promise , Testament , Covenant , etc. in Scripture ( for the single promise of God , is oft called a Covenant ) the Nature of this Right to Benefits consisteth in the Debitum habendi , the Dueness of them to the person from another . 

This Right is said to be Given , because it is itself a Benefit , as being Right to a Benefit ; and the Party is said to have it . 

2.  Another kind of Right to Benefit , is that which accidentally and indirectly ariseth from another man's Duty : As e. g. the Physician of an Hospital , commands his Apothecary to give so much of such a precious Cordial to every one of his Patient's who fainteth or falls into a Lipothymie , but not to the rest : Some of the Patients that they may partake of the Cordial , pretend to faint or swoon : The Apothecary doth his best to discern whether they dissemble , and cannot discern it : Hereupon it is his duty to give it these as well as to others , because he that commanded the Administration intended not that he should know the heart , or be infallible , but should proceed according to his best skill and judgement , or else he must do nothing : So that esse & apparere , & non esse & non apparere , is all one to him . The dissembling of the Patient doth accidentally occasion , or cause it to be his duty to give him the Cordial : And when it is become his duty to Give it , the Patient may so far be said to have Right to it , as that he may justify his demand before any Physicians that are unacquainted with his dissimulation , and the Apothecary had truly a Right or Power to give it , and may justify it before any . Yet this is but improperly called A Right to the Cordial , and properly it is but to be the Object of the Just Action of the Administer . For though the Apothecary had warrant to administer it upon a claim , though wrong , yet the Patient had no Right to warrant his claim ; and therefore his claim itself being unjust for want of Antecedent Right , it could not give him a proper subsequent Right , though in the common judgement of undiscerning men , he had Right . 

3.  A kind of Right in a Benefit may be conveyed by Actual Physical Application , without moral conveyance of Title : As if I cast a Garment over a mad man that strips himself naked , while it is on him , he may ( but improperly ) be said to have Right in it : which is but properly non injust uti ; it is no injustice in him to use it while you permit him . But this is nothing to our present Case . 1.  Because it is not an Antecedent Right to the thing , but a subsequent Right in the thing when they have it ; and is no ground of claim before hand , the party having no Antecedent Title : But our Case concerneth an Antedent Title ; or else the question would be only whether Sacraments be Dorid to such when they have them . 2.  Because this is not proper Right . 3.  Because even this non injustè possidere , never falls out to be the Case of the unsanctified unbelieving Soul ; because it is not bare providential disposal that casteth Sacraments upon him like the rain from Heaven , but it is his own unjust claim and seeking that antecedeth and causeth his possession , so that we may dismiss this from our further enquiry . And there is ( that I remember ) no other way of conveying Right to Benefits which can possibly concern our Case , than these abovementioned : and therefore I may suppose that here is a sufficient Enumeration . If any would make a Contract or mutu●l Covenant to be a different way , they are deceived : For as our covenanting Act conferreth not the Benefit , but is only a condition of God's Collation , ( else a man should give it to himself . ) so the covenanting act on God's part is by the fore-described free Donation ; and it is only by the standing promise , which is not altered when we consent , though only than it become effectual , because that consent is the condition of its efficacy . 

So much concerning the Right to Benefits , and the debitum habendi , or antecedent Title . 

The next kind of R●ght is that which respecteth not Benefits , but our own Action's . And this Right or Justness of Actions , is 1.  Of the Actions of an Officer or Administrator , which is Autoritas agendi , and proceedeth from a Commission , or a command which is equivalent . 2.  The Actions of a subject as such in Obeying ; which is Officium , or Debitum agendi , commonly called Duty . This resulteth from the preceptive part of every Law. And so every man hath a Right to do his Duty ; which strictly is but to say , It is right that he do it , or it is due from him to God , or he is obliged to it . 3.  The third sort of Actions are such as are neither commanded nor forbidden , but either the Law meddleth not with them , and so negatively permitteth them , or else it expressly maketh them indifferent , and so positively permitteth them , such we say a man may rightfully do ; which is indeed neither necessarily , nor sinfully ; but only the things are Licita , such as may be done . 

To apply these to our present Case ; It is evident that none of these are meant in our present Question . For 1. the Question is not , whether it be lawful to a Minister to give the Sacrament to any that is unregenerate : For , supposing that they require it , this is out of doubt ; and we may justly ( though with due limitations and conditions ) excite them to desire it , while we know them not to be unregenerate , or persuade them to do it with Faith and Repentance . 2.  Nor yet is it any of our Question , whether the Action of Receiving be commanded to any that are unregenerate , and so be his Duty ? Though this Question being as necessary to our End , as that propounded , I shall also speak anon to the decision of it . 3.  Nor is it any of our question , whether Sacramental Reception be merely quid licitum , or an indifferent thing to them : For this is not pretended . 

Our Question is then 1. of the Benefit directly , and of the Duty but consequentially . 2 and of the Debitum habendi directly , and but consequently of the Debitum agendi . 3. and of the Title which is the foundation of Right , or of an Antecedent Right to the benefit , even a Right that may warrant before God a claim ; and not of a mere subsequent Right in it ; much lesle of a Possession without proper Right , or of a being an Object of the just Action of another . 4.  It is of a Right given by God , and not of any thing which they may call a Right that cometh another way . 

Before I come to the Negative of the Question , which I shall maintain , I shall lay down what is easily granted the Opponent in these few Propositions following . 

Prop. 1.  God hath bestowed Christ with his Benefits , Justification , Adoption , Sanctification , and Right to Sacraments ; Conditionally upon all ( at least , that hear that word : ) Even Infidels , Heathens , Persecutors of Christianity , that never had a thought of accepting Christ.  

Prop. 2.  Ministers may and must give the Sacraments to many Professors of saving Faith and Repentance , who have not the Faith or Repentance which they profess , supposing that these shall require the Sacraments at their hands . 

Prop. 3.  These Hypocrites may have right to the Sacraments in foro Ecclesiae ; that is , Ecclesiâ Judice : which is no more than this , that their pretence of a true Right before God , is such as the Church cannot judge to be false , and therefore is bound to administer the Sacraments to them , as to men who seem to have that proper right , as far as they can judge . 

Prop. 4.  If it shall after be discovered that the party had no proper right , but that the Church was mistaken in their judgement , it will not follow that therefore the external Baptism was or is Dorid , or to be readministred , though it reaches not its main ends . 

Prop. 5.  Infidels , Heathens , Turks , are obliged to seek to be baptised , and to receive the Lords Supper ; that is , to become true Believers , and then to seek and receive the Sacraments . 

Prop. 6.  When the Church administereth Sacraments to Hypocrites , as they do but their duty , so God approveth their action , as knowing they do their duty : And therefore so far as that comes to the improper Right Coram Ecclesià , is also Coram Deo. As in the foresaid Comparison : If the Physician knew his Patiented to dissemble , that he might have his Cordial , and the Apothecary did not know it , the Physician will justify his Apothecary in his Administration . So will God justify the foresaid Administration of his Sacraments , and acknowledge the Hypocrite to be the Object of our just tradition . 

For the Negative ; Prop. 1.  God hath not given by promise , Testament , or any other Deed of Gift , a proper Title to Sacraments to any that have not saving Faith and Repentance ( and their seed ) which Coram Deo , will warrant them to require and receive them . 

Prop. 2.  God hath not commanded or allowed any that have not saving faith , to seek or receive the Sacraments , in that condition ; but hath made it the order of their Duty , first to Repent and Believe , and then to seek and receive the Sacraments . 

These two Propositions I shall now briefly , but sufficiently prove . The first hath in it three parts , 1.  That God hath not made any Deed of Gift of Sacraments or right to Sacraments to any that are short of saving Faith , ( save the seed of the faithful ) 2.  That therefore such have no title to Sacraments Coram Deo , that can properly be so called . 3.  That therefore they cannot lawfully Claim and Receive them ( though if they claim them we may lawfully Administer them ) To avoid confusion , I shall take these distinctly . 

1.  That God hath made no Promise or Deed of Gift of Sacraments or Right to them , to any that are short of saving faith , or on any lower Condition than saving Faith , I prove : 

Arg. 1.  There is none such to be found in Scripture . Therefore God hath made none such . We have long expected the production of any such Gift or Promise ; and yet none is produced : Which is likely would have been if it could have been found . And if it be not in Scripture , it is nowhere . 

Arg. 2.  If the Promise or grant of Right to Sacraments be made on any Condition besides saving faith , then 1. either on the Condition of the Profession of that Faith ; 2. or on the Condition of a real inferior faith ; or 3. on Condition of the Profession of that inferior faith . But none of these three . Ergo . 

The Enumeration will be acknowledged sufficient by them that we have now to deal with . And 1.  That the bare profession of saving Faith is never made the condition of any Promise or Deed of Gift , by which a Title to Baptism is conveyed , appeareth , 1.  In that none such are found in all the Scripture : God nowhere saith , If thou wilt but profess or say th●t thou believest , thou shalt be baptised , or have Right to Sacraments ( though the Church must administer them on that Profession ) 2.  Else God should command a man to lie , or justify him in it , and make a lie the condition of his mercies . Though every duty be not the condition of Justification , yet every such condition is a duty , and every duty is commanded ; and God doth not Command any man to lie , or to profess to be what he is not , or do what he doth not , or have what he hath not . Much lesle will he make this the condition of his promises . 

Object . God commands both Believing and Profession ; therefore Profession is part of their duty ; and their sin is not that they Profess , but that they do not Believe . 

Answ. But God so connexeth these duties together , that the later is a sin , and no duty , if it keep not its place , and be performed without the former . If a man tell a lie by speaking any good which he never thought , its true that God would have had him both think it and speak it , and then it would have been no lie ; but he would not have him speak it before he think it ; for than its a lie : And you cannot say that his sin is only in not thinking it , and not in speaking it , which was part of his duty : For it was both his sin , Not to think it , and to speak it when he did not think it ; and spe●king it was not his duty , save upon presupposal that he think it , or it was not in any other order to be performed . The same is here the case between Believing and professing to Believe . 

3.  God maketh nothing the matter of Duty , or the Condition of his Gifts , but what hath some moral worth in it which may show it fit to be well pleasing to him . But the bare verbal Profession of that which is not in the heart , hath no such Moral worth in it as may make it pleasing in his eyes . Ergo . 

2.  And then for an Inferior Faith , that this is not the condition of God's Promise , I have fully proved in another Disputation : Moreover , 1.  no such promise can be produced out of the Word of God : If it could , its l●ke we should have had it ere now . 2.  The promises are expressly made on the condition of saving faith ; therefore not of any other . Of this more in the following Arguments . Only here I add , that as to the Administration of Seals , no man can know the sincerity or reality of an inferior kind of Faith any more than of a saving Faith.  

3.  And then for the third , viz. The Profession of a Dogmatical or other inferior Faith , it can be no condition . 1.  Because the faith itself professed is none ; therefore the profession of it i● none . 2.  The profession of a saving faith is none : Much lesle of a lower faith . 

Observe in all this , that when I mention a Dogmatical Faith , I take it in Mr. Blake's sense , and the sense that its commonly taken in , viz. for an assent that comes short of that which justifieth ; and not as some of the Ancients did , who called justifying Faith by the name of Dogmatical Faith , as didst not from Miraculous Faith , because they ordinarily placed Justifying Faith in Assent : So Cyril , and John Hierosol . Cateches . 5. pag. ( mihi ) 43. distinguisheth Faith into Dogmatical , which is saving , and into that which is of Grace , by which Miracles are wrought . He means by Grace the extraordinary Gift of the Spirit . And so some protestants too . Leg● D. Alard . Vaek . Comment . in Symbol . Apost . Proleg . Cap. 5. pag. 20.21 . 

Argum. 3.  It is one and the same Covenant , Testament , or Deed of Gift , by which God bestoweth Christ , and Right to Sacraments , and that on the same conditions . But the Covenant or Testament bestoweth himself only on the condition of saving Faith. Therefore it bestoweth right to Sacraments only on condition of saving Faith.  

That there is any Covenant distinct from that one Covenant of Grace , Mr. Blake disowneth as a fancy that never entered into his thoughts : pag. 125.  That this one Covenant or Testament giveth Right to Christ and to Sacraments upon the condition of one and the same faith , is evident : 1.  Because the word distinguisheth not ; therefore in this case we may not distinguish . It offereth Christ and Sacraments to men on these terms , if they will believe ; but it doth not give us the least hint that by believing is meant two several sorts of faith , whereof one is of necessity to right in Christ , & the other to right to Sacraments . Mr. Blake that so abhorreth the imputing of equivocal terms to the Scripture , I hope will not feign them to speak so equivocally . If the Word had ever said , It is such a kind of faith that is the condition of Right to Christ ; and such a different kind of Faith that is the condition of Right to Sacraments ; then we might have warrantably so distinguished ourselves ; but there is no such thing . Yea , the Scripture maketh it plain that it is saving faith which it meaneth , that is pre-requisite to Baptism , as is already manifest from Acts 16.30 , 31 , 32 , 33.  & 16 14 , 15.  & 15 7 , 8 , 9  & 8.37.2.38 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 , 44 Mark 16.16 , etc.  To which add Mat. 28.19 , 20.  Go ye therefore and Disciple me all Nations , Baptising them in the name etc.  Those and only those that are Discipled , must be baptised . But none are Discipled Internally but true Believers , nor visibly but the professors of a true ( saving ) belief ( and their seed ) Therefore no others should be baptised . 

The Minor ( which only requireth proof ) is thus proved . None are Disciples but those that take or profess to take Christ for their chief Teacher and Saviour . But all that do so heartily , or profess to do so , have or profess to have saving faith : Therefore none but those that have or profess to have saving faith , are Disciples . 

The Major is undeniable . The Minor is clear . If he that heartily takes Christ for his chief Teacher and Saviour , have not saving Faith , there is no such thing . It is he that will not hear the Prophet that shall be cut off ; and he that will hear him that shall live . And he that heartily takes him for his chief Teacher , is willing to hear him and learn of him : And he will give rest to the souls of all that will come to him , and that learn of him , as Matth. 11.28 , 29.  

Argum. 4.  God giveth Right to Sacraments to none but those to whom he giveth Right to Remission of sin . But he giveth Right to Remission of sin to none but true Believers : Therefore he giveth ( proper ) Right to Sacraments to none other . 

The Mayor Mr. Blake wonders at , that all men should have right to the End or Fruit of the Ordinance , who have right to the Ordinance ; when it is the right use and Improvement of Ordinances that must give right to the End. But 1. the form of a Sacrament is Relative , and the nearest end essential to it ; and therefore all ends are not separable , and at a distance . 2.  God giveth no man Right to use Sacraments contrary to his Institution : But the ends to which the Sacraments are instituted , is to seal up Remission of sin already given him by the promise : therefore he giveth Right to Sacraments to none but those to whom he giveth Right to Remission of sin . The Major is proved in the former Disputation . Object . But our Divines say that Baptism is not only for the Remission of sins past , but of future sins . Answ. 1.  True : but still including sins past . 2.  It is the review or consideration of Baptism which they say is for the strengthening of our faith concerning the Remission of sin , daily as we commit it . 3.  If any of them do make Baptism to be effectual to the Remission of sin hereafter , when present sin is not remitted , they suppose this to be by accident , when contrary to the intent and Institution of God , it is misused at the present , but rightly considered of in believing reviews . 

He that hath not Right to be baptised for the obsignation of Remission of sin , hath no Right given him by God to Baptism . For God hath appointed no other Baptism . There are indeed certain distant benefits of the Sacraments which are suspended upon a distant improvement of them . But a saving participation in Christ and pardon of sin is a present benefit , which the person must be qualified for the obsignation of before he have Title by God's gift to that Sacrament . 

Ar. 5.  Ad hominem . It is but few protestants that I know of , that seem adversaries to our present Assertion ; and those few also do grant it : Mr. Blake saith pa. 124 of Sacraments : [ so that I conceit no promise of these ordinances made to such a faith but an actual investiture of every such believer in them . ] And when I supposed that he had thought there was a distinct promise of Church Privileges upon condition of a faith not justifying , or saving , he tells us of some body ( I know not who ) that said I rather feigned this of him , than found it in him , and himself addeth [ And I profess I know no man whose brain ever hatched or vented such a crotchet ] we are therefore here secure ( or should be one would think ) from Mr. Blakes opposition . If this much secure us not , see him p. 122. wheres ( having thrown by my distinctions as confusion , pag. 120. and my positions as not looking toward the business , ( i e. for aught he could see ) and having confuted me by my own words , pag. 121. before he understood them ) he brings me in thus stating the Question [ Whether these men be in Covenant with God , as to God's actual engagement to them ; so far as that God's Promise is in force for conveying actual Right to them as to the promised Blessings ? And so whether it be a mutual Covenant ; and both parties be actually obliged ? And thus I say , that wicked men are not in Covenant with God ; that is , God is not in Covenant with them , neither have they any Right to the main Blessings given by the Covenant , viz. Christ , Pardon , Justification , Adoption , Glory . ] To this I annexed , ( which he leaves out ) Nor to the common Blessings of this Covenant ; for they are given by the same Covenant , and on the same conditions as the special Blessings : so that though they may have Right to them at present on the Ground of God's present collation , or trusting them with them ( as a servant hath in his Master's stock , ) yet have they no Right by Covenant — ] Mr. Blake replieth . 1.  That he knoweth no man that hath spoken so much to prove the affirmative as I But where ? He will tell us Logically thus . [ So long as they break not the Covenant Engagement in which he confesseth they have obliged themselves , God stands engaged to them for the greatest spiritual blessings . But according to him they break not Covenant till they arrive at final impenitency and unbelief . ] Rep. 1.  I said in another book , that as the new Law of faith is called God's Covenant , so no man but final unbelievers , doth so break that Covenant , as to be the subject of its proper actual commination , i.e. penal censure ; or that its penalty should thereby become his due ( the penalty being a peremptory remediless exclusion from all hope ) . And what doth Mr. Bl. but make me say in an unexplained general , [ that they break not Covenant till they arrive at final unbelief etc ] 2.  I said over and over that they broke their own covenant engagements , though they did not so far violate God's Covenant as to incur the foresaid curse : And what doth Mr. Blake but intimate that I teach [ that they break not the Covenant engagement , in which they oblige themselves . ] Yet he stops when he should have repeated these words in his Minor , perceiving it a cleanlier way to let the Reader infer them . Ah sorry Tempter that could procure such a volume of so worthy a man , to abound with so many passages of this nature , that are such strangers and enemies , not only to truth , and common equity , but even to that Ingenuity that should be manifested to an enemy . But this on the by . His second answer is , [ That therefore before mentioned which he calls the great Question between him and me , is no question at all ! It were madness to affirm that which with those limits he thus denies . ] See Reader , though I was so Mad as to prove the Affirmative of this Question which I deny , yet Mr. Blake is not . And may I not now venture to conclude that thus far we are agreed . 

Well then , if Mr. Blake never dreamt of a promise of God , made to a dogmatical faith , giving them right to Sacraments , nor thus actually engaging God to them , let us stay a little here to inquire what it is then that in his Judgement gives them Title and Right . pag. 141. he brings me in saying , [ But if you speak only of Covenant . Right to Baptism coram Deo , by his gift of Covenant , than I make them of the same extent . And he answereth , I cannot tell what other Covenant-right to speak of , etc. ] So ofttimes he saith that they have a Right or Title from God by his Covenant . What should the sense of this mystery be ? Doth God's Covenant give it them , and yet is there no Promise of it to such as they ? Nor is God actually obliged to give them the blessings of the Covenant ? Certainly this cannot be . For 1.  God hath no Covenant-act on his own part , but that which we commonly call his Promise or Testament . He saith [ he that believeth shall be saved , etc. ] and [ If thou believe thou shalt be saved : If thou receive Christ thou shalt have power to be the Son of God ] And when the Soul consenteth it is a mutual Covenant , without any further deed of Gift from God : so that it is this same Promise which is conditional , and whose condition is our acceptance of the gift , which gives right to the Benefit when the condition ( our acceptance ) is performed ; that is , when our heart's consent . And so God hath no Covenant act on his part to convey a Title , but his Promise : therefore if there be no Promise of Title to Sacraments , there is sure no Covenant-gift from God of such a Title , when they are the same . Can Mr. Blake show a Covenant of God ex parte sui distinct from this Promise ? Why then is it not done ? 

But p. 122.  Did ever a man speak of an absolute tie in a conditional covenant , whether the conditions are performed or no ] It seems then that it is but a conditional tie that he speaks of all this while . But what 's that to the conveying of Right ? The efficacy is suspended while the condition is unperformed : or else it were not a Condition . If God had conditionally by his Covenant given Title to Sacraments , that Covenant could give no Title , till the condition were performed . So that it is not a conditional Promise or covenant , till performance of the condition , that can give right . And yet Mr. Blake oft saith , that God giveth a Covenant-right to such as ( he seems to maintain himself ) perform not the condition . 2.  But for all this , I still say our very faith or acceptance of Christ in the Covenant of God is our performing the condition . And therefore ( which its sad should be an egregious affected piece of nonsense in the eyes of any Divines ) our very heart covenanting , is our performance of the condition of the covenant of God , that is , God offereth to be our God , and Christ our Saviour , if we will accept him by consent . Our heart's consent and say , Lord I am willing . And this is our heart covenanting ; that ties the marriage knot : and this was the condition of God's Promise , or part in the Covenant . And therefore every true sincere Covenanter or Believer , as he performeth by consenting the condition of his first right and Possession , so he hath immediately the said Right and Possession : A marriage Covenant is such a performance also , as giveth present Title and Right . We are members of Christ , Pardoned , Adopted , as soon as ever we consent to the terms of the Covenant , that is , do believe . it 's a poor put off for Mr. Blake to tell me , that [ we are ofter said to be espoused to Christ , then married to him . ] For what although the solemnisation of the Nuptials with all the Church in one body be reserved to the last day , doth it follow that each particular soul is not married to Christ before ? Doth not Scripture expressly affirm it ? Do any Divines deny to question it ? What matter is it then which is oftener mentioned , wh●le both are mentioned , and both true ? 

But yet it cannot be his meaning that a conditional promise gives Right to Baptism : At least to men of his inferior faith For he expressly saith , that he [ conceits no Promise of these Ordinances made to such a faith ] . He doth therefore sure conceive ( for all the former words ) that there is some other way of giving Title by God's Covenant , or by God another way than by Covenant . And pag. 124.  He expresseth it thus . [ But an actual investiture of every such Believer in them ] . Surely if we can but understand these words , we have his sense . I would not fall a racking this word Investiture , to make it confess its signification , if I knew where or which way else , besides in this one poor word , in all his two Volumes to find his meaning . But if it must lie in one word , and that not obvious to all understandings , it concerneth us to inquire what that word doth signify . The word Investiture applied to mere Physical subjects , signifieth but a merely Physical alteration , and that can give no Title or Right : and therefore no doubt , that is none of his meaning . When the word is taken in a civil sense , it is usually forma concedendi feudi , but sometime applied to other benefits , and it is commonly distinguished into that which is Ceremonial , Abusive , or Improper , and that which is Natural and Proper . The former is preparatory to Actual Possession of the Benefit : and is said by Lawyers to be equal to , or much like to the Judges Decreeing a man's Possession , which is not a corporal putting him into possession : and the form usually runs thus , Investio te hoc annulo , ense , etc.  Here the thing that he is invested by , is the ring , sword , etc. but the thing that he is invested of , is not them , but the Benefit which they signify , and that but preparatorily , as to corporal possession of the thing itself : and this is used to be done in the face of a Court , or some eminent witnesses . This is Investiture , abusiuè sic dicta . 2.  The latter ( Investitura vera & propriè dicta ) is the very delivery of Possession of the Benefit itself , which is done ( say the Civilians ) many ways . As 1.  When the foresaid Ceremonial Investiture is not at a distance as before , but in ipso feudo , vel oculis subjecto . 2.  Si Dominus propriè investiendo utatur verbo tradendi , potest Vasallus propriâ autoritate ingredi possessionem vacuam . 3.  Si Dominus coram paribus Curiae , etc. juberet beneficiariam ingredi possessionem feudi . 4.  Si beneficiarius per Dominum ipsum aut jussu ejus per alium introducatur in possessionem feudi . ] 

Now which of these is it that Master Blake here meaneth ? 

1.  The Sacrament of Baptism delivered upon God's command upon the ground of his preceding Promise , is his true , proper Investiture of the Believer in the pardon of sin , and Membership of Christ and his Church . These therefore being quoad ipsam possessionem , delivered up by this sacred sign , it follows that it is only those that have antecedent Title to these Benefits ( Christ and Pardon ) that can receive the Investing sign to that use and end , and to no other separated uses is it instituted by God. And as to the distant Benefits ( the Kingdom of Glory , etc. ) The Sacraments are a ceremonial Investiture as to them , and therefore should be applied to none that hath not a precedent Title to those distant benefits , Ecclesià judice ; or should be claimed and received by no other . Nor is it proper to call that an Investiture of the sign itself , which is itself an Investiture of another thing . We use to say , by this Ring , Sword , etc.  I invest thee of that Benefit , but not by this Ring I invest thee of this Ring . 

2.  Our Question now in hand being not of an Investiture of the signified Benefit , but of a Title to the sign itself , it is apparent that it cannot be the first sort of Investiture , viz. Ceremonial : For than it must be by some other Ceremony that we are invested of this Ceremony . And what that other Ceremony is by which God doth invest men of Baptism , no man can tell , nor I think hath gone about to tell . 

3.  It must be therefore the latter sort of Investiture , or none , viz. the Natural and true : but that presupposeth a Title by some antecedent promise or Gift : and is but the means of delivering possession of that which men had right to before ; or of giving the jus in re , to them that had the jus ad rem . Now our Question is not of Possession , but of Title , or the jus ad rem , which is antecedent to Investiture , and may warrant a claim . 

4.  And if you should say that this Investiture doth of itself confer Title to itself , you would speak a contradiction , the Title being antecedent to the right ( as being its foundation ) and the right ( ad rem ) antecedent to the Proffession which the Investiture gives . Or if you feign an immediate donation to be concomitant with the Investiture , or closely antecedent , you must prove it , and show what it is . It is most certain that it must be somewhat , that is , Signum voluntatis Divinae de Debito habendi , that must confer on us a Title : a mere providential disposal is no such thing ; for that is no civil , but a Physical Investiture , and signifieth not the will of God de Debito , but only de Eventu , and therefore of itself is no Title : ( Of which see the Lancashire Ministers against the engagement , at large . ) It must then be a Testament or some Deed of Gift , which in the Gospel goeth under the name of the Promise , which before this possession must give the Title : But a Promise in the present case , as made to the dogmatical Believer , is denied by the Opponent . A new immediate donation concurrent with the Investiture ( so called ) there is none . God doth neither then say , I give thee Title to this Sacrament , Or I deliver it to thee absolutely ; but only hath long ago in his Promise said , that which is equivalent , conditionally ; so that he hath no new donation but only the old one of his Promise , newly applied by his Minister ; and the condition of that Promise is a saving faith , and , not another sort of faith . 

There remaineth therefore but two acts or ways of this proper Investiture , which can be pretended : And that is 1.  A command to them to take Possession ( which is not pretended ) or to claim it of the Minister . 2.  And a command to the Minister as God's Agent to deliver it to such a man And for the first , it will fall under our further consideration anon , where we shall show that there is no such command . Nor can any command give Title to a Benefit , but what hath the nature of Gift , as well as a command . If then there be no Promise or Gift , there is no right to the benefit : commands as such do only oblige to duty . And as for the command to Ministers to deliver the Sacraments . 1.  It is in Scripture commanded them that they baptise them that Repent and Believe ( and their seed ) but no others : Therefore whereas by Reason and Scripture-example and general Rules , it is made their duty to baptise , or give the Lords Supper to Professors , that is as they seem Believers ; seeing God never intended to make us the searchers of hearts , therefore we must follow the common Rule of human converse , to take men's words about the secrets of their hearts , till they utterly forfeit the credit of their words . But to them that profess not truly to believe , we may not give them . 2.  Nor may we give them as from God to men under the bare notion of Professors but as Believers . I mean , that in our invitation and offer , we may not tell men [ All that profess to believe , come to this Sacrament , for its God's will that you have title to it , ] nor may we manage the ordinance in the terms of our prayers or Delivery , as to mere Professors , but as to Believers , and so must we call them , as in probability , and from their profession esteeming them such . 

3.  As it is only true Believers that we must Call to receive them , so if any other come they come contrary to our Call , and so contrary to the word that God put into our mouths , and to his Will ; and therefore they have hereby no Title . it 's true that it becomes our duty to deliver them the Sacrament , but that is accidentally , on supposition of their unjust claim , and hyhocritical or false profession : & ex propria calpa nemini debetur commodum . God employeth not heart searchers in his Administrations ; but he offereth his Ordinances only to heart-searchers and on heart-conditions : And therefore the Pretenders of such conditions may warrant our delivery ; but they can never warrant or justify their own claim , or false pretence in order thereto : And therefore they being not the people that God offered his Benefits to , and called to receive them ( unless by turning true Believers ) it follows that they have not God's consent to receive it ; and therefore there is no Gift from him . As the Minister doth in the Word , so doth he in the Sacraments : In the Word we are to offer Jesus Christ to all that will accept him by a living faith , that is , to offer him to all that he may be so accepted , and on condition of such Acceptance , may be theirs . But if some unsound Professors shall in their way , lay hold of him , and say , he is theirs , it is they that make the false application , and not either God or we . So if we are to comfort any afflicted conscience , we are no heart-searchers , and therefore cannot say to any , thou art a Believer , and therefore this comfort belongs to thee ; but we can only deliver them this Mayor Proposition [ This Comfort belongeth to all true Believers ] and this conditional conclusion [ If thou be a true Believer , it belongs to thee : ] But it is the person himself that must affirm [ I am a true believer ] and so must make the conclusion absolute . And then if the Assumption be untrue , it is his own , and not Gods or ours . So we are to offer the Sacraments ( and Christ in the Sacraments ) to all true penitent Believers . This is our Duty . If any now will step forth and take the Lords Supper among the faithful , it is himself that maketh the sinful application : And if any will say [ Baptise me , for I do heartily repent and believe , ] If this be false , it is he that makes the false Application . And therefore here is no Divine donation can be proved ; nor any consent of God to his claim ; though we are justifiable for the actual giving it upon that claim . So that here is no such Investiture that can be proved which conveyeth any Title , or warranteth any claim : There is only a command to us to offer it to true Believers , and to give it by actual delivery to such Believers , and to believe them that say they are such Believers , till we have just cause to discredit them , or can sufficiently disprove them . So that actual delivery upon such a false profession of theirs , is morally no Gift , nor Investiure , but only such as is merely Physical , as to any collation of Right , the application being by themselves , who can give themselves no Right , and not by God , who never gave consent to the claim . 

And thus I have proved and vindicated the first part of my first Proposition , concerning the Sacraments considered as Benefits [ that God hath not made any gift of them to any but true Believers . ] The two next I need to say lesle to , because enough is said on the by , in vindicating the former . 

The second was , that [ seeing God hath given no Title , therefore they may not lawfully claim them . ] And this is clear from the common Laws of Propriety , that no man may lay claim to that which he hath no Title to . He that would not be questioned as an Usurper , must look to his Right before he take possession or use . 

Object . What another is commanded to give me , that I may lawfully claim as my Right . 

Answ. He is commanded to give it Believers , and to you if you will profess that you are a Believer ; but withal you are forbidden to profess it if it be false , and therefore that is a sufficient Bar against your claim , Coram Deo in the Judgement of God ; though its true that Ecclesia Judice , your claim is such even upon a false profession which they cannot deny . If they be commanded to give it you if you claim , and you not commanded and warranted to claim it , than their duty of giving it upon such claim , will prove no title in you before God.  

The next part of my Proposition doth so clearly follow from what is said , that I need not say any more to prove it , It is your sin to claim and receive that Sacrament , which the Minister may deliver to you upon your claim without sin ; because you must judge by heart-evidence , but the Minister cannot . 

But whereas Mr. Blake doth make it so strange that a Minister may lawfully administer that Sacraments to a man which Coram Deo , he hath no right to ( against which he is so confident ) I would demand of him whether Coram Deo , or Deo Judice , a man have true title to Sacraments without any faith at all , I mean a downright Infidel or Heathen ? If he say , no ; then he yieldeth all the cause . For if this Heathen will so far play the Hypocrite as to profess a Dogmatical Faith ( as he saith ) or a saving faith ( as the Church saith ) than he will confess that it is the Ministers duty to give him the Sacrament upon his claim ; and so he must give it to a man that Deo Judice hath no true right to it . But if he say that such an Heathen hath right to it Deo Judice , I shall not stand now any further to confute him , than 1. to challenge him to prove his Title : And 2. to advice him to be cautelous how he undertaketh to justify his title and claim at the bar of God when the reckoning comes , and these matters must be reviewed . 

And thus I have done with the first Proposition , which speaks of Sacraments ut Beneficia , and proved that God hath not given , by Promise , Testament , or any Deed of Gift , a proper title to Sacraments to any but sound believers ( and their seed ) which will warrant them to claim and receive them . 

2.  The next thing to be done , is to speak of the Receiving of Sacraments as it is Officium , a Duty , constituted by some command of God ; and the Proposition is that [ God hath not commanded or allowed any that have not saving faith to claim and receive the Sacraments in that condition , but hath made it the necessary order of their duty , first to repent and believe , and then to claim and receive the Sacraments . 

Arg. 1.  If no man is commanded or warranted to receive the Sacraments without a Profession of true faith and repentance , than not without that faith and repentance itself . But the antecedent is true ; therefore so is the consequent . 

The Antecedent is proved in the other Disputations . The Consequence is plain : For no man is commanded or warranted to lie , or make a false profession : But to profess that Faith and Repentance which they have not , is to lie , or make a false profession ( at least if it be not a profession limited ) Therefore , etc.  

I have proved before that such a Profession is not only pre-requisite to Sacraments , but also that the very reception of them doth contain it . 

Arg. 2.  no command can be produced in Scripture , which will warrant a man to seek and receive the Sacraments without a saving faith : Therefore there is no such command . I shall pass by all other Arguments ( because they may be gathered from what I have said already ) and shall only inquire into the commands which are pretended , because the proof lieth on them . 

Obj. Every Jew and his children were commanded to be circumcised : Therefore the impenitent , hypocrites , etc. are commanded to receive the Sacraments . As Gen. 17.14 . 

Answ. 1.  They were not commanded to be circumcised whether they consented to the Covenant or not , but Circumcision was the token of the Covenant , and a seal of the righteousness of that faith which they had or professed to have , being yet uncircumcised , Gen. 17.11 , 12.  Rom. 4.11 . That is , the Parent for himself and his child professed a true consent to the Covenant . And this Consent I have before proved to be saving faith , or inseparable from it . And so Covenanting was then as strictly required as Circumcision . 

Object . But every male was to be cut off that was not circumcised . 

Answ. I shall not now stand to inquire into the meaning of that cutting off : But whatever it was , it is certain that there is as much threatened to them that did not covenant with the Lord  

Obj. But that cannot import a sincere Covenanting in saving Faith ; For then how great a part of the people must be cut off ? 

Answ. It plainly speaks of the profession of sincerity in Covenanting , 2.  Chron. 15.12 13.  And they entered into a covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers with all their heart , and with all their soul , that whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel , should be put to death , whether small or great , whether man or woman . 

Obj. But ( saith Mr. Blake ) though they covenant to believe savingly , yet they do not profess that they do so ; and it is not covenanting that proves men in a state of justification and salvation , but keeping the Covenant . 

Answ. He that covenanteth from that time forward to take the Lord for his God sincerely , doth by that Covenant at present express that he consenteth to have the Lord for his God , ( upon the Covenant terms : ) but he that professeth such a Consent , doth eo nomine profess saving faith , which is nothing else but Assent , and that consent producing affiance . There is no act proper to saving faith , if Consent be not . 2.  As therefore faith , which is ( or is inseparably joined with , as others confess ) the heart's consent doth justify a man before he express it in works of actual obedience , so it is but the same thing which we say , that heart-covenanting , or consent , doth justify , or prove a man justified , before he do any further keep that Covenant by any positive effects of it . For it is the performance of the conditions of Gods promise that first prove us justified ; and God promises Christ and Justification with him to all that believe , or receive Christ , or accept him as offered . And this receiving , or accepting , is the same thing with consent or heart-covenanting . So that all that we oblige ourselves to for the future in our sincere covenanting with Christ , are not any means of our Justification as begun , but only of the continuance or not losing of it . 3.  Yet still we easily grant that or all covenanting without the heart's consent will save none . 

Ob. Is it credible that all Israel must be forced to profess themselves true believers , when many were not ? 

Answ. God required them first to be such , and upon pain of damnation , and then to profess themselves such , and seal it by his Sacrament . He warranteth no man to profess a falsehood , but that they truly consent and then profess it . Though Asa and the other Rulers could search no deeper than an External Profession or Covenant and their practice in seeking God , because they did not know the heart . And that it was indeed no other than that which then was saving faith which was professed ( and so required ) in that Covenant , doth appear in the terms of it . It was to take God , to be their only God , and to give up themselves to be his people ; and the mention of their deliverance from the Egyptian bondage , and the nature of Circumcision show that it was in Deum Misericordem & Redemptorem , they that professed to believe , with such respect to the blood of the Messiah as those darker times required . The terms in Deut. 26.16 , 17 , 18. do plainly express that faith which then was proper to the saved [ The Lord thy God hath commanded thee to do these statutes and judgements ; thou shalt therefore keep and do them with all thy heart , and with all thy soul : thou hast avouched the Lord this day to be thy God , and to walk in his ways , and keep his statutes , and his commandments , and his judgements , and to harken to his voice : And the Lord hath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people , as he hath promised thee , etc. ] Sincerely to take the Lord for our God is the sum of all Religion , and the very nature of Sanctification . For it is not the bare Name of God , but God himself that is here meant . And this can be no lesle in any tolerable sense , then to take him by Assent and Consent , for our absolute Lord and Sovereign , and chief Good , or End.  

And that the Jews themselves thus understood the Covenant of Circumcision , Ainsworth on Gen 17. showeth out of their Rabbis in these words . 

Ex lib. Zohar . At what time a man is sealed with this blessed seal of this sign , thenceforth he seeth the holy blessed God , properly , and the holy soul is united with him . If he be not worthy that he keepeth not this sign , what is written ? By the breath of God they perish , Job 4.9 . For that this seal of the holy blessed God was not kept ; but if he be worthy and keep it , the Holy Ghost is not separated from him . ] And after v. 12. ex Maimonid . " [ By three things did Israel enter into the Covenant , by Circumcision , and Baptism , and Sacrifice , etc.  And so in all ages when an Ethnic is willing to enter into the Covenant , and gather himself under the wing of the Majesty of God , and take upon him the yoke of the Law , he must be circumcised , and baptised , and bring a Sacrifice , etc.  When a man or woman cometh to join a Proselyte , they make diligent enquiry after such , lest they come to get themselves under the Law , for some riches that they should receive , or for dignity that they should obtain , or for fear . If he be a man , they inquire whether he have not set his affection on some Jewish woman ; or a woman her affection on some young man of Israel . If no such like occasion be found in them , they make known unto them the weightiness of the yoke of the Law , and the toil that is in the doing of it , above that which people of other Lands have , to see if they will leave off . If they take them upon them , and withdraw not , and they see them that they come of love , than they receive them ; as it is written , When she saw that she was steadfastly minded to go with her , than she left speaking unto her , Ruth 1.18 . Therefore the Judges received no Proselytes all the days of David and Solomon . Not in David's days , left they should have come of fear : Nor in Solomon's , lest they should have come because of the Kingdom and great prosperity which Israel then had . For who so cometh from the Heathens , for any thing of the vanities of this world , he is no righteous Proselyte . Notwithstanding there were many Proselytes , which in David's and Solomon's days , joined themselves in the presence of private persons , and the Judges of the great Synedron had a● care of them ; they driven them not away after they were Baptised , out of any place , neither took they them near unto them until their after-fruits appeared 

Ob. 2.  If none but the Regenerate or sincere Believers have Title to Baptism and the Lords Supper , than none can seek or receive them , till they have Assurance of their sincerity , which would exclude abundance of upright Christians . 

Answ. 1.  God layeth his commands upon us conjunctly , and our casting off one , will not authorise us to cast off another . Upright Christians are obliged both to judge themselves to be what they are , and to receive the Seals of the Covenant : And if they judge themselves not to be upright when they are , or question their integrity as a thing to be doubted of , this is their sin , and cannot be done inculpably . And this sin will not justify them in forbearing the Sacraments : For one sin will not excuse another . The thing therefore that such are bound to , is , first to use right means to know themselves , and then to judge of themselves as they are , and then to seek and receive the Sacraments . And if he say , [ I have tried , and yet I cannot discern , or I fear I am unfound ] yet that will not free him from the blame of misjudging , nor from the obligation of judging more justly of himself . 

2.  There is a true discerning of a man 's own faith and repentance , which is far below a strict Assurance ; and he that truly discerneth that he repenteth and believeth , hath a clear ground to profess it , though he have much doubting and fear of the contrary . The judgement of few or none is in aequilibrio , but it swayeth and determineth either to judge that they are sincere , or that they are not . If it judge that they are not , when they are , their duty is to rectify that judgement out of hand . If they judge that they are sincere , though they attain not a full Certainty , they have reason to act according to that judgement . Man's heart is a dark piece , and much unacquainted with itself ; and if Mr. Blake , or any of his opinion , will prove that a man must suspend all his Actions which are not guided by a certain assured judgement , he will evacuate most of God's service in the Church . I doubt not but he will confess that it is only the penitent that should profess themselves penitent ( in that Condition ) and only they that truly desire Christ and Grace , that should say they desire them ; and only they that have received saving grace that should give God thanks for it as a received benefit . And yet if no one should confess sin with profession of penitence but they that have full assurance that they are truly penitent ; if no one should beg grace with profession that he desireth it , till he have full assurance of the truth of those desires ; and if no one should give thanks to God for Redemption ( in the special sense ) and effectual Vocation , and Conversion , and Justification , Adoption , Reconciliation , Sanctification , etc. but those that have a full assurance that they have received these , I doubt God would have little Confession , Prayer , or Thanksgiving of this sort from his people . Is it unlawful to say [ Lord I believe ] as long as we have any Unbelief to be removed ? When Peter knew not but that he might shortly deny Christ with cursing and swearing , yet might he lawfully confess his belief in him . A man may warrantably speak and profess the Truth which he is not fully certain of , as long as he doth it bona fide , and really meaneth what he speaketh , and uttereth his very heart so far as he knoweth it . 2.  And as long as he is not negligent in his endeavours to know it , but faithfully labours to be acquainted with it . All such ordinary Professions do imply this limitation [ This is the truth , so far as I know my own heart . ] And if it were not lawful to go on this ground , I must give up almost all my duties . For I find so great darkness in my own heart , and strangeness to myself , that it is few things that I say of my own heart , which I can speak with such assurance as this . When Christ commanded me , Matth. 5.24 . to [ Leave my gift before the Altar , and go my way , and first be reconciled to my Brother , and then come and offer my gift ; ] as I am uncertain when my Brother's mind is reconciled to me , so if I should never offer my gift till I had full assurance that my own mind is sincerely reconciled to him , perhaps I might sometime be put upon a long forbearance . For many a one that can say , [ I know nothing by myself ] is yet so conscious of the falseness of his heart , that he is forced to add [ yet am I not thereby justified ] and [ I judge not my own self , etc. ] Christ hath told us that God will not forgive us , unless we truly repent and believe , and from our heart forgive one another . If none may thank God for remitting their sins , till they have undoubting assurance of all this , God would have little thanks for forgiveness . then the scruples of those that reject singing Psalms , would turn off almost all . Who durst say or sing Psal 116.1 . [ I love the Lord , etc. ] Psal. 119.10 . [ with my whole heart have I sought thee , etc. ] Psal. 138.1 . & 91.  & 111.1 . [ I will praise thee OH Lord with my whole heart , etc. ] unless so few as would make but small melody . Many particulars might be instanced in , to show that this ground would evacuate most duties . 

3.  As Mr. Blake is uncertain of every one of his hearers that seeketh Sacraments , whether he have indeed a Dogmatical faith or not , so I doubt he would Baptise but few Children in comparison of what he doth , if none should seek it but those Parents which are undoubtingly certain that they do truly Believe with that Dogmatical faith . 1.  Certain I am upon much sad trial that a great number of the Parishioners that have long been our constant hearers , and have presented many Children to Baptism , have not a Dogmatical faith itself as to the essentials of the Christian Religion ; For many tell me that they Believe not that the Son or the Holy Ghost is God , or that any one hath suffered for us , or made satisfaction for our sins , and that they trust only in God's mercy and their praying , and amendment for Pardon . 2.  I meet with the most humble , Godly , learned and judicious men of my acquaintance , who manifest more doubtfulness about the Dogmatical part , or Assenting Act of their faith , than any other , or at least , their doubt of the rest is most here grounded , because they doubt of their truth in this . And though they are comforted in this consideration , that even Assent is imperfect in the Saints on earth , and mixed with doubtings , and that they lament their infidelity and doubting , and have so much Belief of the truth of Scripture , as prevaileth with them to resolve to trust their everlasting happiness only on that bottom , though with the forsaking of all earthly things , yet are they far short of a full assurance or certainty of the truth of the Gospel , and are principally in doubt of the sincerity of this act of their faith . Now I would know what Mr. Blake would have these Godly persons do that are not assured of their Dogmatical faith , but are oft ready to say , [ I shall one day perish by this Unbelief . ] If he would have them receive the Sacraments without assurance of a Dogmatical faith , we have reason to think that they may receive them without assurance of a justifying faith , though we make this the condition of their Title as they do the other . 3.  It is a great controversy among the Reform Divines , whether an unconverted man can have that faith which we call Dogmatical . I know but two or three Divines to be of Mr. Blake's opinion ( though its like enough there may be more ) And one of them thinks that the nature of justifying faith lieth only in Assent , another I have heard in conference maintain that wicked men ( or the unconverted ) do not indeed Believe God ; nor that the word of God is true . And if this be so , then sure a Dogmatical faith is a justifying faith , and he that must be sure of the one , must be sure of the other , when it is not really another but the same , or an essential part of the same . This also is the judgement of many Protestant Divines , as Bishop Downam , Camero , and his followers , and many more , viz. that faith lieth in Assent or a persuasion of the truth of the word ; and the common opinion of protestants is , that this Assent is one essential part of justifying faith , and that it is in the understanding as well as the will , ( I remember scarce any of note besides Amesius that placeth it in the will only , and make the act of the Intellect to be but Integral or preparatory . ) And if there be any such thing as Grace , or Holiness and Rectitude in the Intellect , I do not yet conceive wherein it can consist , if not in Light , procuring knowledge of , and Assent to the truth . And how much of this ( jure vel injuria ) Mr. Blake yields to the unregenerate , see him on sacr . pag. 179.  As in these words . [ Andrea therefore though the wicked match the Regenerate in assent in their understandings , it will not follow that their understandings therefore are truly sanctified ] I am far from believing that the wicked do match the Regenerate in assent in their understandings : But if he can prove this , I would fain know what the Rectitude or Sanctity of the understanding is , seeing he supposeth that this is not it . He that with a deep habitual assent doth Believe that God is the chief good , and that for him , and that Heaven is more desirable than earth , and that there is no salvation but by Christ received as our Priest , Prophet , and King , etc.  I think he hath a sanctified understanding , or else I know not who hath , nor what it is . But in such great points as this , if Mr. Blake have made any new discovery of the nature of sanctity or rectitude in the intellect as a thing differing from assent , he might have dealt charitably to have told us what it is , and not to have left the world at a loss . 

4.  And I still think , that ( at best ) if the wicked have a true Dogmatical Belief of the essentials of Religion , it is as hard or harder for them to attain assurance of the truth of that Dogmatical Belief in its kind , as it is for the Regenerate to attain assurance of the truth of saving faith in its kind . Therefore if the wicked may lawfully claim a Right in both Sacraments without assurance that they are sincere in their kind of faith , why may not the Godly claim a Right without assurance of sincerity in their kind of faith ? And if Mr. Blake will say that neither assurance nor persuasion , that we have either the one or the other , is necessary to a claim or Right , but only a promise of them for the future , than Heathens and Infidels have right , and may lay a claim . For they can promise to be Christians , and yet remain Heathens . 

Obj. 3  If you take none to have such a right as may warrant their claim and receiving but only sound Believers , than you make election , and the covenant and seals to by commensurate : which is not to be done . 

Answ. The terms are ambiguous , Supposing that we understand each other as to the sense of the word [ Election , ] I say of the word [ Covenant ] that it may mean three differing things . 1.  If you mean the conditional promise of Christ and life to all that will Believe , I say that this is not commensurate with Election : For as to the tenor it belongs to all the world , and as to the promulgation , to all that hear it . This is sometime called a covenant in the sense as all Divine constitutions be , about our life : and sometime as it is the offer of a mutual covenant ; and sometime as it is seemingly accepted : But still God is but conditionally obliged : And this is no sufficient Title to the seal : For than it were due to open Infidels , if not to all . 2.  If by the word [ Covenant ] you mean , man's own promise to God , or consent to his offer , so I say it is either sincere or not sincere . Sincere consent to God's offer is commensurate with election ( unless you can prove that such fall away totally and finally . ) But unsincere consent ( as when it only to half ) the offer or unsincere promising ( with the tongue , without the sincere consent of the heart ) is not commensurate with election ; nor doth it warrant the Hypocrite to claim the Sacraments , though it may warrant me to give them if he claim them . 3.  If by the [ Covenant ] you mean. God's actual obligation , which followeth man's acceptance , which is the performance of the condition of God's promise ; then I say , it is commensurate with election ( unless you could prove the foresaid doctrine of Apostasy ) For when God hath promised us Christ and life on condition of our acceptance or consent , and we hereupon do sincerely consent , than God's promise doth induce on him ( as we may speak after our manner ) an actual obligation , and give us an actual Right to the benefits , and is equivalent ( as to that present benefit ) to an absolute promise . And it is only this that will warrant our claim to any of the benefits . 

Obj. 4.  saith Mr. Blake , pag. 121.  [ Andrea whereas he so peremptorily determines , that though wicked men oblige themselves , yet God still remaineth disobliged , let him consider , whether God be not some way obliged to all that he voucheth to be his people ? If this be denied , there will be found no great happiness to a people , to have the Lord for their God ; But God avoucheth these to be his people , Deut. 26.17 . who are yet in an unregenerate state . ] 

Ans. By [ some way obliged ] you mean either conditionally ( and so he is obliged to all the present living Infidels that ever heard the word , if not to all the world ) or absolutely , or actually : and for the later let Mr. Blake on the next page answer Mr. Blake on this page : his words are [ Did ever man speak of an absolute tie in a conditional covenant , whether the conditions be kept or no ? that therefore before mentioned which he calls the great question , is no question at all . It were madness to affirm that which with these limits he thus denies . ] The Condition suspendeth the Actual Obligation , or at least the Right given beyond all controversy . Indeed if the stipulation were only in diem , and not conditionally , than the thing promised were presently Due , that is , to be hereafter received : and the promissory had jus ad rem , though not statim possidendi & statim crederet dies , etsi non statim veniret dies . For in a stipulation in diem crescit dies , quia statim debetur : sed nondum venit , quia non efficaciter peti potest . But in a promise conditional , there is no right , in the promissory , nor proper actual obligation on the promiser , till the condition be performed . 

And if Mr. Blake deny this , he should have told us what it is that God is actually obliged to do , on men's bare profession or common sort of believing . But this he could not do without contradicting himself and the truth . 

And for Gods avouching Israel to be his people ] I answer , 1.  He avouched them all to be what they were , that is , a people that had actually made an open profession of consenting to his covenant , and had o'er tenus taken him for their God. 2.  He avouched them to be his people also , because that very many ( how many Gods knows ) were sincere in this covenant ; and the whole may be denominated from the better part ( especially if also the greater ) ▪ as our Divines use to tell the separatists , that as a field that hath much Tares is called a Cornfield , not from the Tares , but the Corn , which is the better and valued part ; so the Church is so denominated ( say they ) from the sincere Believers . 3.  He avouched them to be his people , in regard of his peculiar choice of Israel's seed to those temporal Mercies and privileges , which they had a promise of above other Nations of the earth ; as many such are known . What benefits the Hypocrites had shall be enquired into anon . 

Ob. 5.  The Jews had much advantage , and the Circumcision much profit every way , Rom. 3.1 , 2.  

Answ. The great advantages of the whole Nation , were principally for the sake of the Elect , as the third verse following showeth ; and many mercies the rest had by being among them , which were not by a Moral Donation given particularly to those Professors , but to the Nation , denominated from the better part . 

2.  The Unbelievers or Ungodly had much advantage by providential disposals ( planting the spiritual Church among them , etc. ) of which they had themselves no proper grant by donation , and to which they could lay no claim that was justifiable before God. And they had much accidentally from the Minister's Commission , as is before explained . And thus the ungodly may have still , both Word and Sacraments , and outward Communion with the Church , and much of God's protection and blessing for the sake of the godly , to whom they join themselves by outward profession . But this is formerly answered , and so are all the rest of the material Objections that I remember in my Apology to Mr. Blake ; and therefore I shall , to avoid further tediousness , refer the Reader thither ; and if he have read that and this , I think he will not need more words ( if he read not in the dark ) to save himself from being deceived by any of the rest of Mr. Blake's Replies . Only one or two of his Summaries I shall examine , as I find them set together , pag 141 , 142. and pag. 551.  

Ob. 6.  saith Mr. Blake , pag. 141.  [ My third Argument to prove that a Faith short of Justifying may give Title to Baptism , is , [ to make the visible seal of Baptism which is the privilege of the Church visible to be of equal latitude with the seal of the Spirit , which is peculiar to invisible members , is a Paradox . ] When I put him to prove that this Paradox is mine , in the generality here expressed , he proves it from my own words ; where I say , We give the seal of Baptism to all that seem sound Believers , and their seed ; and we say the seal of the sanctifying spirit is only theirs that are such believers . ] I am convinced beyond denial , viz. To seem believers , and to be believers , is all one and seeming believers and real believers are terms of equal latitude . And thus I am confuted , as Mr. Blake useth to confute me ; no doubt , to the full satisfaction of some of his Readers . 

The Visible Seal may be said to be of equal latitude , 1.  Either in regard of a Title by Moral Donation which Coram Deo will warrant a Claim and Reception ; and so I say that saving faith and such a Title to Sacraments ( with the adult ) are of equal latitude . 2.  Or in regard of the justifiableness of a Ministers Administration , and the persons claim Ecclesia judice ; and so they are not of equal latitude . 

But saith Mr. Blake [ For his distinction which he hints here , and plainly delivers elsewhere , of Right in foro Dei , and in foro Ecclesiae , both to Covenant and Baptism ; I suppose considerate men will pause upon it , before they receive it , especially in the sense which he puts upon it . ] 

I like considerate pausing Readers . But le 's hear your Reasons . 

1.  ( saith Mr. Blake ) they may press him with his own Rule , Ubi lex non distinguit , non est distinguendum ; such a Right to visible Ordinances before men never granted of God , I would feign learn.  

Answ. But I know not what Teacher you would fain learn of . Far be it from me to imagine that I can teach you in any thing . But yet I may presume to tell you ( though not to teach you ) 1.  That ( as is often manifested ) such an improper right may result from the Precept or Ministerial Commission ( to give the Sacrament to Believers , or Professors of Faith that claim them ) without a Donation of Title to themselves to warrant that claim . 2.  That the nature of things must be distinguished from those Morals which the Law must constitute . I am of opinion that we need not go to the distinctions of the Law , to prove either that God , and the Church are not all one , but are really distinct , or that the Understanding and Judgement of God and of the Church are not all one ; or that God's Approbation , Justification , or Condemnation , is really distinct from man's . 

3.  There are some necessary Distinctions afforded us by that Doctrine which treats de legibus in Genere , which we may receive without recourse to the Law of God in Specie . Without Scripture it may be known that a Precept is not the same thing with a Promise or Deed of Gift ; and that a Power of Administering to one that demandeth , is different from a Power to demand it , or any just Title that may warrant a claim . 

4.  If this will not serve you , I add , Lex distinguit , ergò distinguendum est . 1.  You confess that a Dogmatical Faith is necessary to our Title . And what is that equally Coram Deo & Exclesiâ ? If a Jew say , [ I will go and deride Mr. Blake ; I will tell him to day that I believe in Christ , and I will be Baptised by him , and tomorrow I will scorn Christ to his face , ] will you say that this man hath equal Right Deo judice , as he hath Ecclesia judice ? I will not be too confident of my understanding your mind , but upon consideration , I think you will not . 

2.  Matth. 22. and Luke . 14.  The servants had power to bring in ( by persuasion ) that person that had not on the wedding garment ( though they were to persuade him to come as a meet guest , and so with that garment , yet the performance they left to himself : ) But yet he had no warrant for his access in that condition , and he meets there with a judgement of God , which was distinct from that of the Church , which with a [ Friend , how camest thou in hither ] etc. left him speechless ; Nor would it have saved him to have said , [ Lord I was taught by learned Divines that there is no Forum Dei to judge of my Right to Sacraments , besides the Forum Ecclesiae : and I had Right in the judgement of the Church , and therefore so I have in thine . ] And thousands will find this Plea prove uneffectual , if they shall be encouraged to use and trust to it . 

3. 1.  Cor. 11.31 , 32.  I think there is a judgement of the Lord mentioned against unworthy receivers , that is not the same with the judgement of the Church : Nor is it my opinion that it was the Church's judgement which laid some of them in sickness , some in weakness , and some asleep . God took cognisance of men's not examining themselves , and eating , and drinking unworthily , which was an eating and drinking damnation to themselves ; and of their not discerning the Lords Body ; and that further than the Church did . 

4.  It hath till now been taken for granted that there is a twofold forum or judgement expressed in Mat. 16.19 . and Mat. 18.18 . Where binding on earth and binding in heaven are distinguished , and losing on earth and losing in heaven . The Treatisers that have written of the power of the Keys , and the Expositors upon this Text , have not thought that these two were but one , nor did offer so injuriously ( that I say not reproachfully ) to expound Christ's words . If you say that [ though they be not the same yet they agree , for that shall be bound or loosed in heaven , which is bound or loosed on earth ] I answer ; that is , quando clavis non errat . When the Church judgeth justly , as the truth is . For God will not judge erroneously or unjustly because man doth so . Yea though the Church's error be inculpable ( as if they absolve or excommunicate a man upon the full testimony of false witness , etc. ) yet God will not therefore judge as they . Though he will justify their act of judging , yet he will not censure the true Title of the person to communion accordingly , nor bind or lose in heaven according to any mistaking sentence . Many other Texts do sufficiently evidence this distinction . 

But because Mr. Blake doth pag. 187. and often so peremptorily renounce this distinction in this controversy , I shall yet add one or two Reasons to show the necessity of it . 

Arg. 1.  If the judgement of God , & the judgement of the Church concerning men's Right and claim here be all one , then either the Church's judgement is infallible in this matter , or God's judgement is fallible . But neither is the Church's judgement infallible , nor God's judgement fallible . Therefore they are not both one . 

The force of the consequence is evident . And for the Minor , 1.  To say God's judgement is fallible , even that which he doth himself immediately exercise ( of which we speak ) is to Blaspheme . 2.  To say that man's judgement here is infallible , is to speak , 1.  That which cannot be proved . 2.  more than the Papists , yea more than the Italian Papists say of the Popes : For Bellarmine himself will confess him fallible about such personal causes as these ; whether such a man's cause be good or bad , etc. 3.  If the judgement of man be in this case infallible , than no man was ever wrongfully admitted by the Church , and so the argument would hold à facto ad jus , such a one was admitted : therefore he had Right to claim and Receive : But the consequent is intolerable . For 1.  It hindereth all hypocrites in the world ( that should believe it ) from repenting of their unjust claim and Receiving , and justifieth them all Coram Deo ; but sure it will prove an uneffectual justification . 2.  The same it doth by all Ministers that ever administered the Sacraments : It teacheth them to justify themselves as infallible , and to disclaim Repentance for any mistake : He that dare tell all the Ministers in the world that they never gave a man a Sacrament without Right Coram Deo , or all the Receivers in the world , that they never received it without such Right as will warrant their claim and Receiving , will show whether the weakness even of good men's arguings may seduce . 

Moreover if the Minister be infallible in this case , then either by an ordinary ability of discerning , or by extraordinary privilege ; The latter is not pretended by any , protestants or Papists , that I know of : The former cannot be said , unless it be also said , 1.  That all other men as wise be Infallible as well as they . 2.  And that therefore the case hath such evidence that no Minister can possibly be mistaken in it . But this cannot reasonably be said . For 1.  If an Infidel or Pagan come in scorn to be Baptised , and profess a Dogmatical faith when he hath it not , the Minister cannot know his heart . 2.  And if Mr. Blake will say that the very scornful words of such a Professing Pagan , are a sufficient title coram Deo , yet the Minister may possibly mistake his words , and think he saith [ I do believe , ] when he saith [ I do not believe . ] 3  Or the Minister may easily mistake the extent and nature of Mr. Blakes Dogmatical faith , and think that the Infidel doth profess that Dogmatical faith , when it is but some faith yet lower than it , or but part of it . 

Furthermore , if Ministers be thus infallible , than none of their Acts can be Nullities : but the contrary is true , and hath been the Judgement of the Church expressed in many Councils ( de rebaptizandis non legitime baptizatis quoad essentiam baptismi . ) 

And this would put us hard to the enquiry , Which is the Church that hath this Infallibility ? Unless we say that all have it that call themselves the Church ; against which many Councils have Judged , when they required the rebaptising of all that were baptised by the Paulianists , etc.  

In a word , all the Arguments which we use against the Papal Infallibility , might be here taken up , and Voluminously managed against this . 

And if Mr. Blake disown this Infallibility , there is no way left , but either to say that God hath no Judgement of this Case but what is fallible ( which I hope he will not ) ; or that God hath one Judgement of it , and the Church another ; and then we have that we seek . If he say that God hath no immediate Judgement at all of it , but only the Churches , which is mediately his : I answer , 1.  The Churches is not mediately his , when it is sinfully erroneous . 2.  If God have a knowledge and observance of it , than he hath a Judgement of it . But to deny God's knowledge or observance of it , is intolerable : therefore . 3.  And I must say , that since I have observed in Scripture , both the use that God makes of good Angels and of evil , about the sons of men , and what appearances they make before him , Job 1. and how the faithful have their Angels beholding God's face ; how they have charge of us , and bear us up , and are ministering spirits for our good , and how the Excommunicate are delivered up to Satan , with much more of the like , I easily believe that God may well be said to have a forum , and pass his sentences on the sons of men before his Angels , were it but by committing his will to Execution by them : For so far as they are Executioners , they must have a Commission for Execution , which containeth or implieth the sentence . And so there is a Justification and a Condemnation now before them . 

Argum. 2.  If God have no other Judgement about Right to Ordinances , but the Church's Judgement , than Hypocrites have equal Right before God and before the Church , ( or Judice Deo & Judice Ecclesia ; ) yea it is the same Right which is more than equal Right . But the Consequent is false : therefore so is the Antecedent . 

A Jew that would make a jest of Christ and Baptism by a feigned Profession , hath such a Right Ecclesia Judice , as that the Church cannot contradict it : But God can contradict it . The Church cannot find any imperfection in it but God can . Ecclesia Judice , his Right is as good as the soundest Believers : but God will not say so . He may charge the Church with doing him wrong , if they deny him the Sacrament : but so he cannot charge God , if he hinder or prohibit it . Surely God will acknowledge a further Title to Sacraments in the Saints , than such a Jew or Pagan hath . 

Argum. 3.  Where there are different Executions , there are different Judgements : But God hath an Execution different from the Churches ( in this Case ) as is apparent , 1 Cor. 11.  [ For this cause many are sick and weak etc.  If we would judge ourselves , we should not be judged , etc. ] Therefore God hath a Judgement differing from the Churches . 

Argum. 4.  If about all human acts God have a Judgement differing from man's , then about the present Case . But the Antecedent is so evident and so momentous , that I hope few Christians will question it . 

Instead of arguing such a Cause any further , I shall lament the case of the Church among us , that any should be found among its Reverend , Pious Guides , that shall so confidently publish , or so easily entertain ( as some seem to do ) so strange a point as this which we oppose : For how far may they yet be led , that can so easily be led to this . Compassion of the Church of Christ doth urge me to speak thus , though I know to the guilty its like to be offensive . 

But yet we may thank God that there be so few of such conceits : sure I am , it is ordinary with protestants and Papists in such cases to distinguish between forum Dei & Ecclesiae , God's Judgement and the Churches . Instead of citing many , I shall now take up with one only , whose Cause ( against the Separatists ) did lead him so much to have entertained the helps that lie on that side , that if he had thought this notion of Mr. Blakes sound , he was very like to have received it . 

Rutherford in his due Right of Presb. Cap. 9  § . 9 p. 242.  Dist. 1.  [ Any who blamelessly professeth Christ , is Ecclesiastically , in foro Ecclesiae a true and valid member of the Church visible , having Ecclesiastical power valid for that effect , but except he be a sincere believer , he is not morally , and in foro Dei , a living member of the invisible Church . Dist. 3.  The Invisible Church Catholic is the principal , prime , and native subject of all the Privileges of Christians , the Covenant , Promises , Title of Spouse , Bride , Redeemed , Temple of the holy Spirit , etc.  And the Church Visible as she is such , is no ways such a subject ; the non-consideration whereof we take to be the ground of many Errors in our Reverend brethren in this matter , which also deceived Papists , as our Divines demonstrate . Dist. 4.  A seen Profession is the ground of members admission to the Visible Church . Hence there is a satisfaction of the Conscience of the Church in admitting of members , either in the Judgement of Charity , or in the Judgement of Verity . Dist. 5.  There is a satisfaction in the Judgement of Charity Positive ; when we see signs which positively assure us that such an one is Regenerate : and there is a satisfaction Negative , when we know nothing on the contrary , which hath a latitude ; for I have a Negative satisfaction of the Regeneration of some , whose persons and behaviour I know neither by sight or report . This is not sufficient for the accepting of a Church-membership , therefore somewhat more is required . pag. 244.  Concl. 2.  The Invisible , and not the Visible Church is the principal , prime , and only proper subject with whom the Covenant of Grace is made , to whom all the Promises do belong , and to whom all Titles , Styles , Properties , and Privileges of special note , in the Mediator do belong . If our Reverend brethren would be pleased to see this , they would forsake their doctrine of a visible constituted Church , etc. 1.  The Church to whom the Covenant and the Promises of the Covenant are made , is a Church and a seed which shall endure as the days of heaven , Psal. 89.35 , 36. and such as can no more fall away from being God's people in an eternal Covenant with him , than their God can alter what he hath spoken , or lie , Psal. 89.33 , 34 , 35.  They can no more cease from being in God's favour , or be cast off of God , than the Ordinances of Heaven can depart from before God , etc.  Jer. 31.35 , 36 , 37.  Isa. 54.10 . or then God can retract his Oath and Promises , Heb. 6.18 , 19 , 20.  But the Visible Church of this or that Parish , etc. ] Pag. 246.2 . The Church with whom the Covenant is made , and to whom the Promises of the Covenant are made , is the Spouse of Christ , his Mystical Body , the Sons and Daughters of the Lord God Almighty , a Royal Priesthood , a chosen Generation , Kings & Priests to God : But this is the Invisible Church of elect Believers , not the Visible Church of Visible Professors . — ] Pag. 248.  [ The Church whose gathering together , and whose unity of faith , etc. the Lord intendeth by giving to them to that end some to be Apostles , etc. must be the Church to which all the promises of the Covenant and Privileges do belong . But the Lord intendeth the gathering , etc. only of the Invisible Elected and Redeemed Church , not of the Visible Professing or Confessing Church , etc. ] Pag. 249.4 . The Invisible Church , and not the Visible , as it is such , hath Right to the Sacraments : because these who have Right to the Covenant , have Right to the Seals of the Covenant — But only the Invisible Church hath Right to the Covenant . For God faith only of and to the Invisible Church , and not of the Visible , in his gracious purpose , Jer. 32.38 . And I will be their God , and they shall be my people . Jer. 31.33 . I will put my Law , etc.  Now the Visible Church , as the Visible , is not within the Covenant . therefore the Visible Church as the Visible Church , and being no more than the Visible Church , hath not Right to the Seals of the Covenant ; but in so far as they are within the Covenant , and in so far as God is their God , and they his pardoned and sanctified People , as it is , Jer. 31.33 , 34.  

5.  It is known here that our brethren join with the Papists . For Papists , ignorant of the doctrine of the Visible Church , labour to prove that , etc.  Just so our brethren take all the places for the Privileges , Covenant , Promises , Styles of Sister , Love , Dove , Spouse , etc. — ] 6.  A Church in Covenant with God , and the Spouse of Christ , etc. — is a Church whereof all the members without exception are taught of God , etc. — But so it is that no Visible Church on earth , that are visible Professors of any competent number , is such a Church , etc. — therefore no Visible Church as such is a people or Church in Covenant with God. See Roger's Catechis . part . 2.  Art 6. pag. 176 , 177.  Concl. 3  A visible Profession of the Truth and Doctrine of Godliness , is that which essentially constituteth a Visible Church . Only our brethren and we differ much about the Nature of this Profession — Our brethren will have none members of the Visible Church , but such as are satisfactory to the consciences of all the Visible Church , and give Evidences so clear , as the Judgement of discerning men can attain unto , that they are truly regenerated . — ] See further . 

This much I have cited specially as to the main Cause : Further ( as to the Distinction in question ) see him after pag. 185.4 . § . 5.  

1.  Dist. All Believers , in foro Dei , before God have Right to the Seals of the Covenant : These to whom the Covenant and body of the Charter belongeth , to these the Seal belongeth : But in foro Ecclesiastico , in an orderly Church way , the Seals are not to be conferred by the Church upon persons because they believe , but because they profess their believing . — ] See further . 

Pag. 188.  [ 1.  The Seals of the Covenant are principally given to the Invisible Church , as the Covenant itself , etc. — and The Invisible Church as such , as a number of Believers , have only Right before God to both Covenant and Seals . — 2.  it 's true , the Orderly and Ecclesiastic way of dispensing the Seals , is that they be dispensed only to the Visible Church . — ] 

Pag. 286.  [ These and many other places do strongly prove our point : and specially that the Profession of Simon Magus , who before God deserved to be cast out of the Church , Act. 8. is sufficient to make one a member of a Visible Church . Yea , but none deserve in foro Ecclesiae , in the Church's Court , to be cast out , but such as either confess scandalous Sins , or are contumacious , or convicted judicially of the same before witnesses , etc. ] 

The same Author in his Peaceable Plea , pag. 181.  [ We preach and invite in the Gospel all the uncircumcised in heart , and all the wicked to come , and hear , and partake of the holy things of the Gospel , and receive the promises thereof with faith : And when they come to this heavenly banquet without their wedding Garment , Math. 22.12 , 13. 2  Cor. 2.16 . Mat. 21.43 , 44. it followeth not , because they profane the holy things of God , that Ministers who baptise the Infants of hypocrites and profane persons , are accessary to the profaning the holy things of Christ — It is one thing , whom Ministers should Receive as members of the Sanctuary and Church : and another thing , who should come in — ] 

Pag. 183.  [ Object . Divine wrath is kindled for the profanation of holy things . Answ. That this is the Ministers or Church's profanation of holy things , is not proved : It is not wrath procured by the Ministers , or those who Receive them into the Church ; but wrath procured by the unworthy In comers . — ] So far Rutherford . 

Having said thus much to Mr. Blakes denial of the distinction of God's judgement and the Churches in this case , I proceed to that which followeth in his book . pag. 141.  

[ Mr. Blake . 3.  They may tell him of the necessity that is put upon Ministers to profane this Divine Ordinance , in putting this seal ordinarily and avoidable to mere blank paper : which is a most contumelious abuse of it . ] 

Ans. They may sooner tell it , than prove it , to be any profanation or contumelious abuse . Big words , may be bad arguments . it 's the Claimer that is the Profaner , whom you encourage by telling him that he hath a Title : but it is not the Minister ; who was never made a searcher of hearts , no not to know the truth of a Dogmatical faith : and therefore may justly set the seal to a blank paper , when the Receiver is made judge whether it be blank or not , or at least , is to give us the evidence that we must proceed upon . I would you would before this have told us whether one that dissemblingly pretendeth your Dogmatical faith , be a blank paper or not , or one that as a Parrot is taught to say [ I believe in God , etc. [ when he understandeth not what he saith . If not , it seems a Dogmatical faith is not the Title then in your account . If yea , then doth the Minister profane the Ordinance in giving it such ; and hath not Mr. Blake sealed to many such blanks , and contumeliously abused the Ordinance ? 

[ Mr. Blake . They may tell him that poor souls are thus miserably cheated , in bearing them in hand , that these great privileges , and consequently all further Church privileges are theirs , when the conveyance is mere fraudulent that casts it upon them . 

Answ. 1.  Alas poor souls ! Alas miserable cheaters ! But who are they ? They that bear them in hand that these privileges are theirs by conveyance : which is not 1.  Let Mr. Blake answer for himself . 2.  It was a gentler passage than this , that caused Mr. Blake presently to infer . [ It seems he hath met with a company of cheaters . ] 3  But to call his brethren cheaters , is nothing so dangerous as to call the conveyance fraudulent . That do not I do : for I say that there is no such conveyance , ( unless you take the word improperly . ) 

[ Mr. Blake They may yet tell him that a door is here opened to Anabaptism , or multiplication of Baptism . A new door , of which either nothing , or very little , hath ever been spoken . ] 

Ans. 1.  They may tell me so : but how will you prove that they tell me true ? I see by you , that telling is easier than proving , and commoner than truth . 2.  Your making this a door to Anabaptism , doth give them that which you cannot warrant them , and advantage the Anabaptists more under pretence of renouncing their advantages , than you desire : the common success of passionate oppositions . 3.  Your feigning this to be new , and never or little spoken of before , in my understanding , importeth one of these consequences ; either as if you had said [ Allured History is false ; believe nothing that ever you read in them ; nay trust not your eyes and ears , that see and hear the contrary to what I say ; ] or else as if you had proclaimed . [ Take heed how you credit even Godly Divines in the heat of their contention , even in the most palpable matters of fact . ] 

Mr. Blake . When discovery shall be made that the Title when Baptism was administered was barely seeming , than all was Dorid ab initio in such proceedings : and as such persons always were in the eyes of God , so now in the eye of men they are unbaptised persons . ] Ans. What proof of all this ? but you say so ? 1.  Baptism is sometimes taken for the mere external Ordinance : sometime for that conjunct with the grace signified , or with the effects . As to the actual conveyance of pardon and life , I affirm that Sacraments are uneffectual to unbelievers ; and so do you ; If that be a Nullity , call them Dorid . But how prove you that the external Ordinance is a Nullity where there was no Title ? The Title indeed was Dorid ab initio , but prove that the Ordinance was so too ? well ! this must be proved from Simon Magus and from Titius : [ If Titius got possessions presumed to be his due inheritance , and afterwards it be made appear that it never pertained to him , but to Sempronius , all is to be judged invalid . ] Ans. But if this possession was delivered by a sealed instrument , as possession of pardon is to a Traitor or Malefactor ( where right and possession are co-incident , ) and the Tenor of this instrument be , that only those that are returned to loyalty shall have the benefit , ( e. g. pardon ) and a messenger is sent to deliver these instruments to all that profess Loyalty ; here if any Traitor shall profess that Loyalty , and seek to kill his sovereign the next day , though all be Hey-boyss as to the effect of pardoning him , yet the external acts of sealing and delivery are not themselves Nullities . And if it be the will of the Prince that this act shall be effectual to its end , when the person shall return to his Loyalty , without the sealing the instrument anew , it may even to the effect be valid afterwards , that through his fault was not so before . 

But if the Anabaptists must have this news that I am turned so far to them as to open them a new door , let them take altogether , and make merry that Mr. Blake and I are turned so far Anabaptists together , and then there may be hope that while we two hold open the door , more may come in ere long . He oft tells us that it is a Dogmatical faith , or a faith short of justifying , that entitleth to Baptism : England swarms with people that have not a Dogmatical faith , and yet they receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper , and their Children are Baptised ( and what faith their ancestors had , who knoweth ? ) there 's scarce a week but I hear one or other tell me , that Christ is God and not Man , or Man and not God , or that they do not think any one hath been our surety , or made any satisfaction to God , or suffered for our sins . ] If all these Baptisms and other administrations be Nullities , and if Mr. Blake will but teach that all should be rebaptised , whose parents are now discovered to want the Title of a Dogmatical faith , I much fear , he will yet have more rebaptised persons in one County than now is in Ten , at least . 

If the Minister be commissioned to deliver the Sacrament on an unjust claim , this justifieth his act , and as he did his duty , so he hath no Scripture for the repeating it . 

I before instanced in the case of a scornful Jew , that purposely comes to Baptism to deride Christ , or to be in a capacity to mischief his cause or people . Hath this man a Title by God's Donation to Church-membership , seals , and all the blessed privileges of the visible Church , which Mr. Blake sets forth ? If he have , then malicious wickedness is the condition of God's great mercies . And when shall we see the Donation that conveyed this Title to him ? 

Mr. Blake . [ 6.  " They may tell you that that Scripture distinction of Circumcision in the flesh , and Circumcision in the heart , is hereby overthrown . ] Ans. 1.  They may tell it me twice , before I will believe them once . 2.  They may tell it you as well as me . Was it not possible for a Jew upon mistake to Circumcise a man that had no Right to it , and yet upon some kind of misunderstood profession ? Resolve whether that were a Nullity first for yourself , and then I will study a further answer . 

Mr. Blake . [ 7.  They may tell him that this principle standing , all persons dying unregenerate , die unbaptised ; yea all that were baptised in infancy and after converted remain still unbaptised . ] Answ. 1.  What! if I saw them Baptised with mine eyes ? many such tales I know I may hear , and I will believe them as I see cause . 2.  I suppose by this that you seem yourself to judge , that all that are without a Dogmatical Faith are unbaptised . 

Mr. Blake . [ 8.  That it is much to be feared , if not certainly to be concluded that the Mayor part by far of Worcestershire combination consists of unbaptised persons , there being I doubt no good evidence of true conversion in the most considerable part of them — I am sure it is voiced that the most profane where the Minister carrieth any authority , are as forward for subscription as any . ] 

Answ. 1.  As to your bold censure of so many persons whose faces you never saw , and whose names you never heard , it showeth us what you dare do . You might more safely have learned of Christ [ Judge not that ye be not Judged , ] and have harkened to Paul [ Who art thou that Judgest another man's servant ? ] 2.  Especially when your censure is founded upon lying fame , as it is . This is the way to discredit all history , when Godly men dare publish that of so many in a County , which the whole Country almost , that are capable of understanding such marters , do know to be false . 3.  Have we groaned , and prayed , and suffered so long in hope of Discipline , and yet are there Godly Ministers among us , that have the hearts to calumniate and reproach the attempts of it , where they never had the face to acquaint us with the least mistake or miscarriage in our way ? Ah what wonder if the poor Church consume away in its corruptions and divisions , when this is the friendship and assistance of its guides ! But of this before . 

The other summary of Mr. Blakes oppositions , is pag. 550 , 551. in his introduction , where he thus declares his mind . 

Mr. Blake [ And truly ( Sir ! ) if I should have a thought of changing my opinion , I know not how to look to the end of the danger that will follow . I must first necessarily engage myself in an everlasting Schism , being not able to find out a Church in the world of any interest , in which I shall dare in this account to hold communion . ] 

Answ. OH the power of prejudice ! What Church in all the world was ever of your Judgement ? And would you have separated from all the Churches in the world ? But le 's hear the reasons of your fear . 

Mr. Blake . [ I shall see in many members too clear symptoms of non-regeneration and Unbelief . — ] 

Answ. 1.  Do not those persons profess a Justifying faith ? 2.  Or is it Infallible symptoms of the contrary which you mean , or which are sufficient to nullify or invalidate that Profession ? if not , you say nothing : if so , then 3.  Dare you hold communion with no Church that hath some members that in your own Judgement are unfit to be there ? How oft hath this opinion been confuted in the Separatists ? But you add your reason . 

Mr. Blake . [ Though this will not bear a separation , yet this consideration of their non-baptism will necessarily enforce it . — ] 

Answ. 1.  The Enemy of the Church needs no hands to do a great part of his work , but our own . The Anabaptiss take us to be all unbaptised , and thence infer a necessity of Separation . Their Separation troubleth the Church much more than their opinion for rebaptising . Our endeavour is , at least to bring them to this , that being rebaptised they would rest satisfied , and live in peaceable communion with the Church . Mr. Blake steps in and confirmeth them in their consequence , on supposition of the Antecedent which we cannot satisfy them in ; and so frustrateth all our labour , and gives them the day , in that , and considereth not I fear the danger of promoting such a schism . But he would do well first to answer the many Reasons that Mr. John Goodwin hath brought against that opinion , and take his work clean before him . If I knew a Church or whole Nation of men that thought verily they were truly baptised , and I thought that it was not so , if yet they professed true Faith and Holiness , I durst not separate from them . 2.  But how irksome must it needs be to your Judicious Readers , to have such conclusions tossed up and down with mere confidence , upon suppositions , which you disdain ( or deign not ) to prove ? One Argument to have proved that our Principles infer the Nullity of the Baptism of the Unregenerate , had been more worth than all this kind of talk . I say that Deo Judice such men have no Title by any Grant or Gift of God to claim or receive the Sacraments , though the Minister have Commission to give it to some unjust claimers . This opinion professeth the Nullity of the Title which is denied . Do you prove that it also inferreth the Nullity of the external Baptism itself , which was justly administered , though unjustly demanded . it 's tedious to read voluminous Disputes , where that which requireth proof is still taken for granted . 

But if all this were so , I think you must still be a Separatist on your own Principles . For where would you find a Church ( among us ) where there be not many that have not a Dogmatical faith , which you say must give them Title to Baptism ? 

Mr. Blake . [ Andrea if I be holpen out ( as indeed I utterly despair ) by any distinction of forum Dei and forum Ecclesiae , Vnivocal and Equivocal , what thought then shall I entertain of the Holy Scripture ? ] 

Answ. I cannot tell what thoughts you will have of it , but I can partly tell what thoughts you should have of it . Will you deny that the Scripture most commonly speaks of God himself himself in equivocal terms ? I hope you will not : And how should it speak otherwise to man's understanding ? And yet what thoughts will you entertain of the Scripture ? You will not I hope take on you to know no difference between Jesuitical dissembling equivocation , which is to deceive , and the use of equivocal terms , either necessarily for want of other words in being , or Rhetorically for ornament , or when custom of Speech hath made them the most apt ? Will you so far equivocate with equivocal terms , as to confound the culpable equivocation with the laudable , and then say , [ What thoughts shall I have of the holy Scriptures ? ] this doth not beseem an Expositor of the Scriptures . 

And whereas you next add the many titles given to the unregenerate , I have answered it before , and more may do in the next Dispute , besides what you had even now from Mr. Rutherford . These titles were never given to any of your Professors of a faith short of that which Justifyeth . And yet there is no passage in your Book that amazeth me more than your frequent and confident Assertions of the contrary , and pretences of the common Judgement of the Church to be on your side . 

Pag. 116 , 117.  When I had said that Dr. Ward would not have found a second to undertake his cause , you say , [ How this passage fell from his pen , may well be to very intelligent Reader matter of admiration — that a man of such multiplicity of reading should think that Dr. Ward in this opinion would not have found a second , when if he had perused our approved Authors about the question , especially since it came to a punctual just debate , he may soon see that he hath almost every one to appear for him , if this which he mentions be his opinion : unless perhaps he hath been so held in reading the Fathers and other Writers for the first thirteen or fourteen hundred years ( in which few will I think come out and vie with him , ) that he hath not regarded what hath been said this 1500 years in this corner of the world . ] 

Answ. 1.  Your groundless insipid scorn , about reading the Fathers of the first 1400 years , doth no whit clear the Truth , nor strengthen your Cause , nor ( I think ) tend to the pleasing of God. 2.  One of us have certainly exposed ourselves to the Readers , — when we stand wondering thus at each other , and profess our understanding to be at so great a distance about a matter of open fact . I must still say , that I hoped Dr. Ward would not have found a Second to undertake that Cause . But this doth not intimate either that I never read that any was of his mind before , or that I expected not that any should be afterwards : it 's one thing to be of that Opinion , and another thing as his Second to undertake it . But I will now say more than that which you wonder at . I must profess that I do not know of any one Protestant Divine , reputed Orthodox , of that Judgement , before Dr. Ward and you : though some Papists and Arminians I knew of that mind : and since I find Sir Hen. Vane maintain it ; and one John Timson , in his Defence of M. Humphrey ; and now newly M. Humphrey , in his second Vindication of Free Admission . Let all Readers now come and wonder at your wondering and mine , or at least the vast disagreement of our Judgements , in such a point of fact . All that ever open the books of protestants , come and judge betwixt Mr. Blake and me . Dr. Ward and he do maitain [ That a certain kind of faith which is short of Justifying faith , giveth title to Baptism even before God ] I say , [ that only true Justifying faith is the condition of our Title before God , as given by him , and warranting our claim ; but that the bare profession of that Justifying faith ( but of no lower ) doth make us such whom the Minister must give the Sacraments to if we claim them , and so by it we have a Right to them before the Church , and so far before God as he is the approver of the Church's act . ] Mr. Blake saith , almost every one of our late Writers appear for him : I say , I remember none of the Reform Divines for them . Nor do I find that Mr. Blake himself hath produced any to that end , but by mere abusing them , Certain I am , that the common doctrine of Reform Divines is , [ that sound believers are members of the mystical Church , and that professors of that belief are members of the visible Church , to whom we must give Sacraments . ] But as for your third sort , who believe with another kind of faith , or profess so to do , it is not their use to take these as members of either , or such as have right to Sacraments . 

One more Objection I find much stood upon ( which I had almost forgot ) viz , The Sacraments are appointed for the visible Church : therefore all that are of the visible Church have Right to them . ] 

Answ. the word [ appointed ] is ambiguous . If it mean only that Ministers are appointed to deliver it to men upon an outward Profession and Claim , this we still grant . But if the meaning be , that Hypocritical or Unregenerate Professors have any Moral Donation or Promise of them , or any command to claim and receive them , in their present state , this is but a bare affirming of the thing in question ; and so their Consequent is the same with the Antecedent . What Mr. Galespie and Mr. Rutherford , and many other Divines have said against it , you have seen before ; as also by what Scripture-evidence it is destroyed . 

Ob. But 't is said of the Jews , that to them pertained the Adoption , and the Glory , and the Covenants , and the giving of the Law , and the Service of God , and the Promises . ] Rom. 9.4 . 

Answ. 1.  Yet will it not follow that all these pertain to all the Visible Church , and therefore not to the Church as Visible . The Glory , that is , the Ark , and other signs of some Glorious Presence , and the giving of the Law here mentioned , with other Privileges expressed in the next words , were proper to the Jews . 2.  The Jewish Nation contained some that were truly sanctified , and some that were not . To the later sort was given the Law ▪ Covenants , Promises , etc. providentially , and by way of Offer : God so ordered it , that among them these excellent mercies should abide , and to them they should be offered ; and if they had heartily accepted them , they might have had a proper Title to the Benefits of the Covenant itself . And it fell out that the seals were actually applied to them upon their pretended acceptance of the offer , and upon their claim . But to the former belonged the Covenants and Promises as the instruments of God's Donation , whereby he conveyed to them actual Right to the Benefits : But so it did not to the latter ( unless we speak of some particular promise made to this or that indiviall person , or some temporal promises to the Jews as Jews , and not as a Visible Church ) Yet may it well be said that to the Jews in general the Covenants , Promises , etc. belonged ; not only because the Regenerate were Jews , and the whole Nation was denominated from the better part sometime , but also ( which is Paul's sense in that Text ) because it is not the foresaid proper Right that is here spoken of , but the actual sending of this Light among them , and the tendering of it to them , and continuing it with them , together with the success of it so far as that some were sanctified by it , and others seemingly consented to it . And thus we may say of England now in the general , that it enjoyeth the Gospel , and Sacraments , etc. in that they are among us , and all men that are truly willing may have a saving title to them , and the rest that pretend to be willing and are not , do actually partake of the External Ordinance , though to their own condemnation , through their own default . But this is no affirming that the unregenerate have a proper Title given them , which may warrant their claim in that estate ; I mean , to the Sacraments , which are special Ordinances . 

The Reverend Vindicator of Free Admission , layeth down 13 Reasons to prove that [ the Covenant in the general Grace and external Administration of the Ordinances belongs to the whole Church as Visible , and to the several members alike ] To which I say , 1. that it [ belongs ] to them , is too large a word without distinction to use in a profitable discourse . I have elsewhere showed that Covenant and Seals do belong to them in some sense , and in other not ; and how far such are in Covenant . 2.  Note on the by , that if this were granted , it 's nothing to Mr. Blake's main cause against me , that [ a Faith short of justifying gives Right ] For no man was ever a member for a Faith short of justifying ; but only for a saving faith , or the profession of a saving faith . 3.  Note that the stress of the Controversy is not [ Whether it belong to them at all ? ] but whether ( as he affirmeth ) to all alike ? Enough is said before for the solving of his Arguments . more particularly . 

To the first . Pag. 6.  How the whole Nation of the Jews were in Covenant , is before declared , ( more than which is yet unproved : ) and also how little this makes for his End.  

To the Second : We easily grant that the Gentiles are graffed into the same Olive , and are as much in the Covenant of Grace as the Jews were ( so many of the Gentiles as profess Christianity . ) And because it is no more , it is nothing to their purpose . 

To the Third : I Answer : there 's no doubt but the promise belongs to all that God shall call ; that is , the bare offer belongs to all them that are called uneffectually , and still remain in unbelief : And the worst of them are invited to Repent and Believe , which when they do , they have Title in that same promise to Remission and the Seals of it : And when they profess to Repent and Believe , and so require the Seals , they have such a Right Coram Ecclesiâ , as that ▪ we must admit of them . But more than this here is yet no proof of . 

To the Fourth : The Called some of them obey not at all : some of them obey o'er tenus , and as to some faith short of justifying : and some of them obey the Call sincerely . You mean the Second : Of whom I say , 1.  Prove if you can that any called ones may have the Sacraments , that profess not saving Faith. 2.  And prove that they who barely profess it , have the Title which is in controversy between us , which will justify their claim , as well as our giving it on that claim . The saying that they are called is no proof . As for your phrase of [ an outward being in Covenant ] you know I affirmed it long ago ex parte hominis , they outwardly covenant with God , and oblige themselves . But if you mean it ex parte Dei , that he hath any such mere outside promises when he meaneth not as he speaks , or that he is actually obliged as a Covenanter to them , yea but for outward things , I have long waited from others for the proof in vain . As to the phrase [ Equivocal ] you shall have more of it , God willing , in due place . 

To the Fifth : there 's difference between the Jews then and the World : 1.  In that one part of the Jews were sincere in the Covenant , and that in great numbers ; in whom , as it were , the life of the Church did abide . 2.  In that the rest of them ( as to the main body ) professed that true faith which others had . 3.  And in that such bare professors were thereupon admitted into that Society , and into those Ordinances , which tended to help them to that sincerity which they wanted ; some of which Ordinances they were immediately bound to use , and others of them but in order after their Conversion : and though they used them unjustly before Conversion , the thing was a mercy in itself , though mis-received by them . 4.  And then they had many temporal promises which no other Nation had : nor have we . I think here 's a difference from the gentile world . Prove more , if you affirm it . 

To the Sixth : I have answered it over and over before . They are commanded to be circumcised but as a sign and seal of the Covenant : Therefore they are bound first in order to consent in heart to the Covenant : And if they do the former without the later , it may show that they have by outward covenanting obliged themselves to God , and so are annumerated with his listed soldiers by the Church : But it proveth not that God is in actual obligation to them , except only as to any of those mercies that were absolutely promised to the Israelites , and belong not to us . 

To the Seventh : The weak unworthy Author of the book of Infant Baptism , whom you are pleased to load with a Title which his conscience doth disown , doth heartily persist in believing that the conditional Covenant is made to more than the Elect , even to all , at least that hear it ; and that this is the effect of Christ's blood ; and that the entrance into covenant , and accepting the terms of it , ore tenus , or not sincerely and unreservedly , is common to Elect and Reprobate . ] But all this is nothing to the present business . 

To the Eighth : It is a strange consequence that such [ Must renounce their profession , and never come to ordinances , etc. ] Must importeth Duty . And their duty is sincerely to Repent , and Believe , and Profess , and not to renounce profession , but only to lament the falsehood and hypocrisy in professing what they did not do . Nor is any bound to stay from Ordinances simply , but to repent , believe , and so come ; as Peter hid Simon Magus , Repent and Pray , etc.  But if he will profess falsely , and come without Repentance , let him do it at his peril , and not think God is obliged to bless him in it ; which would lead hard up to the Papists Opus operatum , though I know how much this is disclaimed by Mr. Blake . For when you liberally give such men a a Title Coram Deo to the Seals , what can be that Title but the Opus operatum of a verbal profession : For though a Faith short of Justifying be talked of , none of you all can tell who hath it , and who hath it not ; and yet I find not so much openness as to speak out and tell us whether indeed all the Hypocrites that have not so much as the Dogmatical Faith which they profess , have indeed a Title before God to the Seals , on the Opus operatum of profession or not : Though by consequence it appeareth that you must say so , or cast all your cause away . 

To the ninth I Answer : If you know him not a dissembler , he is to you what he professeth to be : If therefore he profess that the Foundation is laid , when it is not , you must endeavour to build him up . But if you know him to dissemble , I suppose you will rather help to lay the Foundation before you go any further . But 2.  If you can say as much to prove that I may not teach any but Disciples the observable commands of Christ ( in sensu activo ; that is , do my best to teach them ) as I have done to prove that wicked men have no Title to the Sacraments which will warrant them Coram Deo , to claim them , you will do much towards the changing of my mind . 

To the Tenth I answer : This confusion mars all . I have oft told you , unregenerate men are really in covenant as to their external engaging act ; and this they may break . But doth it follow that they cannot violate their own promise , unless God be actually obliged by promise to them . 

To the Eleventh . I will not stand now to search whether Judas was one of them that was bid Eat , and Drink : But supposing it granted , it is most certain that he was commanded as much to take and feed on Christ by faith : and that he was offered the Sacrament as a Sacrament , that is , a sealing and professing sign , as I have before explained . Now if he had so received it as it was offered , and in the nature of a Sacrament , as Christ bid him ; Take , Eat , Drink , then certainly he had done it in faith . And if he did not so ( as he did not ) he did not what he was commanded . And therefore you cannot hence prove a Right in Judas by any grant , to the separated sign , while he was destitute of the faith which by his action was professed Receiving the Sacrament as a Sacrament is an actual profession o● faith : And you can never prove that Christ commanded Juda to lie , by professing the faith which he had not ; but only that he commanded him at once to Believe and thus profess it . He that will have men compelled to come in ( to the Church ) intendeth that they must bring a wedding garment : or else they shall hear , how camest thou hither ? 

You apprehend John Timpsons' words to be apposite , which imply a contradiction , or touch not the point : If the right Object be really believed ( even that which is the full Object of saving faith ) that very belief is saving , and proveth the holiness of the person . 

To the Twelfth I answer . General and special Grace , ay resolvedly maintain . But when will you prove that it is a part of General Grace to have a proper Title given by God to the Sacraments which seal up the pardon of sin actually where there is such Title ? To have the universal conditional promise ( or covenant ex parte Dei ) enacted , and promulgate and offered the world , with many incitements to entertain it , is General Grace : But so is not either our actual heart-covenanting , the Remission of our sin , nor such a proper Title to the sign of both . 

When you tell us of the World's Potential , and the visible Churches actual Interest in General Grace , you give us ( pardon the truth ) a mere sound of words that signify nothing , or nothing to purpose . You cannot call it General Grace Objectively ; as if the Saints had a particular Objective Grace , the rest a General : For Generals exist not but in the individuals . It is therefore the General conditional promise or gift , which you must mean by General Grace : This is to the world ( without ) indeed but an offer : But is it any more to any of the unbelievers or unregenerate within ? what can be the meaning of [ an actual Interest in a conditional promise ] which all the hearers have not , and yet is short of the true actual Interest of them that perform the condition ? I feel no substance in this notion , nor see any light in it . I confess there is a certain possession that one such man may have more than others ; but as that is nothing to proper Title , so it is not the thing that Sacraments are to seal . 

I have not Mr. Hudsons' book now by me : but your solution by the two sives had need of some sifting . it 's one thing to ask what is the end of Sacraments quoad intentionem praecepti : and another thing to tell what eventually they produce . I do not believe that the sieve that brings men into a state of Grace is in the hands of God only , so as if he used not Ministers thereto . Ministers are said in Scripture to convert and heal , and deliver and save men . 

To your 13th and 14th and last , I answer . That we easily confess that the covenant under the new Testament is better than the old : but this makes nothing for you , nor do you prove that it doth : the force of the first section of your book , as it may be the matter of an Objection , I have answered before . As to your Authorities I say , 1.  Mr. Vines saith nothing which proveth any approbation of your opinion : whether Mr. Burgess do , I leave to himself , for I know not certainly . All that I know of , since Dr. Ward is Mr. Blake , Mr. Humphrey , and John Timpson ; and John Timpson , Mr. Humphrey and Mr. Blake . Your 3d and 4th Sections need no more answer I think than what is already given . You needed not these pillars to support that point which is the design of your Treatise . 

To these I find you add another , the greatest of all , pag. 611. which you say sinks deep into you : but if reason will do it , I will pluck it up by the roots ; partly by desiring you to peruse what I have twice or thrice before answered to it , and partly by adding as followeth ; That 1.  If a man by mistaken doubtings shall keep himself away from a Sacrament , that doth not destroy his Title to it or the Grace signified , nor is it any one's fault but his own . I therefore deny your Minor : It is not this doctrine that cuts off doubting Christians from the Sacrament , but themselves that do culpably withdraw . To your Prosyllogism ; I deny the Mayor : that doctrine which concludes it sin in the doubtful Christian to Receive , doth not cut him off : For it concludeth it not his sin to Receive in itself , but to Receive doubtingly : so that it is not Receiving , but Doubting , that is properly his sin : and withal we say , that it is his Duty to Receive , and his greater Sin not to Receive than to Receive . And though an erring Conscience doth always ensnare , and so create a necessity of sinning which way soever we go , till it be rectified , yet it 's a greater sin to trespass against a plain precept , than against an erring Conscience in many cases . But the main stress lieth on your proof , which is from Rom. 14.23 . [ Whatsoever is not of faith is sin . ] But I could wish you would consider it better , before you press home that Text to the same sense against all other duties as you do against this , lest you leave God but little service from the Church . 1.  It is one thing to doubt about indifferent matters , such as Paul speaks of , as eating , etc.  For there he is condemned if he eat ; because he is sure it is lawful to forbear ; but not sure that it is lawful to eat . But press not this upon us in case of necessary duty . If God command me to pray , praise or communicate , my doubt will not justify my forbearance ; and though it entangle me in sin , it cannot disoblige me from duty ; but I shall sin more if I forbear . 

You say [ If it be sin for the unregenerate to Receive , then cannot the doubting Christian be persuaded , and consequently sinneth . ] Ans. True : but that 's not long of the doctrine , but of his error : and it is the case of all practical errors ; which will not therefore justify you in blaming the doctrine : it 's the unavoidable effect of an erring Conscience . And again I say , he sinneth more in forbearing . 

Whereas you conclude this Argument to be convincing , I have told you before why it convinceth not me : but to yourselves I would ask , whether it do not also convince you that your own doctrine is as unsufferable ? For I am past doubt that not only most Christians , but even most doubting Christians have more knowledge that they have true justifying faith , than the rest of the world have , that they have true Dogmatical faith . Though the wicked doubt lesle , because they believe and regard it lesle , yet indeed they have not only far more cause to doubt of the truth of their Dogmatical faith , but have lesle true knowledge of it . At least many of them it 's thus with , when so many true Christians do as much doubt of their Dogmatical faith , as of any . Now what will you do with all these ? If you take their faith itself ( though common ) to be their Title , than they must according to you , all keep a way , while they doubt of it : And if it be but the verbal profession of that Dogmatical faith that is their Title , before God , and their own Conscience , than any infidel may make himself a Title at pleasure by a lie , and the bare opus operatum of speaking the words which he never believed , but derideth the sense while he uttereth the terms . As you will save your own Communicants from condemning themselves then for want of Assurance of their Lower faith , so shall you direct us to do by ours . 

I will only add this Question , What Description must that man give of the faith short of Justifying , which entitles to Baptism , who takes Justifying faith itself to lie but in Assent ? You know my meaning : It will be certainly another kind of faith , than Mr. Blake describeth that such a man must require . 

I had thought I had done with you at this time : and this day I received a Book of Mr. Prins writing , containing the fruit of your Doctrine ; and therein I find a passage of yours cited from pag. 125. which makes me think it may deserve further consideration than I thought to have taken of it . 

You say [ Giving and Receiving being Relata , all those Texts that prove it the duty of any to Receive the Sacrament , doth eo nomine oblige the Minister to deliver it to them , or admit them ; because posito uno Relatorum , ponitur alterum . ] 

Answ. Must Logic do the deed at last ? If so , it will give us leave to distinguish between Relata secundùm dici & secundùm esse ; simplices & duplices relationes , etc.  Ponitur autem hoc unum Relatorum vel in esse , vel in debito : If you speak of the former , than you know 1. that our Giving is not effectual Giving , but Offering , when it goes before Receiving : and 2. that as scibile may be sine scientiâ , as existent ; so Offering may be without Receiving , though not Receiving in our present sense without Offering : therefore one of these may be put without the other . But I suppose it is Debitum offerendi , & recipiendi , which you think are thus related . But 1. here the debitum offerendi goes first , and the debitum recipiendi comes after , and is but conditional and not actual , till the very act of oblation . You may be bound to Offer your people the Sacrament , and not perform your duty : they are not bound to Receive it , when you are bound to Offer it ; but only on condition or supposition that you actually do Offer it : so that it is not your duty and theirs that are connexed as Relata : else they should be bound to Receive that which is not offered them ; for you may neglect your duty . Nor is it your actual Offering and their actual Receiving that are inseparably connexed as perfect Relates ; for you may offer it , when it shall be refused . 

But you 'll say , [ At least the thing intended stands good ; that posito recipiendi debito ponitur etiam debitum offerendi . ] I answer : Not always so neither , unless you take the Duty of Reception to be actual and absolute , and not conditional : For you may be bound to Receive on supposition that I offer : both this and many other things which I am not bound to offer : Much lesle am I eo nomine ( as you strongly say ) obliged to deliver it to you . You may be obliged to give me Thanks , supposing I bestow a Benefit on you : and your thanks hath relation to my Benefit : and yet I do not yet understand that I am eo nomine obliged to give you that Benefit , because you must be thankful if I do . Your Obligation to receive , is plainly consequential and hypothetical , supposing I actually offer it : and that cannot so necessarily infer the duty of Offering . For I make little doubt to prove , that in many Cases when the Minister sinneth in his Offer , it is yet the People's duty to receive it if he do offer it . The Scribes and Pharisees might unjustly usurp the Chair of Moses , and yet it may be the people's duty to hear them . The Priests may usurp their place , and yet the cleansed Leper may be bound to show himself to them . Nero may sin by ask Tribute , when it may be my duty to give it him if he ask it . If Mr. Prin had thought that your Argument would justify a Thief in taking his purse by the high way , I do not think he would have cited it . Giving and Taking here are Relatives too : If a Thief demand your purse , resolving to kill you if you deny it , it may be your duty to Give it , to save your life ; when in my opinion it is not eo nomine his duty to Demand or Take it . 

Well! but this is not the chief part of my answer to you . If you had laid better grounds for it , and well limited it , I might well grant you , that when the People are bound to Receive , it implieth the Minister's duty to offer it them . But than you must take duty as you find it entirely , at least essentially , and you must not cut off a piece of a duty ; yea , leave out the essentials , and turn it into a sin . God commands people first to Repent and Believe , and then to profess it by words and sacramental actions , and therewith receive the seals of his special grace . This is your Duty : Perform your duty so far as is antecedent to mine , and I shall confess that mine will follow , and I must offer you the Sacraments . But if you will refuse to repent or Believe , or to profess that you do so , in a credible sort , or will by word or life profess that you do not so , and yet will demand the Sacrament , you do not your duty , and so I am not obliged . Prove that it is a man's duty to receive the Sacraments without Faith and Repentance ( yea or a credible Profession of them , ) or to profess by that Reception that he Takes Christ and Believeth in him , when it is a lie , and then you say somewhat . All men are bound mediately to receive the Sacrament ; that is , first to seek after the Word , and then to hear it , and then to believe and repent , and then to seek the Sacraments : but it followeth not that they may do the last first , and receive before they repent . 

Moreover , as the Receiver is bound ad ordinem & modum , and not simply and any how to receive : so I am bound ad ordinom & modum , and not any how to give . And therefore I must first know my call to it as a Pastor , and I must do my best to help the people to a due preparation , and I must do it Decently , in Order , and to Edification : and the miss of one of these may turn the duty into a sin . I am not therefore of your opinion , as you next express it , that [ there is as many Scripture precepts and precedents to deliver the Sacrament to all , as to any , supposing them within the Church , and neither unintelligent or excommunicate . ] If this were true , than 1.  If any of the Parish will say , Sir ! I am none of your Flock ; I renounce your Pastoral over sight ; but yet I will have the Sacrament from you ; it seems I must be forced to do the office of that Relation where it is disclaimed : And if all the Anabaptists or Separatists of some neighbour-church demand it of me , I must give them all the Sacrament : or if all the Parishes about stock in to me , or a thousand strangers , I must give it them all ; or if the Parishioners will refuse to speak to me , and to be personally instructed , and one will have it leaping , and singing , and laughing ; and others will have me bring it them from house to house , I must give it to them all ; and why not , if they swear and curse when they demand it , or profess to take it merely to ensnare me ? For none of these are supposed unintelligent or excommunicate . 

But I find you take up this Reason before in another sort , sect . 2. pag. 5.  Having given a touch about Arminius so doubly defective of ingenuity , as shows you to be but a man , ( of which more in due place ) you add [ This doctrine enforceth them to distinguish between what gives Right , as to a man's own part , to Church-membership and Ordinances , and that which gives Right to be admitted : whereas the truth is , these are Relata , quorum posito & sublato uno ponitur & tollitur alterum . Besides , there is this great inconvenience it runs down right into , that the Minister shall be bound to administer the Ordinances ( particularly the Sacrament ) unto people , when they are bound upon pain of damnation not to take them . ] 

To all this I answer : 1.  I do not think you ever read such a distinction as you here frame : at least not from him , whom ( you know ) I have reason to think you intend . Doubtless , he that hath Right to be admitted , hath also in eodem foro a Right on his own part to Ordinances . This is not fairly done : Indeed a Right of Admission may be in the Minister , ( who is another subject ) when yet the party hath no Right ( of the same sort ) to be admitted , or to seek or Receive . 

But we must once more consider your Canon de relatis . And to what is said before , let me deal plainlier with you , and tell you that the things in question are not Relata : For though actual Giving and Receiving have some kind of Relation , yet several Rights , viz. the Jus dandi , & Jus accipiendi , are not Relates . Show us if you can , how Jus ad Jus refertur . 

Moreover , the Distinction which is used by those whom you here oppose , is ( not as you feign it , but ) between [ a Right Coram Deo to claim and receive the Sacraments ] and [ a Right or Duty of the Minister to give it upon claim or demand . ] Now the former Right is actual and positive ; the later but suppositive : Demanding or seeking is supposed to go before my giving , and my right and duty to give : And I think ( according to my small skill in Logic ) Demanding and Giving are no inseparable Relates ; and I am content that any beggar at your door be Judge : This or nothing you must prove to your purpose . And if you prove it , I may the next time I see you demand all your Estate and Learning ; and what will you do then ? And ( with submission to the Judgement of better Lawyers , especially the Learned Citer of your words ) I conceive that [ a Right of delivering on supposition of a demand or claim ] doth not so necessarily suppose a Right to demand and claim , as one Relate supposeth its Correlate . If a man demand your coat ( upon terms of violence ) you may give him your cloak also ; and yet no more justify his demand , than you justify his smiting you by turning the other cheek . But if I should be mistaken in these Law-matters , I must remember Mr. Prin , that when ever he delivereth to soldiers the key of his house to prevent the breaking open the doors , or delivereth them his Arms or monies to save his life , or a contribution to save the rest , he justifieth their Right to claim all this . And by the same rule when ever he went to prison at their command , he justified their right of commanding him : For Commanding and Obeying are as much Relates , as Demanding and Delivering are . 

By this time you may see what is become of the [ Grievous inconvenience ] which you dreamt we were running downright into . I hope you would not persuade the World that ever we taught , that it is our duty to give Effectively , which ever causeth a reception , nor yet to deliver the Sacraments , but on supposition of their claim or seeking , to any such men ; nor yet to persuade them to claim or seek them in statu quo , in their present unbelief and impenitency , with a false profession of the contrary . And then do you indeed count it so grievous an inconvenience that we should be bound [ to give it to an unjust claimer on supposition he demand it , on a lying profession of Faith and Repentance , which yet is credible to me ] and yet that he deserveth damnation for his lying profession and unjust claim and receiving . If the Iliaca passio were common in London , and this miserere provoked some rich Physician to so much compassion , as to deliver to his servant a gold bullet to swallow for the Cure ( which is reputed so good a medicine ) and many come for them that are really sick , and swallow the bullet , and it saves their lives ; but many others sergeant the disease through covetousness of the gold , and the servant believing them , dilivereth them the bullets ; do you think here the servant did more than his duty , when he is not able to judge who dissembleth , and the Physician thus leaveth it to him ? Or do you think that the covetous dissemblers had coram donatore a just claim , supposing him to be able to discern their deceit ? Or is here such a Grievous inconvenience as you imagined ? I think not . 

And as for the inextricable difficulties which you think this leads into , another may see the way out of them , when you do not ; and he may as confidently conceive that the difficulties and inconveniences of your way are far more . 

As for that part of your Book which owneth Church-discipline , and the power of the Keys , I give you thanks for it , and assure you if we could but see it practised , even lesle rigorously than the ancient Churches have practised it , when there was no coersive power of violence to enforce it , but rather the sword of persecutors to discountenance it , we should not trouble you with Contests for any other suspension , For my part I blame many of the suspenderss as heartily as you do ; but it is not for doing too much , but for doing too little , and in disorder . And I hope you that are for Excommunicating where others do but suspend , ( though Mr. Prin can tell you that even that is [ in truth an actual Excommunication , without any precedent citation , articles , legal proceeding , hearing , sentence , etc. ] Append . ) will do more than they , and not lesle , according to this principle . And if you will needs believe that you are not authorised to do it ( a ready way in this age to put off some troublesome work ) I hope you will seek to them that you think have Authority : If it be in a meeting of Ministers , make use of them : If in a Bishop , use him if you have one , if not , procure one . For me thinks men that own the necessity of Discipline , should do their best to procure the exercise of it . 

And as for that Book of Mr. Prins , which occasioned me to say the more to you on these passages , though I highly honour the Author's name , and disown the way of his Vicar A. against whose way he principally intendeth it ; yet I must say that his writing shows me , as well as his Icon , that All flesh is grass : the best men vanity — And what the Church and World must suffer , if the best men had the ruling of it . That all ministers who will not give the Sacraments to all their Parishioners ( legally qualified and desiring the same ) p. 4. should be used as he directeth , viz. their Tithes withheld by the people , themselves imprisoned , and ejected , I cannot wish ; especially if I consider what the legal qualification is , and if I believe him ( here ) that no Ordinance can be made without the consent of King , Lord's , and Commons , and that the Ordinances wanting these are mere Nullities in Law. These evils which I foresee , go not down so easily with me as with that pious Author : 1.  That hereby the greatest part of the ablest godly Ministers in England ( as far as I am able to learn ) must be turned out and imprisoned : 2.  And then the Churches either left destitute , or possessed by ignorant , drunken , scondalous men ; there being not worthy men of his judgement to supply them . 3.  And how many thousand souls may perish everlastingly ? 4.  And God's worship be abused , and his name dishonoured through the land 5.  And the great hopes of godly people frustrate concerning the prosperity of the Church as to posterity ; and their joy turned into sorrow . 6.  And the enemies have their ends . 7.  And would be able to tell us that where the Bishops cast out one able Minister , they have cast out many . 8.  That even the men whom Mr. Prin av-s_d intendeth , should have so much to say for their former resistance and usage of such men as he ; as to say [ You see now what men these are , and what desolating cruel works they would make , if it had fallen to their Lot to govern . ] 9  That even the multitude of sober Godly men , should have such a temptation , to rejoice at that which once they lamented , even that such as Mr. P. are kept from power , and that they have escaped so great a calamity as he here designeth them . 10.  That indeed such a spirit of violence should be found in so good a man , that hath tasted of so much persecution himself , as to endeavour to imprison and eject all the Ministers in England , that think the Law of God is stricter than the Laws of England , ( standing as heretofore ) in point of Qualification of Receivers whom we must admit . 11.  That the Quakers , who are now crying down Tithes , should be so much furthered in their design , as to have the people taught to detain them by Law ; and they that are crying down the Ministry , should be so far directed to eject them . 12.  And that the multitude of obstinate , rebellious people , that will scorn to come to a Minister , or hear him speak to them personally , or will live in many notorious Vices ( which the Law enabled us not to use Discipline against ) or the ignorant that know not who Christ is , God or man , nor will be accountable to us of their understanding the Essentials of Religion , but watch all advantages to defame their Ministers , and hinder their doctrine , and detain their maintenance , and get them out ; I say , that these should have now directions put into their hands , for nonpayment of Tithes , and for imprisoning and ejecting them : All these things I confess are grievous to me ; though I believe that the principal intention of the Author was , to direct some better men , that might be wronged by the overmuch rigour of some Minister , that was guilty of unwarrantable separation : But good meanings will not warrant such attempts . Were I of Mr. Prin's Judgement against suspension from Sacraments , I think yet I should rather choose to be suspended in another sort myself , than be guilty of Imprisoning and Ejecting all the Ministers in England , that gave not the Sacraments to all their Parishioners , according to the Laws which never were repealed by the threefold consent of Kings , Lords , and Commons' . 

And herein I see what one bad opinion or principle in practicals will do , even in the best and most experienced men ; and what actions must be expected from the best man , if his Judgement be mistaken : And I see also whether the Doctrine of Common Admission leads . 

The fifth Disputation . De Nomine . Whether Hypocrites and other Unregenerate persons be called Church-members , Christians , Believers , Saints , Adopted , justified , etc.  Univocally Analogically , or Equivocally ? Luke 14.26 . If any man come to me and hate not — his own life , he cannot be my Disciple . And whosoever doth not bear his Cross and come after me , cannot be my Disciple . Vers. 33.  Whosoever he be that forsaketh not all that he hath , he cannot be my Disciple . Gal. 5.24 . And they that are Christ's have Crucified the Flesh , with the Affections and Lusts.  Rom. 8.9 . Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ , he is none of his . 1 Pet. 2.6 , 7 , 9 , 10.  He that Believeth on him shall not be confounded — unto you which Believe he is precious — ye are a chosen Generation , a Royal Priesthood , an holy Nation , a peculiar People , that you should show forth the Praises of him who hath called you out of Darkness into his marvellous light : which in times past were not a people , but are now the people of God.  Rom. 6.16 . His Servants ye are , to whom you Obey . John 12.26 . Where I am , there shall also my Servant be . Ephes. 5.23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 29 , 30.  — Christ is the Head of the Church , and he is the Saviour of the Body . As the Church is subject to Christ , so let Wives be to their own Husbands in every thing . Husband's love your Wives as Christ loved the Church , and gave himself for it : that he might sanctify it , and cleanse it with the Washing of water , by the Word ; that he might present it to himself a Glorious Church , not having spot , or wrinkle , or any such thing , but that it should be Holy and without blemish . — no man ever yet hated his own Flesh , but nourisheth and cherisheth it , even as the Lord the Church . For we are Members of his Body , and of his flesh , and of his bones . See also Ephes. 4 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16.  1 Cor. 12.12 , 13 , 26 , 27.  For as the Body is One , and hath many members , and all the members of that one Body , being many , are one Body : so also is Christ. For by One spirit we are all baptised into one Body — And whether one member suffer , all the members suffer with it ; or one member be honoured , all the members necessary to say somewhat to the point : which I shall do with as much brevity as I can , without injury to the Cause . 

Because here are several Titles commonly given to unsound Professors , which the Question doth take in , and we cannot speak to them all at once , I shall begin at the first , and then the rest may easily be dispatched : yea , the most that needs to be said concerning them , will fall in , in order to the handling of the first . 

But what shall we do for a Judge or Rule for the determining of our Controversy ? Custom is the Master of Language : and if any one will pretend to so much reason as to tell the signification of words from the bare Etymology , contrary to Customs interpretation , the world will but laugh at him : For how well soever he plays his part , he will but tell us how such words should be used , and not how they are used ; and therefore he will help us to the right understanding of no man's words or writings thereby . it 's Custom therefore , and not Etymology , that we must be judged by : But Custom is here double-tongued . The world is not agreed of the sense of Analoga , nor well of aequivocals and univocals . I must crave of the Reader that he will suppose here what I have already written about these terms to Dr. Kendal ; that I need not to repeat what is there . The Controversy , though but nominal , is old between the Papists and the protestants ; and the protestants have commonly maintained all along since the Reformation , that Hypocrites or mere Professors are but Aequivocally called Members of the Church : The Papists have resisted them in this : and yet been forced in the opposition to cut the throat of their own Cause . Though it be the Defence of the old Protestant Cause here that is finally my Business , yet it is the late opposition made against it by two Protestant Divines that is the occasion of my undertaking ; to wit , Mr. Blake , and ( since him ) Mr. Humphrey . And yet with them I need not have much ado : For , if we are not agreed , we know not well the state of our difference ; and therefore have happily made ourselves uncapable of following it far by Controversy , as being in the dark . In my writing to Mr. Blake , I use to say that such men are [ Church-members , Christians , Saints , etc. but Equivocally or Analogically , ] as being willing to avoid all needless Controversy about words ; but sometime ( supposing that Assertion ) I use the common language of the protestants , and mention equivocally only . I do not remember that Mr. Blake doth affirm that such men and true Believers are univocally called Church-members , Covenanters , Christians , etc. nor yet that he denieth it : so that I know not what he is for ; but what he is against I partly know : For the term [ Equivocal ] here , he tells us that he abhors : But he would take it as tolerable , if I had used the term [ Analogical . ] And if that might reconcile us , it is but his more heedful reading of my words , and he will find that I do ordinarily use it . As pag. 62. lin . 4 , 5. [ It is an imperfect Consent , Analogically or Equivocally called Covenanting , etc. ] And after at the bottom of the page , [ and therefore such are said , as to the Faith , Consent and Covenant so required , but Equivocally or Analogically to Consent Covenant or Believe , etc. ] And pag. 64. lin . 6 , 7. [ these men in proper strict sense are no true Christians , but Analogically only . ] And pag. 65.  [ As he is Equivocally or Analogically a Beleiver , or Christian , so I yield he is a Member of the visible Church , etc. ] These and other such places may satisfy Mr. Blake , if the term [ Analogical ] will satisfy him . Well! but yet the term [ Equivocal ] he abhors : If so ; then he must either judge that they are Univocally called Church-members , Saints , etc. or else that there is a third , between Univocal and Equivocal . The former he speaks not out : the later ( I suppose ) he knoweth is denied by many Philosophers with so much reason , as that it deserveth his pains for a better proof . it 's like he hath read it inter leges Aequivocorum , in the Logicks commonly read in the Schools , that Omne Analogum est Aequivocum , ( as Fascic . Log. pag. 21. & alii . ) it 's agreed on , that Vnivoca vel Synonyma are sometimes taken so strictly for Paronymas , and sometime so largely as to comprehend the paronymas , si careant homonymia : and thus it is that we have to do with the term . Burgersdicius divideth Genus in synonymum sive univocum , & homonymum sive aequivocum , and makes all that is spoken inequaliter de speciebus suis to be Genus aequivocum . But then he meaneth not by inaequaliter that mere inequality in the Degree of Excellency in the several species , ( on which some Scotists affirm , that Animal is Genus Analogum quoad hominem & brutum , because man is prastantius animal : ) but cum una species ab alterâ pendet , and so the Genus doth magis uni , alteri minus convenire , aut uni mediatè , alteri per alterum . And so he concludeth that Ens , si genus sit , aequivocum genus est ; quia substantia magis est Ens quam Accidens ; imò Accidens non est Ens , nisi quia & quatenas pendet a substantia . Yet this which is by the Schoolmen called Analogum attributionis , is as like to belong to Univocals as any Analogum is : as the same Author saith pag. 155.  Omnium longissimè à synonymis absunt homonyma a casu , quaeque causam homonymiae habent in nobis : propiùs ad synonymorum naturam accedunt tropica , ac imprimis analoga : at omnium proximè quae ambigua sunt ob inaequalem attributionem : And yet these doth he there again reckon among the homonymas or aquivoca ; dividing homonymie into that which is á Casu , and that which is à Consilio , and into that whole Reason is in nobis , and whose Reason is in rebus ; among which this inaequalis attributionis is the highest , which the Schoolmen call Anology . For which Burgensdicius , Keckerman , and other of our Logicians , with some contempt reject the Schoolmen's doctrine of Analogae . 

Scotus maintaineth , that inter Vnivocat & Aequivoca non datur medium , in 1 Dist. 8. q. 2.  For 1 Denominatives ( as diverse of the Scotists show at large , and its past doubt ) are not media between them . Nam licet non praedicentur univocè de suis subjectis , quia de illis non praedicantur essentialiter , sed denominative , tamen sunt praedicata Vnivoca , quia tributine candem rationem , licèt accidentariam , secundùm idem nomen , suis subjectis ; ut Meurisse . For Scotus makes this difference in 1.  Dist. 3. q. 3. & in 3.  Dist. 7. q. 1. between univocè praedicuri , and esse pradicatum univocum , quòd illud sit praedicari secundum candem rationem essentialem univocatis : hoc verò sit praedicari secundum candem rationem accidentariam inferioribus . And as Paronymas , so Analoga are not media inter univo●um & aequivocum . Nam inter unum & multa nullum medium inveniri potest in rebus : ergo nec in vocibus inter , significare unum & multa , medium invenietur . At univoca & aequivoca opponuntur pones significare unum & multa : ergo inter ea nullum potest constitui medium . Si igitur nomes aliquod significat quidpiam unum multis common , univocum est : si verò plura , aequivocum . Quare nullum est analogum quod sit simpliciter tale , sed vel est analogum univocum , vel analogum aequivocum : Analogum quidem univocum , si Ratio ejus una & eadem conveniat multis , cum ordine tamen ita ut prius dicatur de uno quam de altero : u.g. ratio animalis respectu hominis & bruti , etc. ut Meurisse Metaphys . Scot l. 1. p. 58 , 59  

So Guilford de Rubione in 1 D●st . 3. q. 3. saith , Vnivocum opponi scli aequivoco , non verò analogo & denominativo : quia univocum se habet ad aequivocum , sicut unum ad multa : unum autem propriè solùm multis opponitur : se habet autem ad anal●gum & denominativum , sicut superius ad sua inferiora : quia univocum aliud est purum , aliud non purum : non purum est aut analogum aut denominativum : Nullum superius autem opponitur suis inferioribus . Itaque univocum non opponitur analogo & denominativo : sed ab analogo distinges tur tantùm univocum purum , & à denominativo univocum qui ●ditativum , seu illud quod est & praedicatum univocum , & univocè praedicatur . 

See also Posnaniensis in 1.  Dist. 3. q. 1. act . 3. dub . 3.  & Ocham . in 1.  Dist. 2. q. 9 lit . E. denying tha● there is any Analogical praedication contra-distinct from Univocal and Equivocal . Lege Meurisse Metaph. l. 1. pag. 60 , 61. etc. & pag. 110.111 , 112 , etc. & ●hil . Faventin . in Philos. Natural . Scoti Theo●em . 95 pag. 654. usque ad 674.  Vid. & Cajetani Opuscul . de Analog . nom . cap. 1.  & 4.  & 6.  & Fonsecam 4.  Metaphys . cap. 2. q. 2. sect . 3. etc. And so Porphyre gives it as the sense of Aristotle , that Ens aequivocè dicitur de primis decem generibus , c. de Specie : which Suarez expounding , saith , [ Dicendum est ab antiquis autoribus Analoga sub aequivocis comprehendi , ut constat ex Aristot. in Anti●raed . c. 4. & ex Aug. in Categoriis , c. 2. & hoc significavit Aristot. locis infran citandis de Anolog●a Entis , & praesertim CITIZEN Elench . c. 6. ubi agens de aequivocis exempla ponit in Ente . ] 

So that if these be not mistaken , I may call the same term Analogical and Equivocal , yea and I must call it either Univocal or Equivocal when I have called it Analogical . To the same purpose have written R●da , Antonius Andreas , Francis. May●o , Trombetta , Pendasius , Bonettus , Joan. Canonicus , Scribonius in Pantalit . Raconisius and others . And Guilford Camerarius Scotus in Parte 3.  Disput. Philosoph . select . maketh it his first question , and determineth it as all the Scotists , Nulla dari Analoga media distincta ab univocis & aequivocis , pag. 304.305 , 306 , 307.  So Irenaus Brassavolus in Scoti universalia , q. 7.  & 8. so that if this hold , the Opponents must prove that Hypocrites are Christians , Saints , Church-members , etc. univocally as well as Analogically , or else they will prove to be such but equivocally . 

I know other Schoolmen are of another mind ; and indeed they are of so many minds about the very sense of the word Analogum , and the true nature of Analogy , that it may well make us despair of a fair end of this Controversy . They are not so much agreed wherein it is that Analogy doth consist : some say that it consisteth in dependentia : and some ( as Petr. Hurtado de Mendoza , Disput. Logic. 9 sect . 4. subject . 5. ) in transcendentia , etc.  Read but Hurtado himself of this , Disput. 9 from pag. 111. to 124. and see whether there be not opinions enough about Analogy , to warrant us to despair of a determimination of this Controversy , from the Consent of the Learned . Should I but tell you out of Tartaretus in 1. sent . didst . 3. qu. 3. and Rada , and others , of the threefold Univocation , Logical , Physical and Metaphysical , and the Description of each , and out of Francis. de Marchia of the four several degrees of Univocation , and many more distinctions which must be taken in , if we would exactly discuss this point , you will think before we have done that the Matter is not worth our pains . In a word , seeing our Controversy ( as is said ) is de nomine ; and the Custom of Artists is the only Judge that can determine such Controversies , and they are here all in pieces among themselves , as much as about almost any one word in use with them , as far as I can remember , it followeth that Mr. Blake and I must stay for a decision till our Judges are agreed , what Analogy is . 

For my own part , I make so small account of the Controversy , that where the term [ Equivocal ] offendeth any , as it doth Mr. Blake , I am very willing to let it alone , and to use the term [ Analogical ] which they can more patiently hear : I am loath we should quarrel about so small a matter . But because I am on the Defense , I shall yet briefly tell you , what Reasons I had to use the term [ Equivocal ] as well as [ Analogical . ] 

And first I shall argue from the Definition to the Name ; and secondly ▪ from Authority . 

And 1.  We may here suppose what is commonly acknowledged , viz. that Vnivoca sunt quorum nomen est common , & secundum nomen ratis sustantiae est cadem : Aequivoca verò quorum nomen est common , & secundùm nomen ratio substantiae diversa . [ Vbi [ Ratio substantiae ] denotat conceptum objectivum , quisquis ille sit , vel substantialis , vel accidentalis : Et Conceptus objectivus semper accip●tur red●plicatiuè , in quantum significatur per nomen , & sic sumitur essentialiter : quia leoni ut albo essentialis est albedo . Igitur aequivoca hoc differunt ab univocis , quia his communis est & Vox , & Conceptus formalis & object vus : univoca enim sunt ipsa universalia , atque ità eisdem omnino verbis ac conceptibus constant quibus & illa : Aequivoca verò neque habent eundem conceptum formalem , neque objectivum , quia significata sunt omnino dissimilia in ratione significata per nomen , ut Hurtad , de Mendoz. Log. D●sp . 9  § . 1.  But as he further noteth , They that hold that we do uno actu plura ut dissimilia cognoscere , must say also that , praeter nomen conceptus formalis est idem aequivocis , & differt ab univocis , quòd univoca habent eundem conceptum objectivum similem ; secus verò aequivoca , quae habent plures dissimiles ; item differunt in conceptu formali , quia aequivocus aequivalet pluribus , etc.  

These things about the nature of Equivocals being supposed , I must next consider of the several terms now in question , and examine them hereby , as applied to the Godly and the Wicked . 

And first the Word [ Church ] in its general sense is not the thing that we have now in question : Otherwise I should soon confess that in all Assemblies there is something common : a Congregation of materials is common to them all . And thus it may as well be said that the word Ecclesia is univocally spoken of a mutinous confused tumult , Act , 19.32 , 39 , 40. or any other common Assembly ; as of an Assembly of mere Professors . But it is a Christian Church than we are speaking of ; which being Coetus Fidelium , vel Christianorum , is differenced from other societies by the Matter , and by the End. And for the first : If bare Professors are but equivocally called Christians or believers in Christ , than they are but equivocally Church-members , nor a Church as consisting of such , but equivocally a Church . But the antecedent is true , therefore so is the Consequent . The Consequence is undeniable , because it is not a Congregation or Society in general , but the Christian Church thus specified by its Matter and End , which we speak of , as is said . The Antecedent I prove , reducing the Paronymas into the Abstracts ; and first of the term Believers : If Faith be but equivocally attributed to the bare Professors and the true Believers , than they are equivocally called Believers . But the Antecedent is true , as I prove thus : If the name of faith be the same , and the ratio substantiae secundum illud nomen , be diverse , than faith ascribed to bare Professors and to true Believers is an aequivocum . But the Antecedent is true , as is most apparent : For that its the same name [ Faith , Belief , Believers ] we are agreed : And that it is not the thing in both that is thus named , I think we are also agreed . For in one sort , it is a true saving Faith , that is called by the name of [ Faith ] : and in the other , it is no faith at all , but the bare verbal Profession of that faith which they have not . And I hope we are agreed , that faith , and the Profession of Faith , are not the same thing . 

Object . But though this hold as to bare Professors , or mere Hypocrites that have no faith , yet it will not hold of these that have a faith short of Justifying . 

Answ. 1.  It cannot be denied that bare Professors of saving Faith are visible members of the Church , though they have no faith at all ; therefore it must be granted of all them , that they are but equivocally Believers , and of them is our question . 

2.  I have before proved , that it is this profession of a saving faith , that constituteth a visible member ; and therefore all such and only such ( with their seed ) are visible members ; and that it is not the reality of any faith ( special or common , ) that constituteth a visible member . For that which makes visible , must itself be visible : But so is neither a special nor a common faith : for no man knoweth it in another . So that à quatenus ad omne , à forma ad nomen , it is plain that all Professors and none but Professors are visible Members , and that if any have the Faith professed ( special or common ) that makes them not visible Members ; but the profession of Faith whether they have it or not . So that it plainly followeth , that a visible Member , qua talis , is denominated a Believer only equivocally . 

3.  And if they be denominated Believers ab ipsa fide , scil . that which is short of Justifying , yet its plain that this faith itself is not the same with that of sound Believers ; no not of the same species , Mr. Blake himself being Judge , who so keenly girds me for making saving and common faith to differ but in degree , when in the very writings that he must fetch the slander from , I again and again profess that they differ morally in f●ecie . ) If then his lower faith and saving faith do so much differ , than there is not the same ratio substantiae secundum illud nomen : For I have not yet found that it is a Generical Nature common to both , which he supposeth signified by the word [ faith ] in our Question ; much lesle that Church-membership is constituted by such a thing ; But if he should come to that , I must first desire him to describe that Generical nature , and no more to lay it upon the specifical nature either of Dogmatical or Justifying faith ; and when he hath so done , I doubt not to bring many more species that shall on as fair pretences put in for a place as participant in that generical nature , as his Dogmatical faith hath done . 

So that by this it is evident , that not only the thing which constituteth men visible Church-members , ( which is always in the Adult , a Profession and not the Faith professed ) is but equivocally called Faith ; but also that the lower faith is equivocally called the Christian Faith. But the first alone sufficeth us to prove that visible Members as visible , are but equivocally called Church-members , because the ratio substantiae is diverse , secundum illud nomen . 

2.  And it is as plain that bare Professors are but equivocally called Christians . For the Ratio nominis in found Christians is true Faith in Christ as Christ : but in the other it is only the Profession of such a faith : and these are certainly diverse . And If you again carry the Question to Dogmatical Believers , I answer as before ; both 1.  That they are not the persons in our Question ; 2.  That as such , they are not members visible ( no nor mystical . ) 3.  That even as to them the Ratio substantiae is so diverse , as makes the name apparently equivocal . 

3.  The same also may be said of the word [ Saints ] Holiness in the Regenerate is the hearty Devotedness and Separation of the Person to God as God. Holiness in bare professors ( who are visible Members , ) is but the verbal Devotion and extrinsic Separation ; And Holiness in the common Believer , is but a half Devotedness and Separation , and wanteth the Essentials which the Regenerate have So that it is not the same thing that is called Holiness in these ●hree ▪ and therefore the word Hol●ness as to them is equ●u●c●l ▪ 

4.  The same also I say of Regeneration : The true Believeer is called Regenerate , because he is so changed by the spirit , as to be as it were born again , not of flesh , nor of the wiil of man , but of God , and is become a new creature : but the bare Professor is called Regenerate , only because he is baptised , and professeth Regeneration , and is entered extrinsecally into a new society . And the lower sort of Believers is said to be regenerate , but only because he hath some common work of another species : so that Regeneration is equivocally spoken of these . 

5.  So also is Justification : it 's clear that it is not the same thing that is called Justification in the one sort and in the other , as I suppose will be confessed . 

6.  The same also I may say of Adoption as is undeniable . 

7.  And the same I may say of being in Covenant with God. For 1. ex parte Dei , with the Regenerate God is actually in Covenant , that is , as it were obliged to them : but to the rest it is but conditionally , which will induce no actual Obligation , or Debitum , till the Condition be performed . 2.  And on their own part , the regenerate are said to Covenant with God , principally because they consent to his terms , and heartily Accept his Covenant , as it is ; which Scripture calleth sometime their Believing , ( If thou believe in thy heart , etc. ) and sometime their Willing : ( whosoever will , let him drink of the waters of Life freely ) : so that the Regenerate man's Covenating is always with the Heart , ) and comprehendeth all the Essentials ) ; and sometime with the Mouth also : But the bare Professors Covenanting is but with the mouth alone ; and the lower Believers is wanting in the internal Essentials : so that it is plain , that it is not the same thing that is called [ Covenanting ] in them : and therefore the word is equivocal . 

And then by this it is put out of doubt that they are equivocally called Church members : Because the things forementioned that constitute their Church-membership are not the same . 

If any Papist should here set in , and with Bellarmine pled , that it is Profession and Engagement to Church Polity that constituteth all Members , and that the Church in its first notion signifieth only the visible Body , and that Faith and Holiness , or any thing intrinsic is not necessary to make a Member , but only to ma●e a living Member ; 1.  I should desire such to be at the pains to see what our Divines , Amesius , Whitaker , and abundance more , have said already to show the vanity of this , yea and its self-contradiction . 2.  Were it not done by so many already , I would show such from many Scriptures and Fathers , that the word [ Church ] in our Christian sense doth principally signify the number that are cordially congregate unto Christ , and united to him . 3.  But whomsoever the word is first applied to , it is certain if it be applied to both , that it is equivocal : unless you will say , that it signifieth some Generical nature in common to both : which cannot be as is aforesaid ; and if it were granted , 1.  It would exclude the spiritual aggregation to Christ to be the Ratio nominis , contrary to Scripture ; and 2.  It would exclude all Saints that have not the opportunity of a visible profession and conjunction with the Visible Body , from being of the Church , and so from Salvation ; Or 3  It would make two Churches specifically distinct , which both Papists and protestants do so vehemently disavow . 

Having thus given my Reasons from the common description of Equivocals , and the nature of the things , why I say that mere Professors , and consequently visible Members as such , are but equivocally called Believers , Christians , Saints , Members , etc.  I shall next come to Authority , and inquire what is the Custom of Divines in this case , seeing that Custom is so much the master of Speech : and it is only Protestant Divines that I shall allege , because it is for the sake of protestants that I write , to dissuade them from siding with the Papists in this point : For between them and us it is so ancient and well known a Controversy , that with men that are exercised in such writings , my allegations will be needless : but for the sake of some confident men , that have derided the common ●ssertionss of Protestant ; against Papists , as if they were singularly mine I shall annex some of the words of our most esteemed Writers by which these men may discern the minds of the rest ; wishing that such men would rather have been at the pains to have read the Authors themselves , than to suffer their passions and tongues to overrun their understandings . 

1.  Calvin in 1 Cor. 12.  [ His interea duobus ep th●tis declarat quinam habendi sint inter vera Ecclesiae membra , & qu● ad ejus Communionem pr priè pertineant : Nisi enim vitae sanctimoniâ Christianum te ostendas , delitescere quidem in Ecclesiâ poteris , sed ex eá tamen n●n eris . Sanctificari ergò in Christo o●ortet omnes qui in populo Dei censeri volunt . Porrò ●anctificationis verbum segregation in sign●ficat ; ea sit in nobis quum per spiritum in vitae novitatem regeneramur , ut serviamus Deo & non Mundo . — Unà cum omnibus invoc . — Et hoc common est piorum omnium Epitheton — Quod exponunt quidam de solâ Professione , mihi frig●dum videtur , & ab usu Scripturae alienum est . ] 

Idem Institut . lib. 4 cap. 1. sect . 7 [ De Eccl●siâ visibili & qué sub cognitionem nostram cadit , quale judicium facere conveniat , ex superioribus ●am l●quere existimo : Diximus enim bifariam de Ecclesiâ Sacras Literas loqui . Interdum quum Ecclesiam nominant , tam intelligunt quae reverâ est coram Deo ; in quam nulli recipiuntur n●si qui Adoptionis gratiâ filii Dei sunt , & spiricûs sanctificatione vera Christi membra . — Saepe autem Ecclesiae nomine universam hominum multitudinem in orbe diffusam designat , quae unum se Deum & Christum colere profitetur . — In hâc autem plurimi sunt permixti hypocritae , qui nihil Christi habent praeter titulum & speciem , plurimi ambitiosi , avari , invidi , maledici , aliqui impurioris vitae , qui ad tempus tolerantur ; vel quia legitimo judicio convinci nequeunt , vel quia non semper ea viget disciplinae veritas quae debebat . ] 

2.  Beza in Confess . Christ. fid . p. 34. c. 5. sect . 8.  [ De veris Ecclesiae membris . ] Vera sunt Ecclesia membra qui characterem illum habent Christianorum proprium , id est , fidem . Fidelis autem aliquis ex eo agnoscitur , quòd unicum Servatorem Jesum Christum agnoscit , fugit peccatum , & studet Justitiae , ídque ex praescripto Verbi Dei. — Nam quod ad rel quos homines attinet , cujuscunque tandem sint statû● vel conditionis , non sunt numerandi inter Ecclesiae membra , etiam si ut ità loquar ) Apostolatu fungerentur . Sed hîc cau●ndum est nè vel ulteriùs progrediamur quam par sit , vel temerè judicemus : expectandum enim est Dei judicium in detegendis hypocritis , & falsi fratibus . — Et pag. 32. sect . 2. he shows [ unam duntaxat esse veram Ecclesiam ; ] and therefore he speaks here of that one Church . 

3.  Junius in his most accurate Tractate de Ecclesiâ ( Vol. 2. p. 998. ) saith , [ Ecclesia absolutè dicta in Divinis , appellatur Coetus eorum quos Deus evocat è natura & modulo naturali ipsorum per gratiam indignitatem filiorum Dei ad gloriam ipsius . — Justam Ecclesiae formam adscripsimus — Vecatur à Deo quisquis ad Ecclesiam pertinet è natura & modulo naturali suo : quá autem ? per gratiam supernaturalem , & viam illius gratiae ; & quo tandem ? in statum supernaturalem apud Deum in coelis — ] 

Et pag. 1014. speaking of the matter of the political Church , Non videtur satis explicata definitio illa — nisi vocem illam [ fidelium ] aequivocè acceperis — non eos solum oportet intelligamus , qui verè sunt fideles , non eos solum qui professione externâ prae se ferunt , licet animo & cord non sint : sed utrosque communiter , locutione planè aequivoâ , non tamen insolent planè , quia utrique saltem conveniunt in nomine , quamvis toto genere secundùm rem & veritatem differant . ] 

Et pag. 1115 1116 , 1117.  Animadvers . in Bellarm. he saith , [ 23.  Ibid. Nomen fidelis accipi pro eo qui fidem publicè profitetur . ] Nempe aequivocè & secundùm quid , putà rationem externam ipsius , ut pictura hominis dicitu● homo . 

24.  Art 27.  [ Vocari Chatolicos qui fidem Catholicam profitentur , quicquid sit de fide internâ . ] Aequivocè igitur , ut proximè dictum . 

25.  Art 28.  [ Christianus enim nomen est Professionis . ] Negatur haec tota Responsio : Nam Patres quum dicerent , verè Christiannos , intelligebant secundùm formam internam Christiani , quae per severa est , Christianismus verus . Nam qui solâ professione sunt Christiani ; two verè quidem de Ecclesia sunt secundùm rationem externam illius : non autem secundum internam illam in quâ est Christianismi veritas . Christianum autem nomen Professionis esse nullus homo negat : sed nomen esse negamus professionis solùm , nisi aequivocè : Nam & Clemens Alex. definit storm . 7. nomen sensus , sidei , & cultus & prof●ssionis est . 

Cap. 11.3 . Art 2.  Vera Ecclesia non esset illa quae dicebatur Ecclesia , sed pii quidam pauci . ] Haec Lutherus rectè de Ecclesia justa secundùm parts essentiales ipsius considerata , id est , formam internam externámque ipsius simul formaliter & materialiter in membris ipsius . Nam Papa & qui sunt ipsius , in Ecclesia sunt materialiter , ut Ecclesiae 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , non Ecclesia sunt ; qui autem in Ecclesi● sunt materialiter atque formaliter , two vera Ecclesia s●nt , essensi dísque . Ecclesia autem vera quidem est quae utrosque quidem complectitu● , ut rete pices bonus & malos : sed quae membra sunt illius , non omnia vera sunt illius formaliter : sed quaedam vera materialiter , formaliter aequivoca . Hoc itaque respectu Ecclesia in membris suis considerata , dicitur ex parte vera , & ex parte non vera : quemadmodum meta aut strews messis dicitur triticum , quae considerata in suis partibus verum habet triticum & paleam , quae non est verum triticum , sed palea tritici & ipsum cont●gens . Vtrumque simul Ecclesia : sed illi materialiter atque formaliter , id est , essentialiter ; isti materialiter solum , id est , aequivocè . Verum autem , figurato , & aequivocè dicto etiam opponitur . ] 

6.  Ibid. [ Distinguunt duas E●clesias . ] Falsum . Non duas Ecclesias numero statuunt , sed unam numero Ecclesiam duplicem esse modo & ratione dicunt pro conditione membrorum ipsius , cum alia sint vera formaliter , eoque essentialia Ecclesiae membra : alia materialiter solum , ac proinde aequivocè dicta . Atque hoc respectu postea membrorum contemplatione veram Ecclesiam vocant , numerum eorum qui membra sunt Ecclesiae verè & essentialiter ; falsam verò eorum , qui membra sunt Ecclesiae materialiter solum atque aequivoce . Hoc autem quisquis verum esse negat , solemn meridie lucere negat , & bis duo esse quatuor . ( if I had spoken so confidently — ) So pag. 1113.20 . Art 31.  [ Non essent membra Corporis viva . ] Id autem est , non esse membra Ecclesiae secundùm partem rationémque formalem , sed secundum materialem ac communem ipsius , ut ante . 

22.  Art 15.  [ In nullo horum locorum distingui duas Ecclesias . ] Quasi verò cum ipsâ veritate , cum arte , cum ratione pugnet quisquis distinguit aequovocationes . 

So pag. 1112.12 . Art 17.  [ Ex priore multi membra & sancti dicuntur aequivocè , quia membra sunt tantum materialiter : ex posteriore autem sancti propriè appellantur atque formaliter . ] 

I hope here 's enough to signify Junius his mind . 

4.  Zanchius in Tract . de Eccles. Vol. 3. cap. 2. p. 56.  [ 3.  Si Ecclesia latius accipiatur pro Ecclesiâ Militante , quatenus etiam reprobi multi & hypocritae ibi connumerantur licet non sint verè de Ecclesia , nec Ecclesia , nec parts Ecclesi● — quae licet mixtos habeat reprobos & hypocritas multos , existentes quidem in Ecclesia , cum tamen ( ut d xi ) sint neque Ecclesia , neque parts Ecclesiae , etc. — Et pag. 58.  [ Hypocritae vero et si sint in Ecclesia , non tamen sunt parts Ecclesiae , neque verè ad Eccl●siam pertinent . Ecclesia enim est Sponsa Christi , corpus Christi unde Augustinus dicere solet roprobos in Ecclesia multos esse , non tamen de Ecclesia — Sunt in Ecclesia sicut palcae in frumento , quae ita sunt in frumento , ut non sint tamen frumentum , nec parts frumenti , sicut comparavit Christus Ecclesiam Mat. 23.  Sunt sicut zizania inter frumentum ab host superseminata . Zizaria autem non sunt frumentum , nec parts frumenti . Videntur quidem reprobi hypocritae qui sunt in Ecclesia , ad tempus esse etiam de Ecclesia ; quamdiu scilicet ab ea non deficiunt , & cum aliis Evangelium profitentur , etc. — cum ventilantur ventilabro irae Divinae , vel deficiunt — patefaciunt se nunquam fuisse membra Ecclesiae , cum proprium membrorum Ecclesiae sit , semper in Ecclesia permanere — Reprobi saepe videntur insiti , & tamen non sunt : vi lentur esse membra Ecclesiae , & nihil minus sunt . Ratio , quoniam soli electi , & vera Christi membra , sunt Ecclesia Christi . 

Read him to the same purpose , pag. 73.77 . 

Et in de Relig. Christian. Fid. cap , 23.  Thes. 6. p. 345.  [ Reprobos hypocritas , licèt sint in Ecclesia , de Ecclesia tamen non esse . — Membra sunt Satanae , non Christi . Read the rest there : So again , pag. 535 , 536.  

5.  Polanus Syntagm . Theol. l. 7. cap 1.2 , 3 , 5. ha●h a long Dispute against Bellarmine , to prove that none but the Elect and truly sanctified are members of the Catholic or Universal Church : I shall refer you to the Book , to save the labour of transcribing And pag 522. col . 1.  He reckoneth this among Bellarmine's Errors as the sixth : [ Quod impios quidem n●gat esse viva corporis Christi membra , at intera statuit esse mortua membra corporis Christi . At 1. embiguitate ludau● : Nam membra corporis Christi vel 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 sunt vel 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Deinde si de membris Christi 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 sermo sit , falsa est distributio quaedam membra Christi-esse viva , quaedam mortua , Vt enim in vivo corpore naturali — etc. ] So pag 521. col . 1. he saith , that only the justified are called the sons of God 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and others only 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . And col . 2. he saith the like of their Saintship . [ Et hic tertius est istius ratiocinationis error . Sancti enim 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 dicuntur : Propriè quidem soli santificati spiritu adoptionis : Impropriè vero & 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 two qui sanctam fidem Christi ore profitentur , licet non sint spi●itu s●ncto s●nct●ficati . 

6.  Ravenellus Bibliothec. pag. 510.511 . saith , [ Vox Ecclesiae ambiguè sumitur : Propriè & strictè pro coetu illorum hominum quos Deus ante jacta mundi fundamenta elegit , & in tempore efficaciter voc●t , etc. vel Impropriè , etc.  

And having cited many Texts to prove that Electi & Fideles sunt Membra & corpus Christi , he addeth [ Quod nota contra Pontificios , qui docent ipsos reprobos & sceleratos ad Ecclesi●m propriè dictam etiam pertinere . 

7.  Peter Martyr in 1 Cor. 1.2 . p. 5. defineth the Church thus ; [ Esse dicemus , coetum credentium ac renatorum quos Deus in Christo colligit per Verbum & Spiritum sanctum , etc. — Nam illi ( sancti ) solùm verè & coram Deo sunt de Ecclesia . Quae alioquin habet admixtos permultos alienos a Chr●st● : & high specie tantum , no● reipsa pertinent ad Ecclesiam . Et Paulus postquam dixisset , hoc loco [ Ecclesi●e Dei , per oppositionem adjunxit [ sanctificatis per Christum Jesum , vocatis sanctis ] ut intelligamus impios ad Ecclesiam revera non pertinere , licet in ea perpetuo versentur . — Scio commentum circumferri , quod impii membra Christi sunt , verum mortua ; quae tamen vivificari possiat . At hoc ita est verum , at si mortuum hominem dixeris hominem esse — sed in praesentiâ id tantummodo contendimus , tales homines reipsa & quo ad Deum , non esse parts Ecclesiae . 

So on Rom. & Loc. Commun . he hath much of the like . Indeed Loc. Com. Clas 4. c. 1. p. 741. he hath the very same words over again at large , which I have cited from him on 1 Cor. 1.2 . 

8.  Musculus Loc. Com. de Eccles. pawn ( mihi ) 655.  Porro cum Scripturâ docet esse Ecclesiam Corpus Christi , an non satis manifestè significat , Ecclesiam Christi non esse eorum qui inter membra Christi recenseri non p●ssunt ? Sum quidem in externae professionis societate quamplurimi mali ; atque hactenus in Ecclesia : verùm de Ecclesia non sunt , quia verae Ecclesiae membra non sunt : Aliud est esse in externa Christianorum societate ; & aliud pertinère ad internam , quae spiritus est & fidei , quâ Caput & Corpus & membra cum membris spiritualiter & veraciter communicant . Aliud ( inquam ) est esse in Ecclesia , & aliud esse de Ecclesia . ] And he citeth that of Austin ( as many other protestants do ) l. 2. contra . Crescon . c. 21.  [ At per hoc etiam nesciente Ecclesia , propter malam pollutámquae conscientiam damnati a Christo , jam in Corpore Christi non sunt , quod est Ecclesia : quoniam non potest Christus membra damnata habere . ] See him on Mat. 3. p. 33.  

2.  Rutherford is Peaceable Plea , pag. 93. c. 9  [ 4.  Dist. If a true Church and a visible Church , as visible , may not for a time be opposed by way of contradiction , etc. ] Pag. 96.  [ Separatists Arguments must be weak , for they all conclude that which we deny not , and no other thing , to wit , that Heretic , Adulterers , Sorcerers , Blasphemers , be no parts of Christ's visible Church , as it is a Church : Yea , we may say that as the tree-leg , and the eye of glass , and the teeth of silver by Art put in the body , are no members of the living body , so neither , are these members of the true Church , and so much do all our Divines , as Calvin , Beza , Junius , Whitaker , Tilen , Piscator , Pareus , Vrsine , Trelcatius , Sibrandus , Amesius prove against Papists . 

Pag. 107.  A Church , and a visible Church , may be opposed by way of contradiction , as a number of Believers , and a number of non-believers . For a Church essentially is a number of ●elieverss , and Christ's mystical Body , else it is not a Church etc.  

Pag. 114.  The Church visible as a Church , is indeed Christ's Body , a royal Priesthood , a chosen Generation ; but as visible , it is sufficient that it be a Royal Priesthood only by Profession , etc.  Our Adversaries give us no right description of the true natural and lively members of the true visible Church : he that would give such a definition of a man , as agreeth both to a living man , and to a pictured or painted man , were but a painted Logician . — 

Pag. 173. — Although the Parents indeed , as concerning any real union of faith , be plain strangers to the Covenant , and members of the Church only , as an arm of wood is a member of the body . — See him also in his Due Right of Presbyteries , chap. 9 sect . 9 pag. 256.257.259 . 

10.  Maccovius College . Theolog. Part. 4.  Disp. 13.  Thes. 3 , 4. etc. [ Haec Ecclesia jam dicitur visibilis , jam invisibilis : Quae distinctio non eo spectat , ut statuantur duae Ecclesiae , etc. — sed est haec distinctio nominis , ut loquuntur in Scholis — 7.  Et hinc jam liquere potest quomodo Ecclesia visibilis sit & invisibilis : visibilis nempe confusè , dum in socictate illâ , quam definivimus , credimus esse electos aliquos , etiamsi qui illi sint non novimus scientia perfecta , sed conjecturali duntaxat . 21.  Notae ergo Ecclesi●e ad hoc nobis ser viunt , non ut sciamus distinctè qui pertineant ad Eccle siam , sed ut sciamus quibuscum nobis colenda sit communio , seu publica , seu privata ; nempe cum illi , quibus illa insunt , unde judicio charitatis colligi possit , eos veram esse Ecclesiam , vel pertinere ad veram Ecclesiam . 

11.  Cocceïus de S. Scripture . Potent . p. 575.  [ Quod attinet coetum sive multitudinem vocatorum , saltem Verbisono , & Christi fidem profitentium , eam vocamus Ecclesiam , partim propter fideles , qui in eò sunt , partim propter spem . Charitas en●m omnia sperat . Eo modo sanctos etiam promiscuè appellamus qui se Christianos' nominant , & in quibus non deprehenditur a nobis hypocrisis , etc. — Imoratione fidelium tota multitudo appellatur Ecclesiae . 

Et pag. 555.  [ In Majore Ecclesiâ Vniversalis visibilis significat , ( si vera est Propositio ) omnes p●ofitentes Nomen Christi , & in coetus ubique locorum collectos : inter quos sine dubio sunt fideles : Propter quos illa multitudo vocatur , Ellclesia Dei.  

Pag. 649.  [ Ecclesiae statum in his comp●ehendi certum est sed bonos & malos simul Ecclesiam a Christo dici , atque adeo Ecclesiam ex malis constare , quomodo fratres pergunt loqui num . 52. nentiquam admittimus . Licet admittamus multitudinem illam profi●entium , in quâ & Ziz●nia , vel Zinecdochicè , vel proper spem fidelium , vel etiam propter gloriationem om●ium , di●i Ecclesiam ; & Zizania esse in Ecclesia , quia bonis mali perm●xti sunt : ut & Antichristus sessurus erat in Templo Dei , hoc est Ecclesia , nempe inter fideles , & in congregationem Justorum , ipse infidelis & injustus omnibus myriadibus suis stipatus , etc.  Vid. ultr . 

12.  Luther . Tom. 4. p. 333 , 342. ut in Loc Commun . Class . 5. cap. 4. pag. 12.  [ Hypocritae volunt Ecclesia esse , & non sunt , quia non cognoscunt Ecclesiae thesaurum , scilicet Christum ; Pii verò cognoscunt , & taemen non videntur esse Ecclesia , sed manent absconditi coram mundo : Ita stat illud argumentum a principio mundi ; Ecclesia non est Ecclesia : Et , Non Ecclesia est Ecclesia . Ergo nihil nos moveat , si impii jactent se esse Ecclesiam , & non possunt intelligere — See him also de Conciliis towards the end , de Ecclesia . 

13.  Sutlive , contr . Bellarm. de vera Eccles. p. 6.7 . c. 2.  [ Non aliter coalescunt & augentur membra Ecclesiae nisi per Char●tatem , nec aliter vivunt quam per Spiritum sanctum ; nec aliquis meritò in Ecclesiae catalogo recensetur qui non studet sanctitati : Est enim Ecclesia non sceleratorum & improborum , sed sanctorum communio , etc. — In hâc tamen sanctorum societate , non negamus multos versari & hypocritas & sceleratos , qui nihil habent hominis Christiani praeter nomen . — Non tamen propterea censemus deserendam esse fratrum societatem quia inter eos sunt nonnulli homines scelerati & impii , qui non sunt verè Ecclesiae membra . ] Next he reprehendeth Bellarmine for not admitting the various acceptions of the word Ecclesia : And reciting his definition , he addeth , [ Cujus d●finitionis tot sunt peccata quot vocabula . Nam primò , ut quis sit membrum Ecclesiae , non tantum requiritur fidei professio , sed etiam ipsa fides . Non est enim Ecclesia societas profitentium fidem , sed credentium , nisi velit ille fideles mentiri , quando dicunt , Credo in Deum ; & sine fide nemo ad Deum accedit , nemo fit membrum Corporis Christi . — His fifth Chapter is to prove that no Reprobates belong to the Catholic Church , and he concludeth folio 17. col . 2.  [ Sic neque reprobi , quantumvis videantur Christiani , vera erunt Ecclesiae membra . — His sixth Chap. is to prove against Bel. that wicked & unconscionable livers are not true members of the Catholic Church and communion of Saints , Fol. 19 he saith , [ Aristoteles negat mortuum membrum , esse membrum . Quae autem aequivocè dicuntur membra , non magis sunt membra , quam homo pictus est homo rationalis — And because he so effectually pleadeth this Cause , I will recite the substance of his Arguments . Argum. 1.  Qui spiritum Christi non habet , hic non est ejus : At qui sceleratò vivunt , non habent spiritum Christi : meritò ergo tales existimamus non esse vera membra Christi . 2.  Omnes pii ab hominibus impuris & sceleratis animo & moribu● recedere debent . — At a fratribus & membris veris Ecclesiae discessionem facere nefas est — ergo . — 3.  Omnes Christiani sunt velut unus panis & unum Corpus : At panis non fit nisi ex uno frumento , non ex paleis , & Corpus non consistit ex membris dissentientibus inter se. — 4.  Totum Corpus Christi incrementum ex eo capit per Charitatem . At homines impuri & selerati non habent charitatem , etc. — 5 Non modo Ecclesia Dei , sed omnia ejus membra sunt Templum Dei , & in eyes habitat Spiritus sanctus . At ubi regnat peccatum , ibi non est Templum Dei , etc. — 6.  Christus est Caput Ecclesiae , & ipse est servator Corporis sui : & tradidit se pro ea ut illam sanctificaret , etc. — At Christus non est hominum impurorum aut sceleratorum caput . Totum enim Corpus ex Christo Capite per nexus & conjunctiones subministratum & constructum crescit in augmentum Dei , non servat homines in peccatis stupidos , etc. 7.  Quiverè in Ecclesiam tanquam membra in Corpus inferuntur , coelestis Vocationis fiunt participes , Hebr. 3. justificantur , Rom. 8. & spiritum Dei habent . At homines isti , etc. — 8.  Ecclesia dicitur puteus aquarum viventium . At homines flagitiosi & magni peccatores in peccatis mortui sunt . — Non sunt ergo ex Ecclesia : quod August . ex loco colligit lib. 5. de Bapt. contr . Donatist cap. 27. — 9  In filios Ecclesiae illa quadrant quae dicit Apostolus , Rom. 6.  Liberati à peccato , servi autem facti Deo , fructum habetis vestrum in sanctificationem , finem vero vitam aeternam . At hominibus improbis , etc. 10.  Cives Ecclesiae in Scriptures vocantur sancti , 2 Cor. 1.2 . — Quare nisi homines impuri & flagitio si possint vere dici sancti , non possunt homines ejusmodi propter externam suam professionem vera Ecclesiae membra censeri . — 11.  Ecclesia Christi tota est pulchra , 2 Cor. 11. virgo casta . At , etc. — 12.  In Symbolo dicitur Ecclesia sancta , & sanctorum communio . At si homines scelerati & impuri vera essext Ecclesiae membra , tum sanctitatis denominationem amitteret , & esset non sanctorum communio , sed sceleratorum colluvies , quod planè impium est vel dicere vel cogitare . ( See his Replies to Bellarmine's Answers , ) — 13.  Ecclesia supra petram a dificata est , & porte inferorum adversus eam non sunt praevaliturae . At contra peccatores portae inferorum praevalent . — 14.  Ecclesia dicitur plenitudo sen complementum Corpor● Christi . At — 15.  Ecclesia est columna & firmamentum veritatis . At improbi non pertinent ad hanc columnam , etc. — 16.  Disertè Scripturae excludunt ex sancta civitate homines impuros & sceleratos ( Here some Texts are cited . — 17.  Qui ex patre Diabolo sunt , non habent Deum patrem , 1 Joan 2.  At homicidae & scelerati . — At si ex Deo non sunt , non possunt inter Ecclesia membra numerari — 18.  Ab Autoritate patrum : where he citeth Cyprian , Origen , Hierom , Ambrose , Ruffinus , Gregory , Epiphanius , Augustine , Chrysostom , Theophilact , Bernard , etc. — 19  Arg. A consensu & testimonio totius Ecclesiae Catholicae ducitur . Recitantes enim Symbolum Apostolorum , omnes Christiani profitentur se credere sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam , Sanctorum Communionem . — 20.  Arg. Ab Adversariorum confession ( of which more anon . ) 

And six Reasons he addeth folio 24. col . 2.  And folio 25. he refuteth Bellarmine's Arguments for the contrary , ( the same that others since make use of ) from Scripture and Reason . Where Bellarmine saith , They cannot be cast out of the Church by Excommunication , if they be not in it ; he answereth , [ Si Fide & Charitate & Spiritu sancto careant , tum licet vel Praelatorum sedes occupent , vel in Ecclesiae catalogo censeantur , non tamen sunt vera membra Ecclesiae . Nec ad rem facit quod Christus malis Praelatis obaudiendum docet : Hoc en●m sit , quia tales adhuc videntur esse in Ecclesiae — Of a Councils testimony produced by Bellarmine he saith , [ Licet Concilium quoddam Et iscoporum in colloq . cum Donatistis fateatur malos esse nonnunquam in Ecclesia velut paleas in area , — non tamen asserit hujusmodi malos esse vera membra Ecclesiae , sed ostendit quid vulgus existimat . 

I know the answer to all this must be , that Dr. Sutlive speaks all this only of the Catholic mystical Church , and not of the Visible Church . To which I Reply , 1.  He and other protestants profess , that they hold not that there is two Churches , one Visible and the other Invisible ; but one Church , only . 2.  And that this one is called Invisible from its essence , and Visible from an adjunct , which is so . 3.  And therefore that where there is Profession without true faith , and so men that have only that which denominateth it Visible , without that which denominateth it Invisible , these are only equivocally and not truly members . 

Hear further what Sutlive saith of this , folio 25.  [ Hinc ergo cadit calumnia illa Adversarii , quasi nos faceremus duas Ecclesias . Vnan enim nos facimus Ecclesiam Catholicam , quae tantum bonos continet , licet mali in ea conseantur , quia non omnes certo norunt esse malos . At Bellarminus revera duas facit Ecclesias , unam ex bonis tantum , — alteram ex malis & bonis , & aliquando ex malis tantum . Nam ad Ecclesiae formam constituendam nullam putat requiri intornam virtutem . — 

And folio 26. answering to Bellarmine's Arguments from the Fathers , he saith of Nazienzen , [ Nullus dixerit eum existimâsse hujusmodi homines vera esse membra Ecclesiae . Loquitur enim de Ecclesiae militantis parte ; ( that is of the particular Church of Constantinople ) ídque secundùm vulgi sententiam , & non secundùm veritatem ; & ubi proprie loquitur Moabitas & Ammonitas licet in mysteria nostra irrumperent , distinguit à veris Christianis ] 

Cap. 7.  He proves that Infidels and Heretics ( though occult ) are not vera Ecclesiae membra . And folio 27. col . 2. he saith , [ Vt agamus de forma Ecclesiae , ubi potius essentialis ejus forma posita est , quam in fide Christi interna ? Forma enim illa substantialis est , & non accidentalis ; Ecclesiaeque dat esse , & vere demonstrate quis ad Ecclesiam pertineat . At confessio fidei externa non magis demonstrate Ecclesiam , ejusque parts , quam tabula picta hominis naturam . — 

Licet ad Ecclesiam admittantur qui profitentur fidem , ut dicit Bellarm. non tamen sequitur eos fieri vera Ecclesiae membra , nisi habeant etiam fidem quam profitentur . Neque enim civis est qui pro cive se gerit , licet aliqui ita putent , sed qui revera Jus habet civitatis . 

Fol. 28.  Praeterea nos ostendimus , excludi omnes ex Ecclesia Catholica , tanquam membra non vera , sed ficte adnascentia , qui non habent charitatem ; & hoc Catholicorum omnium testimonio confirmavimus ; adeo ut jam constet Bellarminum esse Monachum , à Christi Ecclesia extraneum , & non Catholicum : ( I desire the contrary-minded of our brethren to mark what a heavy censure I must fall under , if I should turn to their opinion . ) 

Fol. 29.  Nulli ferè haeretici non se Christianos' esse pro●●●ntur : eos tamen Chrysostomus ex Ecclesia excludit . Nam non nomen , sed veritatem , facere Christianum . ] 

Many Arguments he here useth , of which I will recite only the last , folio 30. col . 2.  [ Si Fides non minùs requiritur quam Baptismus ut quis fiat membrum Ecclesiae ; cur magis sit membrum Ecclesiae qui profitetur se fidem tenere & non tenet , quam qui profitetur se baptismum habere & non habet ? ] 

They that will read the rest may see much more to the same sense : but I find I have stayed long enough on one Witness . 

14.  Amesius Medul . Theol. lib. 1. cap. 32.11 . [ Illi autem qui professione tantum sunt sideles , dum remanent in illa societate , sunt membra illius Ecclesiae , sicut etiam Ecc●esiae Catholicae , quoad statum externum tantum , non quoad statum internum aut essentialem , 1 Joan. 2. ver . 19 ] 

Et in Bellarm. Enervat Tom. 2. lib. 2. c. 1.3 . confuting Bellarmine's calumny , that feigneth us to make two Churches , a Visible and an Invisible , he saith we only affirm , Vnam quoad essentiam internam , & alteram quoad modum existendi externum : and urgeth Augustine saying , [ Bonos sic esse in domo Dei , quae est Ecclesia , ut ipsi sint domus constructa ex vivis lapidibus : malos sic esse in domo , ut ipsi tamen non sint domus . ] 

§ . 7.  Where Bellarmine saith , Reprobates belong to the Church ; he answereth , [ Hoc non potest negari si intelligatur secundum extrinsecam rationem Ecclesiae militantis , prout capilli , ungues , aut mali humores pertinent ad corpus humanum : quam explicationem dedit nobis Bellarm. cap. 2. aut quemadmodum Civitas Romana multos non Cives dicitur complecti . ] 

§ . 8.  Bellarm. Magni & manifesti peccatores sunt in Ecclesia . Resp. At hoc etiam conceditur à nobis eodem sensu quo antecedens illud effatum — i e. ita ut istius modi peccatores non sint membra vera , nec simpliciter corporis Ecclesiae , sed tantum secundùm quid & Aequivoce . 

15.  Wendeline in Christ. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 28. is large upon it ; He makes spiritual Union with Christ to be the Internal and Essential form of the Church ; and visible Externals to be but an Accidental external form . In all his definitions he makes only the Elect-believers and Justified to be the true members , and that both of the Universal Church and of Particular Churches . He hath nine Arguments against the Papists to prove Hypocrites no true members of the Church , concluding that then Heretics and notorious ungodly persons are much lesle members . He answereth the Papists Arguments at large , ( the same that are now taken up against us ) drawn from the Parables of the Tares , the Net , the ten Virgins , etc. and from the coruptions of the Jewish and other Churches : and concludeth pag. 736.  [ Hypocritas quod attinet , ex judicio Charitatis habentur quidem pro veris Ecclesiae membris ; sed non sunt . Aliud est esse quoad externam Professionem , & aliorum Opinionem ; aliud vere esse . And showing how the true Church is visible , he doth it thus , pag. 737.  Deinde ex judicio Charitatis pro veris Ecclesiae membris habentur omnia coetus particularis membra , sive hypocritae , sive verè fideles sint , in quibus externae nostrae notae deprehenduntur . Hoc igitur respectu quoque vera Ecclesia , vera inquam , sive 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 sive secundum Charitatis judicium , est Visibilis . 

Yea , having mentioned those Notes wherein the external accidental form consisteth , he addeth , [ Harum respectu Ecclesia appellatur visibilis , cujus membra sunt verè fideles & hypocritae ; illi tamen ipsa rei veritate , high ex judicio Charitatis & hominum opinion . ] I desire the Reader that needs it to peruse the Chapter throughout , because the book is common , and it thoroughly handleth this point against the Papists . 

16.  Keckerman System . Theolog. l. 3. c. 6. shows the equivocal use of the word Ecclesia , and makes the consideration of that the ready way to decide the Controversy between us and the Papists . Ecclesia latè accepta he makes to be that which containeth all Professors , viz that profess Christ to be their King , Priest , and Prophet : of which he layeth down these Canons ; [ 1.  Ecclesia est quiddam 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , quod una essentiali & generali definitione comprehendi nequit . ] Andrea addeth , [ De Ecclesia variae intercedunt Controversiae Ecclesiis Pontificiis & Reformatis , inter qua● prima est haec , Vtrùm videlicet etiam Reprobi ad Ecclesiam pertineant ? Affirmant omnes Pontificii , & statuunt etiam Reprobos ac Damnandos homines Ecclesiae membra esse , ídque hoc confilio , etc. — id interim concedunt , Reprobos esse putrida Ecclesiae membra : At verò considerare debebant , membrum putridum non esse amplius animae instrumentum in corpore , & idcirco nec Membrum , nisi 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 dictum ; sicut Aristoteles de Manu dicit , Manum resectam , aut it a mutilam ut resecanda sit , non esse Manum , nisi 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Sicut Serra qua secare non possumus , aut Coulter ligneus , non est Serra vel Coulter , nisi homonym●s : Tota ergo Questio facillime expeditur distinctione Ecclesiae , quae vel late accipitur , & quidem cum homonymia quadam , vel strict & proprie sine homonymia . Priori modo Reprobi profitentes Christum , sunt membra Ecclesi● ; posteriori nentiquam . Ducatur Argumentum à similitudine Reipub. & Regni alicujus , ubi quidem Civis late & 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 dicitur etiam flagitiosissimus quisque , & qui preditario est in patriam animo , inque eâ seditiones movet — said proprié ac sine homonymia , etc. — 

17.  Gomarrus in Loc. Commun . Eptom . per Sibolium collect . Loc. 50. pag. 57  [ Materia ( ex qua Ecclesiae est ) sunt omnes & soli Electi , Rom. 8 29 , 30 , 33. 1  Pet. 25 , 9 — ] Pag. 510.  Speaking of the Militant Church , as joined in external communion , he saith . [ Et Reprobi velut hoedi cum ovibus permixti , Math. 25.32 . propriè sunt in Ecclesiâ , sed non ex ecclesiâ , 1 Joan. 2.19 . nisi secundùm quid , & Metaphorice , ob similitudinem professionis Fidei & Obedientiae ; qui hircinum ingenium ovinâ hâc pelle contegunt , & oves Christi fallaci specie simulant . — 

18.  Dr. Humphrey in Jesuitismo Part. 2.  Rat. 3. having in the Index said [ Ecclesiae vox aequivoca , ] doth pag. 210. and forward , labour to manifest it . And pag. 279 [ Quamvis enim Ecclesiae nomen sit 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 & aquivocum , tamen si de verâ Ecclesia proprie loquendum est , illo egregio nomine soli digni sunt fideles . Donius est cujus Lapides vivi : Vinea & Pomarium Domini est , cujus arbores fructuosae & fructum ferunt , qui non peribit sed perdurabit . Nam homo pictus non est homo sed statue , ita nec Ecclesia nisi quae Fide fundatur , Charitate rigatur , Spe sustentatur , Spiritu animatur ac sanctificatur . 

19  Sharpius in Curs . Theolog. de Corp. Eccles. milit . is large against the Papists , and near twenty times mentions an homonymie in the word , Ecclesia , and calls the members of the Visible Church only , son's 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and the Godly 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . And oft distinguisheth betwixt being in the Church as the Reprobates are , and being of the Church as Believers Justified are . And that you may know what he takes the Church as Visible to be , note what he saith pag. 1763. ad Obj. 12.  Obj. Quod est in parte est in toto : at Reprobi sunt in parte Ecclesiae Catholicae , viz. Visibili : ergò . — Resp. Non concludit quod est in Questione , quia Questio est , An sunt ex Ecclesia , seu membra Ecclesiae ; non An in Ecclesia Visibili ? Deinde , sunt in parte , non ex parte , que est pars Ecclesia Catholicae . Nam Visibilis Ecclesia tota qua talis , non est pars Ecclesi● Catholica . — Pag. 1766.  Confundit esse in Ecclesia , & esse de Ecclesia . — Vid. caetera . 

20.  Rob. Bodius Com. in Ephes. cap. 1. vers . ult . pag. 186.  [ Quinimo ne Membra quidem omnino nisi 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 & aequivoce dici possunt , ut docet Philosophus ipse naturae lumen ductumque secutus , lib. 2. de anim . oculum visu destitutum . h. e. coecum non amplius oculum esse inquiens , nisi aequivoce , etc. — Pag. 187.  Bellarminus spinam quae ipsum hac ex parte pungebat quasi digito nobis indicat . ( Nempe , si mali sunt aequivoce tantum , & non vere Membra Ecclesiae , sequetur ( inquit ) inde malum Pontificem non esse Caput Ecclesiae , & malum Pastorem equivoce tantum esse Pastorem : quod ( inquit ) inter Errores Joan. Hussi . damnatum fuisse , Sess. 15.  Council . Constant. — Pag. 188.  Quare hoc saltem ex Bellarmini distinctione consecuti sumus , males Plebeios , qui tantum ut Membra , non autem instrumenta , considerari possunt in Ecclesia esse mortua , ac proinde non vera Membra . 

21.  I H. Alstedius in Encyclopaed . lib. 25.  Theol. sect . 3.  Loc. 24. pag. 382.  Cum Ecclesia militans dicitur esse & Invisibilis & Visibilis , neque est distributio generis in suas species , neque integri in sua membra ; sed distinctio adjunctorum ejusdem subjecti ( therefore there must be the same subject of Visible Profession , as of Invisible Faith. ) Non itaque hic est sensus , quasi Ecclesia una sit Invisibilis , altera Visibilis : aut quasi una pars Ecclesiae sit Invisibili alia Visibilis : sed Invisibilitas est affectio , seu modus Ecclesiae respectu for●ae essentialis , & internae ; Visibilitas est affectio seu modus Ecclesi● , quantum ad formam Accidentalem , & ex●ernam , Nam forma essentialis est Invisibilis , quia est Relatio & quidem spirtualis — Forma accidentalis est visibilis . — 

22. D. Georg. Sohnius ( one of the most learned accurate Divines the Reform Churches have possessed ) Tom. 1.  Method . Theol. pag. 195.  Itaque illi in quibus nihil agit Christus , non sunt membra Christi & Ecclesiae : vel certe sunt ( ut quidam loquuntur ) mortua membra . Nam vulgo sic dividunt membra Ecclesiae ; ut alia viva , alia mortua esse dicant . Pag. 196.  Ecclesia visibilis est Coetus hominum ad tractandas res divinas convenientium , in quo Coetu etiam sunt mali & hypocritae multi , sed tamen de doctrina con●entientes : qui quamvis in Ecclesia versantes , tamen non sunt de Ecclesia ; id est , non sunt Ecclesiae vera & viva membra . Visibilis dicitur Ecclesia propter ordinem Ecclesiasticum , & formam exteriorem ac visibilem : que quidem fecit ut Ecclesia s●t & dicatur visibilis . Etsi autaem hic fidelibus admixti sunt hypocritae , tamen non nisi propter fideles dicitur Ecclesia . 

Et in Thes. Marpurg . pag. 118.  § . 13.  Quibus multi admixti sunt hypocritae , qui quamvis in Ecclesia versantur , tamen non sunt de Ecclesia , id est , non sunt ejus vera vivaque membra . 

23.  Ph. Melact . in Apol. August . Confess . Impress . Witteberg . 1542. f. 65.  Concedimus quod hypocritae & mali in haec vita sint admixti Ecclesiae , & sint membra Ecclesiae secundum externam societatem signorum , etc. — At Ecclesia non est tantum societas externarum rerum ac rituum , sicut aliae politiae , sed principaliter est societas Fidei & Spiritus sancti in cordibus , etc. — Fol. 66.  Et in Decretis inquit Glossa , Ecclesiam large dictam complecti bonos & malos . Item malos , Nomine tantum in Ecclesia esse , non Re : bonos vero Re & Nomine . Et in hanc sententiam multa leguntur apud Patres . Hieronymus ait , [ Qui pecator est aliqua sorde maculatus , de Ecclesia Christi non potest appellari , nec Christo subjectum dici . ] Quanquam igitur hypocritae & mali sint socii hujus verae Ecclesiae secundum externos ritus , tamen cum definitur Ecclesia , necesse est eam definiri , quae est vivum Corpus Christi : Item quae est Nomine & Re Ecclesia . Et multae sunt Causae : Necesse est enim intelligi quae res principaliter efficient nos membra , & viva membra Ecclesiae ] Leg. & folio 67. & quae habet Sohnius in Thes. Theolog. ex Corpore doctr . Melanct. c. 17. p. 52.  

24.  Learned Sadeel in Respons●ad Turriani Sophism . is so large in proving the Internal form of the Church only to be Essential , that instead of citing his words , I must refer the Reader to the perusal of the Book , contenting myself now to recite these few about the Membership of Reprobates . 

Pag. 315. ( mihi ) Sic igitur habeto : quia particulares habent Ecclesiae Electos , hinc fieri ut elogia totius Electorum Ecclesiae de singulis particularibus Ecclesiis dicantur : non quia sunt vifibiles ( ut tu existimas ) sed quia visibiles Ecclesiae Electos habent propter , quos etiam Ecclesiae dicuntur . Sic dicuntur Hebr. illi ad quos scripsit Apostolus , accessisse ad Jerusalem coelestem , & myriadas angelorum , conventum & concionem sive Ecclesiam primogenitorum qui conscripti sunt in coelis , hoc est , ad Ecclesiam Electorum . ] Sic dicuntur Ephesii Concives sanctorum , & Domestic Dei. Sic Corinthii , sanctificati . Sic Philippenses , Colossenses Thessalonicenses , dicuntur sancti . Deinque sic illi ad quos scribebat Petrus , dicuntur Electi . Quae omnia visibilibus Ecclesiis tribuuntur , & nihilominus sunt Electorum propria : ut enim de Vite dici potst eam proffer vinum ad vitam hominis tuendam accommodatum , neque id tamen ad aridos & mortuos palmites , sed ad solos frugiferos erit referendum : Ità quod hìc dicitur de Ecclesia , & multa alia consimili ità dicuntur de Ecclesiis visibilibus , ut ad solos Electos , non autem ad Reprobos & Hypoeritas pertineant . Rectè enim Hieronymus , Nihil interest ( inquit ) de Corpore quid dicatur an de Membris , cum & Corpus dividatur in Membra , & Membra sint Corporis . [ Quamobrem duo tibi fuerunt consideranda , Turriane , quae te ab hoc inepto concludendi genere revocarent . Vnum , hypocritas & reprobos propriè non esse parts conficientes , sed , ut ita dicam , deficientes , vel vel potius esse parts 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 quand Ecclesiae Visibles dicuntur constare ex electis & Reprobis . ] Sic pag. 314 [ Visibilis Ecclesia constat etiam & imprimis ex electis , tanquam dignissimis , & propter quos ( ut ante diximus Ecclesia vocatur . 

25.  Sam. Maresius Colleg. Theolog. Loc. 15. pag. 386 , 388.  [ Quum vox Ecclesiae sit ità 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , non potest certa definitione ejus quidditas exprimi , nisi caetera significata tanquam analogata ad primarium aliquod caput revocentur . Hoc vero statuimus esse Ecclesiam Electorum etc. — Distinctio frequens Ecclesiae in universalem & particularem non est generis in species , aut totius in parts , sed vocis ambiguae in sua significata . 

Ratione Professionis & Vocationis Christianae , quum in aliis sit duntaxat externa , in aliis vero interna quoque & seria , Ecclesia membra sunt duum generum : Qu● dam enim Univoce , quaedam vero non nisi Aequivoce talia dici debent . Aequivoce tantum & solum secundum dici , Ecclesiae membra sunt Hypocritae , occulti Infideles , & Reprobi ; E nobis egressi sunt , sed non erant ex nobis : Illi sunt in Ecclesia , ut mali humores aut lumbrici in nostro corpore : Univoce vero , proprie & secundum esse , soli Electi & vere Credentes . Vos non creditis : non enim estis ex ovibus meis , etc.  

Idem in Exeg . Confess . Belgic . § . 15.  Art 27. p. 386 , 387.  [ Ind autem nonnulla magni momenti Consectaria nascuntur ; 1.  Reverae dari Ecclesiam praedestinatorum sive electorum : imo hanc proprie & univoce esse solam Christi Ecclesiam , etc. 2.  Solos electos post efficacem suam vocationem constituere in terris univece & proprie illam Christi Ecclesiam quam credimus ; alios vero non nisi aequivoce , secundum dici & putative ad illam pertinere . Quae in contrarium disputantur a Bellarmino , plane futilia & ficulnea sunt . 

26.  Altingius Loc. Com. Part. 1.  Loc. 11. pag. 180 , 181.  Item Part. 2.  Loc. 11. pag. 580.581 , 582.  [ Cum solis Pontificiis certamen superest — 1.  An ●raeter electos vocatos etiam Reprobi , Infideles , sive occulti sive manifesti peccatores , verae Christi Ecclesiae membra sint ? Pontificii affirmant : Nos negamus . 

Rationes nostrae . Ex natura subjecti 1.  Qui nec Spiritum sanctum nec sidem habent , verae Christi Ecclesiae membra non sunt . Reprobi , infideles nec Spiritum , sanctum habent , nec fidem , etc. — 2.  Qui non sunt ex sive de Ecclesia , non sunt vera ejus membra : Reprobi , infideles non sunt ex sive de vera Ecclesia : ergo — 3.  Qui sunt membra Diaboli , non sunt membra verae Ecclesi● , etc.  

Ex natura Praedicati . 1.  Omnia membra verae Ecclesiae vocantur secundum propositum Dei , etc. — 2.  Omnia membra verae Ecclesiae sunt membra Christi , etc. — 3.  Omnia membra verae Ecclesiae sunt Oves Christi , agnoscunt , audiunt , sequuntur ipsum , etc. — ] See the proofs , and the confutation of the Papists reasons , drawn from the Parables of the Field , the Net , the Wedding Feast , from Baptism , from the Example of the Apostolical Churches , the uncertainty of Members , etc.  

Idem in Explicat . Cateches . Palat. Part. 2. pag. 255.  [ Item proprie & Univoce competit veris & sinceris ejus membris , quae sunt vere sideles : Improprie & Aequivoce membris simulatis , qualia sunt omnes hypocritae ; qui ut paleae inter triticum , zizania inter bonum semen , pisces putridi inter bonos , versantur in Ecclesia , & propter , externae confessionis gloriationem ejusdem membra censentur . 

27.  These Salmuriens . Vol. 3. de variis Ecclesiae partibus , Thes. 28.  [ Equidem mihi dici velim quid sibi voluerit subtilissimus Disputator , qui parts veras appellavit membra arida atque mortua . Illa autem forma quae in corporibus viventibus anima appellatur , semper vitam comitem habet , neque potest ab ea separari , haud magis quam à seipsa : Ideo neque rami in arbore demortui parts ejus censentur : neque in animantibus quae loco sunt excrementorum , quaeque vitam non participant , ut pili & ungues , ab ea parte qua sunt privati sensu , habentur pro corporis partibus : neque in corpore humano crus aut brachium quod 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 penitus occupavit , membrum ejus censetur ampliùs ; haud magis quam homo pictus pro homine judicatur : ideoque extirpatur , tanquam nihil cum corpore common habens . 

28.  Lucas Trelcatius signior in Opuscul . Theol. Loc. Com. de Eccles , pag. 430.  [ Ob hoc enim ipsum Ecclesiae nomen singulis coetibus fidem Christi ex illius Verbo profitentibus rectè tribuitur , quòd scilicet Ecclesiae invisibilis ibi membra esse verè credantur ; nam propter electos propriè coetus aliquis vocatur Ecclesia , etiamsi sint minima illius pars . A potiori enim , non autem saepè majori , fit hîc rei denominatio , scilicet ab eo quo res est quod est : ut acervus tritici , tritici tamen dicitur , non palearum . Pag. 429.  Visibilis verò Ecclesiae membra sunt hominibus nota , sed judicio Charitatis , saepe non Veritatis , propter vocationem & professionem externam , sed saepe hypocriticam . Pag. 427.  Visibiles inquam , non ab illâ formâ internâ quae dat proprie esse rei , sed à formâ externâ , etc. — ] See more there . 

Pag. 448.  Resp. Neg. Nec enim mortua membra corporis vivi sunt membra , nisi homonymôs : & vivae Dei Ecclesiae nullum est membrum mortuum . ] Vid. & L. Trelcat . jun. Instit. lib. 2. page 254 , 255.  

29.  Th. Cartwright contr . Rhem. in Joh. 15.1 . [ Branch in me ] Rotten branches , and dead members : branches and members in show and not in truth . And therefore that which they have not indeed , and yet seem to have in their own and other men's opinion , shall be taken from them . 

30.  Bucer , and Marlorate citing him , on Joh. 15.2 . Quomodo ergo zizania sunt in regno Dei , & putres pisces in reti Evangelico , carens veste nuptiali in nuptiis Christi ; ita in Christo est qui non fert fructum ; Nomine tenus scilicet , & secundùm externam speciem tantùm , non etiam verâ fide . 

31.  Joan. Camero Praelect . de Eccles. pag. 246.  [ 3.  Negandum est posse sciri distinctè & certò qui sint verae Ecclesiae membra ; quae sit vera Ecclesia : at concedendum est tamen posse id sciri distinctè & probabiliter ; quae scientia vulgò dicitur Judicium Charitatis . — ergo Ecclesiae dicitur quemadmodum homo . Name & homo pictus & coloratus à Philosopho dicitur homo ; & verus homo dicitur homo : & homini picto & vero quedam sunt communia secundùm quae tam hic quam ille homo dicitur : attamen nemo cavillabitur constitui sic duo genera hominum . 

Et pag. 258.  [ Negamus in ullâ re externâ sitam esse Ecclesiae Essentiam , ideoque nulla vis est quae cogat ut fateamur Essentiam Ecclesie eandem Notam esse , etc. — Consequens est , ut quaecunque Deus pollicetur Ecclesiae suae , seu ea pertineant ad fidem , seu ad mores , intelligenda sint eâ de parte quae proprie sine tropo Ecclesia dicitur , neque convenire Ecclesiae illi quae synecdochicè Ecclesia dicitur , nisi per accidens , respectu scilicet illius partis , quomodo vivere is dicitur , cujus aliqua pars computruit , quanquam pars putrida ( quod & Aristoteles nos docuit ) non est proprie pars , sed homonymos propter similitudinem & figuram : nam reâpse non est pars quando non est formae totius particeps . ] 

Were it not that I think the labour needless , I should add many testimonies collected , and at hand , from Zuinglius , Bullinger , Piscator , Paraeus , Bucanus , Rivet , with many more , yea many score I doubt not might be added : But I shall spare myself and the Reader that labour , till I perceive it necessary , and shall only conclude with two of our own : One in a book not past a month old ; that it may appear that we yet hold to the old Protestant Doctrine , as easy as it is to turn some from it by specious pretences . 

Mr. H. Jeanes in Scholast . & practic . Divinity pag. 18.19 . saith thus . [ Use Inform. Is the Church the outward fullness of Christ , considered as Head ? we may then be informed what is the nature and quality of the true members ; that they are effectually called , and truly sanctified , linked unto Christ with an internal union by the bond of the Spirit on his part , and of faith on theirs . Indeed as in the body natural there are hairs , nails , evil humours , and many other things , which yet belong not integrally thereunto as proper members : So if we regard not the inward and invisible Essence , but the visible state , or outward manner of the Churches being , there adhere unto her many uncalled , unjustified , and unsanctified persons , but it is only as excrements or ulcers : For every true member of the Church is a part of Christ's fullness , and therefore must receive of his fullness grace for grace , must be endowed with all saving and sanctifying graces ; otherwise how can it concur to the making of Christ full and complete ? 

Use 2.  Refut . Whence secondly may be inferred the gross Error of the Papists in avouching , that external profession and conformity , outward subjection to the Pope of Rome , are sufficient to constitute one a true member of the Catholic Church , although he be a Reprobate , an unbeliever , an hypocrite so gross as Judas or Simon Magus , a professed and notorious impious wretch , that is utterly devoid of all spiritual life and grace whatsoever . If he take up a room in the Church , it matters not with them , though he neither do nor can perform vital actions , yet he shall pass for a true part thereof . 

Pag. 19  He confesseth that they are united to the Church but by an outward Conjunction : And was ever any man so deprived of common sense and understanding as to call a wooden leg a part of the body to which it was annexed , as to term wens , warts , and moles , sores and botches members of the body in which they were ? ] 

33.  The other is Mr. Perkins , in whom the Judgement of other English protestants of his time may be discerned : Expos. on the Creed , in Vol. 1. pag. 308.  [ Hence we learn , 1.  That the Church of Rome erreth , in teaching that a wicked man , yea such a one as shall never be saved , may be a true member of the Catholic Church , etc. — ] 

But lest you should say that he speaks this only of the Invisible Church , ( though our Divines say that there is but one Church which is Visible and Invisible in several respects ) I shall desire you to consider what he saith of the Visible Chuhch expressly , pag. 303 , 304.  [ The visible Church may be thus described : It is a mixed company of men professing the faith , assembled together by the preaching of the word . — It is called a Church , of the better part , namely the elect whereof it consisteth , though they be in number few . As for the ungodly , though they be in the church , yet they are no more parts of it indeed than the superfluous humours in the veins are parts of the body . — Again because the profession of faith is otherwhiles true and sincere , and otherwhiles only in show , Therefore there be also two sorts of Members of the visible Church . Members before God , and members before men . A member of the Church before God is he that beside the outward profession of the Faith , hath inwardly a pure heart , good conscience and Faith unfeigned , whereby he is indeed a true member of the Church . Members before men , whom we may call reputed members , are such as have nothing else but the outward . Profession , wanting the good conscience , and the Faith unfeigned ; the Reason why they are to be esteemed members of us is because we are bound by the Rule of Charity to think of Men as they appear unto us ; leaving secret judgement unto God. ] so far Perkins . And so much for these testimonies . 

By what hath been said it is evident that it is the judgement of the protestants that reprobates and wicked men are not properly members of the Church , but only Equivocally , and that the Church , is but one , which in some respect is visible , and some invisible , and that it is denominated Invisible because its Essential form is Invisible ; and denominated visible only from an External Accidental form ; and therefore that those members that are only visible , or have only the Accidental form of Members , or are only of the Church as visible , are but Equivocally members of the Church properly so called , as from its essential form . This they commonly maintain against the Papists . I confess I think that somewhat more should be said for the explication of this point ( which is fullyest done by the Thes. Salmuriens . vol. 3 ) but though I am not now delivering my own apprehensions , but the words of others , yet that the true [ Church ] as also [ Holiness , Faith , Christianity , Adoption , ] are Equivocal , as applied to the Regenerate and unregenerate , I wholly agree with the common judgement , and am past doubt of it , though Mr. Blake contradict it with Abhorence . 

Bellarmine confesseth that many of their own ( as Johan . de Turre cremata , Alexander Hales , Hugo , Thomas , etc. did take the wicked to be but Equivocally called members of the Church : And our Divines ( as Dr. Sutlive pag. 23.24 . mention also Peter à Soto , Melchior Canus , and diverse others ( et . p. 29. ) And Bellarmine himself saith they are but Membra Mortua . And for the judgement of the Fathers , herein , other Divines against the Papists have produced them at large . See Dr. Sutlive de Eccles . lib. 1. c. 7. folio 28. etc.  6. folio 22.23 . Now let us hear Mr. Blake . 

Mr. Blake p. 150. [ then it seems there is no Reality in such separations ! Camero tells us otherwise , that there is a Reality in this Saintship by separation . ] 

Ans. This is the first time that ever I heard that Equivocal terms express not Realityes . Is there no Reality in a picture or a corpse ? It sufficeth that the Reality is not the same that in a man , and a corpse is expressed by the same word [ Man ] Camero's judgement of our controversy is declared before in his own words . 

Mr. Blake [ And it seems the Scripture is still under the charge of Equivocal speeches all over . ] 

Ans. This anger flies too high . I beseech you make not the undeniable Equivocal terms which you find in Scripture the Matter of [ a Charge : ] it 's is ill judging the Law that must Judge us . Is there a Divine on earth that will deny that there are Equivocal terms in Scripture ? or that there are hundred , if not thousand numerical words that are such . And do you not fear to make these the Grounds of [ a charge ? ] Scripture shall not go uncharged except it speak so as to please us ! In the highest matters about the Attributes and Works of God , how common are Equivocal terms ? But do you indeed think that all Equivocal terms are Culpable ? yea or unnecessary ? or not intelligible ? I pray you distinguish between Jesuitical dissembling Equivocation , and the laudable yea necessary use of Equivocal words , when either the transcendencie of the matter , the incapacity of men , the paucity of terms , the custom of speech , etc. hath made them fit or needful : Let God have the forbearance and justice in your interpretations , as every writer and Speaker is allowed without any accusation ; the Scripture hath accusers enough already . 

Mr. Blake [ I would know for my learning what advantage or profit a dead corpse is in capacity to enjoy . I think none at all : but these have much every way . ] 

Ans. Thus you argue , ( or you say nothing : ) [ If unregenerate Saints , Church-members etc , have much advantage , and a corpse have no advantage , than they are not Equivocally called Saints , Church-members , etc. as a corpse is called a man : But etc.  The consequence is not only false , but too gross . Advantage or disadvantage are nothing to the nature of Equivocals . 

2.  In its kind a Corpse may have advantage ; It may be stuck with flowers , perfumed , emblamed , and kept from stinking , as ungodly men are by their common Gifts , for the sake of those with whom they do converse . 3.  An Ape is capable of advantage , and yet if you call him a man it is a more Catachresticall Equivocation , than to call a corpse so : An embryo or rude begining of a man's body before it receive the soul , it is capable of advanatage , in order to Manhood , and yet is but Equivocally called a man  

Mr. Blake . If such Equivocation be found in the word [ Saint ] then the like is to be affirmed of the word Believer ; and Believers having their denomination from their faith , that is equivocal in like manner , and so the common Division of faith into Dogmatical or Historical , temporary , miraculous , and justifying is but a Division of an Aequivocum in sua Aequivocata , which I should think no man should affirm , much lesle Mr. Baxter , who makes common and special grace to differ only gradually ; and then as cold in a remiss degree may grow to that which is intense ; so one Aequivocatum may rise up to the Nature of another : animal terrestre , may become Sydus Coeleste . 

Ans. 1.  it 's no good consequence : because the word [ Saint ] is Equivocal , therefore the word [ Believer ] is so . 2.  Our dispute is not about the sense of the word [ Faith ] or [ Believer ] in General : but about the [ Christian Faith ] in special , from whence a man is to be properly called a Christian , and upon the profession whereof he is to be baptised ; for I told you once already , that as Faith is taken in General , so your lower sort of faith is truly and properly Faith ; and so is believing in Mahomet : To distinguish Faith into Divine and Human , and into Christian and Mahometan etc , is not aequivoci in sua aequivocata divisio : But to distinguish the Christian Faith which entitleth to Baptism , into saving Faith , and that which is short of it , is aequivoci in sua aequivocata . 3.  If you thought no man had been guilty of this conceit , whether that thought do more disparage the said assertion , or yourself , I must not be judge ; but I take it as if you had said , [ I thought no man had written against Bellarmine's definition of the Church ] 4.  As to your [ no Man ; much lesle Mr. Baxter ] as I know not the reason of your thought , unless you indeed take me not only to be no Man , but to be somewhat distinct both from a man and no man ; so I am as little satisfied with the Reason which you allege : For 1.  It is a Gross untruth unworthy a Divine and a Brother , that I hold common and special Grace to differ only gradually . And that this should be deliberately published , even after I had given the world in print so full an account of the mistake of this accusation from another , once and again , this is yet lesle ingenuous , and doth but tell us what we must expect from brethren when passion is predominant . I never affirmed any more than this , [ that there is a Moral specific difference , between special and common Graces founded in a Natural Gradual difference . ] I manifested in print that Dr. Kendal who writeth against me on this occasion , doth not only say the same thing , but profess that others differ not from me , and resolveth his dispute into a reprehension of me for pretending a difference . Yet after all these writings my reverend Brother Mr. Blake sticks not to affirm to this and future Ages in print that I hold [ Only a Gradual difference , ] without any more ado . And of such dealing I may say his Book is too full . 5.  Your reason is no reason ; I hope you think not either that your Animal terrestre & Sydus caeleste differ but Gradually ; nor yet that there are no Equivocals that differ only in Natural degrees : who knows not that in many hundred cases a Degree may vary the species ? 

Mr. Blake [ If Judas faith was only Equivocal , than the unclean spirits were Equivocal likewise . 

Ans. A consequence as well fortified with proof of Reason as much more of your book is . Yet I take the boldness to deny it . 

Mr. Blake [ I shall never believe that an Equivocal faith can cast out a real devil . ] 

Answ. 1.  You are not able to make good your word : for you have not wholly the Command of your own belief . I am as confident that you will believe it . 2.  But if you will not that 's no good argument to us that the thing is false . 3.  An Equivocal faith is a Real faith ; why then may it not cast out a Real Devil ( that is , be a Causa sine qua non ? for no faith doth properly effect it . ) I hope you will believe that [ the finger of God ] can cast out a real devil ; and yet I hope you think that God's Power is but Equivocally called [ His finger . ] 

Mr. Blake [ The Apostle tells us of Faith to the removal of mountains , void of Charity : if this were Equivocal faith , those must be Equivocal mountains . 

Still the like proof ! you may as well say [ If it be Equivocally called God's finger , than it must Equivocally be called a devil that is ejected . We need better proof . 

Mr. Blake pag. 153. bringeth Du-plessis , Wollebius , Gomarrus , Hudson , Paraeus , Ames , saying that good and bad are in the visible Church . 

Ans. Have you to do with any man that denyeth it ? But you know , they distinguish between In the Church , and Of the Church , and 2. that they Judge not of the visible as you do . And therefore you do but fraudenly pag. 156. make it my opinion as joining with Bellarmine's unjust charge , that the visible Church is no true Church , but Equivocally so called , and that there are two Churches etc.  Do but you quit yourself of the charge of making two Churches as well as all , and we shall do well enough for that . And for the other part of your charge , our Divines say that there are in the visible Church , 1. those that belong to it as Invisible . 2 hypocrites and reprobates : the former say they are properly members of the Church in its proper sense , the latter are only seeming members : and the Church visible is called [ a Church ] in respect to the former : And the visible is denominated but from an Accidental and not the essential form . Their words before cited show this . 

Mr. Blake [ And whereas Mr. Baxter saith that other Divines generally pled that Hypocrites are not true members of the universal Church , but as a wooden leg to the body : I am almost confident that in turning over all his books , he can produce but few such testimonies , ] Had he said [ the Catholic Church ] instead of [ the universal ] I believe he might have found many — I think that scarce any man will deny that the universal Church is visible — yet Whitaker as largely makes good that the Catholic Church is invisible : If I be now sent to my Dictionary , to see whether Catholic and Universal be both one — the one a Greek word , the other a Latin ; I confess it is so in Grammar , but not in their use of it that handle the question of the Church Catholic in this manner — etc.  

Answ. wonderful Confidence's Readers , take warning by Mr. Blake and me , and for our sakes be not over credulous , no not in the most palpable matters of fact . You hear Mr. Blakes confidence , and now you shall hear mine . Whether I can cite many such testimonies is partly apparent already . Melancthon , Calvin , Beza , Vrsine , Polanus , Paraeus , Piscator , Zanchy , Junius , and I think I may add an hundred more , do promiscuously use the terms [ Catholic ] and [ Universal ] hear : and commonly join them thus [ Ecclesia Catholica seu Vniversalis . ] I profess , I mention that which mine eyes have many a time punctually observed : and I further profess that I never to this day ( to my best remembrance ) did read one Author ( nor hear of one till M. Blake here speaks it ) that did distinguish between the [ Catholic and Universal Church ; ] and though I may not say that no man ever did so , as having not read all , yet I will say , I do not believe that ever one reputed , wise and Orthodox did so , and I think Mr. Blake would have proved it from some one if he could . I take this therefore to be a most injurious reproach to our Divines . Name us one man if you can that ever was guilty of this ridiculous distinction : yea or one Papist that had the front to charge them with such a thing . It is well known that our elder Reformers use to pled against the Papist that particular Churches are visible , but that Ecclesia Catholica seu Vniversalis is invisible ( though you stick not to say that scarce any man will deny the Universal Church to be visible ; ) and that our latter Divines do speak more cautelously , and say , that both particular and Universal Church are quoad formam externam visible : and yet both are well reconcileable in sense : but your dinstinction I never met with before . 

Pag. 156.  I must profess that in perusing all Mr. Blake's book , I found but one place , that at the first reading might seem to an impartial man ( of intellectuals no stronger than mine , ) to be a successful confutation of any one of my Arguments , and that is the next , where repeating my Argument ( that the distribution of the Church into visible and invisible , is but of a subject into divers adjuncts ; therefore the members that are merely visible , are indeed no part etc , because adjuncts are no part of the essence : he answers [ The consequence might as fairly have been that these members which are invisible , are no parts etc.  ] I confess at the first view its a pausible answer , but open it , and the inside is no better than the rest . For my argument takes the adjunct as conjunct with the reason of the denomination , and Invisible is not a real adjunct , but a negative denomination ; and so the argument is thus [ The Church is called Invisible from its internal essential form , which is invisible ; and it 's called visible but from its external accidental form which is visible : therefore those Members that are merely visible ( note ; I said , Merely , ) are but Equivocally called members of the Church , because they participate only of the accidental form , and not at all of the essential . Thus argue the protestants ordinarily against Bellarmine . And now where is Mr. Blakes splendid answer , Invisibility is but an adjunct , no more than visibility ; true ; and not so much neither . But the Reason of the denomination , or the thing denominated Invisible , is that which protestants call the essence , and that called visible is but an Accident in their account . 

Whereas pag. 157. you take the Church to be an integrum , and that the merely visible Members are parts , yea and the visible to be the Church most properly , it is notorious that you side with the Papists therein against the stream of Protestant Divines : Though the thing itself I shall not now debate , it being merely a Controversy de nomine that we have in hand , and I mention the words of Divines , because that custom is the Master of speech ; and therefore have no better means that I know of to decide such kind of Controversies . 

As to what you say pag. 132.  I reply again ; that which is Real , may have an equivocal name ; and men will know this , yea and Children too , when you have talked your utmost . 

And as to what you say page 139.140 . about Equivocal Covenanting , I say as I did of Faith : Take Covenanting in General , and so a wicked man doth properly Covenant ex parte sui with his tongue : But take it for the Christian Covenanting which entitleth to baptism and denominateth us Christians , which is [ a consent to God's terms on which he offers Christ and life , ] and so all the covenanting , of the ungodly are but equivocally called [ Covenanting with God in Christ ] If you will not believe me ; at least regard Dr. Kendal's long dispute on such a point in his second volume , on a mistake , intended against me ; and answer him before you persevere . And as for God's act of Covenanting with them , I say , He is not actually in Covenant with them or obliged to them ; but only still doth offer them his Covenant . 

Reader , I suppose I should do but an unnecessary and undesired work , if I should thus give a particular Reply to all the rest of such passages as the forementioned in Mr. Blakes book . And therefore having enough of such work already , I shall forbear , and here dismiss thee . 

An account of my Reasons why I make no answer to Mr. Robertson , nor a more particular Reply to Mr. Blake , or Dr. Owen's appendix , as they were given heretofore in a Letter to a Reverend Friend . 

Though most of my Reverend brethren that have written to me of that subject , do advice me to forbear particular Replies to the words of others , because the matter is so much obscured or disadvantaged through the verbal quarrels , and they only desire me to handle the point of Title to Sacraments in some just Disputations , and to take in that of Mr. Blakes which best deserveth a Reply , ( whom I have obeyed in these Disputations , ) yet because some few others are of a contrary mind , I shall lay down my reasons why I do not yield to their desires ; which is , not only because it is impossible to please men of contrary expectations , and because they are the fewer , but also because to me their reasons seem lesle weighty , and the work which they require is lesle grateful , and will be lesle profitable . 

And first for Mr. Robertson , he that thinks such a book doth need a Reply , is like to profit little by any of mine , and so I leave him to be of what opinion the wind and tide shall drive him to . I have read over a M. S. Book of Mr. Hotchkis which is his vindication against Mr. Robertson ; wherein he hath sufficiently and easily done a needless work . To reciprocate gain-saying with that kind of men , is an unprofitable and unpleasing thing : The sons of contention in their greatest darkness , are more zealous and unwearied in their generation and work , than the Children of light and peace in theirs . it 's not desirable to match them in violence , in selfconceitedness , in rashness , or false accusations , in scorns , or lowdness , or length of speech . And as peaceable Readers are grieved with such disputes , so usually the Antagonist is more hardened in his mistakes . If you have a friend that erreth , whose recovery you desire , be sure that you write not a confutation of his errors : for ordinarily that 's the way to fasten him in them , and make him worse . Some will think this a hard censure , to pass on learned godly men , whose hearts should be devoted to truth , and who pretend to love the light that doth disclose it : But there 's no reasoning against common unquestionable experience . Who will doubt whether it can be so , when he sees it is so ? Of all the Cartloads of controversal writings that swarm in the world , how many can you name that convinced the Antagonist , and brought him to a recantation ? Bethink yourselves how many you can name . Nay how many that did not provoke and harden them ? By secret explications , and loving debate , the minds of many have been changed ; and many by positive Asserting and proving the truth ; and I confess some by controversal writings that were written against others ( else I would never meddle that way ) but how few by those that are written in confutation of themselves ? As soon as you speak to men in the hearing of the world , they presently apprehend their reputation to be so engaged , that they are excieted to defend it with all their might ; and instead of an impartial consideration of your arguments , and a ready entertainment of the truth , they bend their wits to study how to make good what once they have delivered , and to prove that true that once hath passed their pens , that the world may not think them so weak as to have mistaken . Nay when they do profess to love the truth as truth , and to be willing to receive it ; yet this Self is so near them , and so potent with them , that they cannot easily suspect that which is their own ; and especially if they have espoused it with any extraordinary endearment : It hath still a lovely aspect in their eyes , and they think so intentively what may be said for it , that they have scarce leisure or room or life to apprehend the force of that which is said against it . The first eyes which they cast on your writings , is with a desire to find some such weaknesses in them , which may be matter of reproach , or insulting for them ; and their endeavours are suited to their first intentions ; and thus are they biased in their reading from end to end . You therefore multiply their temptations to err , when you discover their error : For now you so involve the interest of their error with their own , that they see they cannot confess but with some disgrace , nor receive the truth without being so base as to confess themselves overcome : And therefore they muster up all their forces to maintain their opinions for the maintenance of their honour . It must be therefore for other men's sakes more than for their own , that you must enterprise such works : Unless you meet with those eminently humble self-denying Divines ( they say there are some such in the world ) that are most jealous of their own , through consciousness of their darkness , and take it for the greatest victory to be conquered by the truth . I doubt not but there are some such humble souls , where the window standeth open to the light , though pride and prejudice shut it with the most . Of whom if you please to esteem me one , I shall not much contradict you , but shall thence suppose that you will rather permit me to speak plainly against the sin , because I have suffered by it myself . 

And as to those other Reverend persons , Dr. Owen and Mr. Blake , whose displeasure hath been so much kindled against me , I shall give you a brief account of my Reasons , from the quality of their writings , why I think that it is not to be done , at least by any particular examination of their words . 

By the effects of what hath been said to them already , you may strongly conjecture what good it would do them to be contradicted again . In the former writings there appeared so much calmness , that one would have thought they had been men that could have endured a Reply : But for their second , they so much differ from the first as if the men were not the same . If you judged by the storms that arise in these writings , would you not think that I had somewhere reproached their persons , or done some heinous thing against them ? But whether it be so , I am content that the indifferent judge . For the former ( Dr. Owen ) I desire that any of his tenderest friends will peruse those few lines in which I contradicted him , and if they can find a word that is uncivil or abusive , I shall be ready to disown it , and to profess that I was guilty of provoking him to such an impatient entertainment . If I can understand myself and him , and may judge by his complaints and by the complexion of his dispute , the heinous injury that I have done him is that I have gainsaid him ; And I had thought that half the humility which some of his professions of himself do intimate that he is possessed of , would have caused a man to have judged this a pardonable fault . As long as his person is not once meddled with , but only his words examined , and cause set against cause , and reason against reason , what harm is done to him ? what bone is broken ? or what one feather is plucked from his plume ? Nay rather it hath occasioned the reparation of his honour with some ; For some that before judged that he meant as he spoke , do now begin to believe that he meant better ; since he so earnestly contendeth that he meant as the Orthodox , and seems to disclaim the Absolution of Unbelievers . And I must confess I do somewhat the lesle repent of those disputes that so much offend men , when they have so good an issue for the matter , though some accidental evils are occasioned by them . When a bad cause is disowned , I have the thing that I intended : And though it be very angrily that we agree , and close with somewhat a sharp collision , yet it 's well that we agree : Though I must say that it is so usual for men to love those of their own opinions , that I marvailed to find a man with such high indignation endeavouring to prove himself of his Opponents mind ; and that we should agree more passionately than we seemed to differ . As I little thought that Dr. Twisse had been of the same mind with myself and others in this point ; But Mr. jessop hath peaceably and temperately proved it : and I therein rejoice : so I lesle thought that Dr. Owen had been of the same mind ; but he hath hotly and haughtily proved it ; and therein also I rejoice . As long as we come nearer , and error goeth away with the disgrace , we may the better bear the displeasure of the Reconciled . 

As for the great pains he hath taken about my Person ( for the cause found him not work enough ) to prove from my writings that I am so hypocritically proud , I know not well what return to make him that will be acceptable . Should I as faithfully admonish him , it would seem but a recrimination ; and its like he hath those that are nearer him that do it , who need not take their ground from fame , and whose words may meet with lesle indignation : Should I tell him that a Minister is not to be prodigal of his reputation , because it is not his own , and that a man that is voluminously slandered , and that is Calumniated by the offspring which such Reverend men as he hath midwived into the world , may possibly open his mouth against the Calumniator , and clear his innocency and the truth without a predominant degree of pride , I should probably incur the censure of being yet more proud , by denying any thing that is charged upon me ; though it were that Heresy itself which his parallel doth seem to his Readers to accuse me of . If I should tell him that I do unfeignedly confess the truth of his accusation , and that I was aware of Pride and Hypocrisy in my heart before he told me of them , and that the subduing of them is the business of my desires and care , it 's ten to one but I shall be proud in seeming so humble as to confess my pride , and that these ( as he speaks ) are but good words to cover it . But yet confess it I must and will , how proud soever I be in the confession . 

One evidence of it which I have heard from the apprehension of others , viz. because I gave him not his due Titles of honour , is no whit cogent with me that know the case : and I think my justification is unanswerable : viz. that when my papers were written he was not Doctor , though he was when they came out of the press . 

Whether it be not harder measure that I have met with at his hand , I desire you to judge by two or three particulars . 

1.  Though I did purposely again and again profess that I reckoned not all to be Antinomians that held only some one or few of their opinions , that are not the worst ▪ and in particular , not all that held the very same opinion against which I argued with him , and withal entitle him [ The most sober and learned man that I know of that writes that way ] even for that opinion ; yet doth he think meet to publish to the world that I [ enroll him into the Troop of Antinomians , ] when he is unable to produce a syllable of mine that hath such a signification . I think this dealing is not fair . 

2.  He untruly charges me with [ traducing him for maintaining and giving countenance to the Propositions which I mentioned pag. 189. ] on his pag. 9 and 3. and thereupon groundeth his tragical exclamations . I mentioned him as the author of these particular words which I annexed to his name , which I judged indeed unsound ; but will it thence follow that I fasten on him all the errors that I mention in the precedent or subsequent pages ? Having read my words inconsiderately , he exclaims against supposed injuries , which were caused by the mistakes of his own imagination , and are not to be found in any of my expressions . A stranger that reads his passionate scorns upon such occasions , and had not read the words which did offend him , would little think that so learned a man should make such a stir upon the pretence of a charge that was never brought against him , but only against others , a leaf before the mention of his name . If he ask , Why then did I there mention his name ? I answer ; As he defendeth that particular opinion which his words express , and not as defending all that other men are charged with : and I mentioned his , because it is too like to theirs , and they are encouraged by it , as Mr. Eyre's allegations may evince . 

3.  When in the close of my confession pag. 462.  I called so large a recital of other men's words , [ a spending of much time to little purpose , ] even to satisfy those that look too much at the names of men , he feigneth me to speak this in reference to the matter and manner of the Book . 

4.  His splendid fiction of the terrible conditions which I put upon my answerer , and his insulting thereupon , are only the effects of his inadvertency and mistakes ( pag. 45. ) as I shall show anon . 

Pag. 5.  His pretended knowledge of me , as if it were upon much acquaintance and experience , doth argue much sagacity . I think I have seen him as oft as he hath seen me , and yet my knowledge of him is very small . 

In his anatomising of my pride pag. 6 he plays the aftergame more plausibly than his brethren played the foregame . They go before , ( and partly by his help ) and publish abundance of Calumnies of me to the world , telling them not only that I am a Papist , but what books they were that made me a Papist , and what Emissaries I have in all parts of the Land , with much more of the like . When my discovery of their abuse did frustrate much of their design , this Learned man comes after them , and at last will prove me proud for contradicting them ; forsooth for talking so much of myself . As if one of the Doctor's friends should accuse me of theft , or murder at the Assize , and when I have justified my innocency , the Doctor should come after him , and tell how much I had spoken for myself , and prove me thereby to be proud and selfish . The truth is , I am conscious of so much of these sins , and so far believe the odiousness and danger of them , that I take such books as this Doctors for a great mercy ; as knowing that strong corruptions must have something that is strong to work the cure , and a hard knot must have a sharp wedge ; a Shimei may be sent of God for good ; and how unrighteous soever the monitor may be , I am abundantly beholden to God that doth permit it ; I had rather have a Messenger of Satan to buffet me , than be exalted above measure . I confess my pride needs sharper reprehensions than friends have ever used about me ; and therefore they are better from any body than from no body . But I must say , that I despair of speaking , writing or doing any thing so exactly , but that ingenious malice may plausibly put it into as odious a dress as this Reverend man ( I hope with a better mind ) hath there clothed the passages with , which he refers to . 

Pag. 7.  His passion quite conquereth his ingenuity , while he is not contented to ease his spleen on me alone , but must fall upon the Worcestershire profession of faith , and therein pick quarrels with the plainest passages , contrary to the sense that I had told him in my explication we took the words in ; and can find that [ in sundry particulars therein we give too great a countenance to the Socinian abominations ] when we have professed that we believe in God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , and then that we consent to take this God for our God and chief Good , this Christ for our only Saviour , etc. he can find us directly answering Mr. Biddle , and distinguishing the Lord Jesus our Redeemer as our Lord from that one true God ] as if we did not include the three persons in the first Article of our consent , and in the second respect the office of Christ rather than the pure Godhead considered in itself , whi●h was expressed before ! Or as if we had not plainly prevented such exceptions ! As God is offered , so is he to be accepted ; and therefore our consent must respect the benefits and offices , and not only the persons in the Trinity as such . And did this Reverend man forget how oft Paul hath given him the very same cause to suspect his words of countenancing Socinianism ( excepting the difference of the authors ) as we have done ; I mean , how oft he doth as plainly distinguish as we here do ! But because such eyes will not look at an explication in the distant leaves , we have since tried a further remedy against such Calumniations , by putting our exposition in the margin , that he that will see the words themselves , may see them . But when all is done , you see what dealing you must expect . I look not to scape the fangs of such excepters , if I say that I believe in God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost ; for no doubt but some of them can find heresy or somewhat that countenanceth it in this . 

But the hardest measure of all that I have from him is in his Socinian parallel in 11.  Articles , page 11.12 . etc. I never met with Reader but understood without doubt , that he mentioned the words in the English Letter as mine : But he was wiser than to say so , much more to quote the places where they are all found . Indeed part of them are the common Protestant doctrine ; and part of them never fell from my pen , nor came into my thoughts with any approbation . Yet hath he so prudently managed the business , that his Readers shall generally think he charges them on me ( and who will not believe him rather than search he knows not where to disprove him ? ) and yet he may deny it when ever he is blamed for it . 

Having thus given you an account of the quality of that Appendix , I hope you see sufficient Reason why I should forbear a more particular Reply . Nor will I vie with him in poetical shreds and adages , though a Polyanthea or Erasmus Apopthegms would furnish me without any further travail . 

And next as to Mr. Blake , I find more cause in his last writings to deter me from all Disputations where pious men may think themselves concerned , than to encourage me to proceed in the justest defence . And I confess it repenteth me for his own sake that ever I defended myself against his accusations , and that I did not silently suffer him to say what he would : though yet I am willing that the equity of the Reasons which I gave for my Replying to him in that Apology , be censured by any impartial man : even those that I have expressed in my preface to that Book . But I could not then see the consequents as to himself . 

I am heartily sorry that I have become by my defence , an occasion or temptation of so much offence , and of so much distemper and injustice to a man whom I so much love and honour ; should I speak any further for that which I am confident is the truth of God , how much more might I offend and tempt him ? I well hoped that he that made the assault on his Brother would have patiently heard an answer ; and have been glad of such a collation of our several thoughts as might tend in any measure to beaten out the truth . As he thought it was for God that he assaulted me , so I as verily think it was for God and his certain truth that I wrote my defence . And if I be mistaken , why should he be so angry at it ? when I know he takes not himself to be infallible . When I wrote 〈◊〉 the Index the contents of one section , thus [ whether it be virtually written in Scripture that Mr. Blake is justified ? and whether it is de fide , ] he saith ( pag. 336. ) that [ he did not without trembling of spirit read , nor without tears think upon this thus put to the question . ] And what 's the reason ? why saith he [ Who would not believe that I had directly asserted it , or made some unsavooy vaunts about it ? ] Truly , no man would believe it from these words , that knows what an Index is ; but would understand that it tells him the matter that is contained in the page that it referreth him to , and not the matter directly asserted by another . And must we not dispute against that also which is indirectly asserted ? I profess it never came into my thoughts that the most tender passionate man , that was not melancholy , could have so much matter of offence in those words as to tremble or weep at them . It is a case wherein I must speak of some individual , or I could not speak to the purpose . For it 's granted that it is not every man's justification that is de fide , nor every justified man's , and yet some men's was . Had I instanced in Peter or Paul , it had been nothing to out business : For I confess that Scripture declareth them to be justified . Titius and Sompronius I knew not , and therefore could not instance in them . Should I have instanced in myself , he might have taken it for sophistical : For the disproof of my own certainty of justification , is no disproof of another man's ; whom then could I more reasonably and fitly instance in than the Opponent himself ? especially being a man of whose sincerity I am so confident . It never entered into my apprehension that this was any more wrong to him , than it would have been to have put this question , Whether Mr. Blake's Soul be in loco , if I had been disputing with him whether anima humana sit in loco ? I profess if it were to do again , I know not how more fitly to express it . But if I have not skill enough to draw the index of a Section , without so great sin or offence as shall cast so Reverend a man into trembling and tears ( no doubt , in compassion of me ) I think its time to lay by this kind of work . 

I have been ( it seems ) also a temptation to him to tell the world such stories of myself , as I little thought such a man would have reported . As Mr. Robertson talks so confidently of his discourses with Mr. Hothkis who professes he never saw him or spoke a word to him ; so doth my dear friend Mr. Blake tell the world as truly , once on the credit of his Informer , but again absolutely without such limitation , that I have given out that I have made some body my Convert , who professeth now to be satisfied in his Book : Whereas he might as truly have told them , that I take myself to be King of France or Spain . If he will bring his tale-carriers face to face , and prove by any faithful witness that I ever boasted of any man as my Convert , or ever said of one man living that I had made him my Convert , in any matter of such opinions , I will give you leave to spit in my face and call me liar . 

As fairly doth he cast his censures on the credit of his Informers at the Wocestershire combination ( as he termeth it ) [ that the most profane , where the Minister carries any Authority , are as forward as any ] with more of the like : whereas if he had been unsatisfied in their proceedings , there are many Reverend brethren there that would have readily given him an account of them , and a better information : And he was publicly told by them and me , that we were not gathering Churches or taking in members , and therefore not discerning who were meet ; but only discerning who did accounted themselves as such , and profess themselves such already . 

And as fairly doth he report that he hears I [ bring in the name of Reverend Mr. Ball to give honour to this , that the Doctrine of the Church of Rome and the reform Churches is one and the same , or inconsiderably differing in this of justification ; ] And then tells us that he heard it himself and told Mr. Ball of it , and that he disclaimed it . Whereas 1.  It was not half this much that I spoke . 2.  And do not know that ever I spoke it to three men , or more . 3.  And I must profess to the world that the man I had it from was Mr. Blake himself , and only him , and that at too several times , once mentioning the Papists doctrine , and the other time the Arminians about justification ; and that he reported the nearness of us to them , as Mr. ball 's saying , but never told me with it one word of his disowning it . 4.  And I never spoke this myself , as approving the conceit , that the Papists and we did so inconsiderably differ herein . And now let the equity of Mr. Blakes dealing be judged of , whether he were a fit man publicly to accuse me of this crime , who was my only Author . I would never have mentioned these things , if he had not thus necessitated me . Though I am in doubt that he will take it ill , that in all these things I deny his Accusations , and do not by my silence interpretatively belie myself . 

And as to the main bulk of his Disputes against me , I must needs say that there is such ordinary mistaking the sense , or quite overlooking the drift of my Arguments and Answers , and obscuring the matter with mere shifts and confusions , that if I should give a punctual answer to such a book , I think the perusal of it would be ungrateful to the Reader . For what profit can it be to any man to be convinced at so dear a rate , how much Mr. Blake hath miscarried in his arguing ? I know my censures of his labours are like to be provoking : But who can help that ? Had I thought him in the right , I had never contradicted him . Or could I yet see that I have erred , I must needs approve that light which did reveal it : And if I be in the wrong , it is no news for an erring man to think that he doth not err ; and if he think not so , he doth not err in mind , but in word . But if I prove in the right , if it will not excuse me that I do but ward off the blow that he giveth me , not that I pled for God's truth , at least let it excuse me that some evidence is cogent , and some light so constraining that I cannot choose but think as I do think , till I have better evidence to the contrary than doth appear in Mr. Blakes Reply . And so little is my understanding at the disposal of my will , that if my life lay on it , I could not choose but be persuaded in my heart , that Mr. Blakes Reply is so full of mistakes , and built upon such misunderstanding of the words that he Replieth to , that it tendeth more to darken the truth than to clear it , and to pervert the inconsiderate that will take things on trust , or think his cause best that hath the last word to colour it , and put a gloss upon it : and that there needs no more with the judicious Reader that is willing to try before he trust , and thinks the truth is worth his labour , than impartially to read over the words that Mr. Blake doth Reply to , for the manifesting of the insufficiency of his Reply , as to the main of the cause . He will think this is great confidence ; but what Remedy ? I think he is near as confident : though both be not in the right . And I doubt not but Dr. Owen can see the height of my Pride in this confidence . But certainly when ever I come to be so humble as to believe all that such Reverend brethren say , I must needs be so Proud as to disbelieve those that contradict them ; For I see it a matter not to hoped for , that ever they that are so offended with me , should come to an agreement among themselves . As Dr. Owen and Mr. Blake are against me ; so Mr. Blake and I are against Dr. Owen , and so its runs round . And if I should be so humible as to agree with one of them , what shall I do for another inconsistent humility , to make me of the others mind that is against him ? 

I must confess that there is one part of the contest between Mr. Blake and me at least , that I think well worthy a review , and that is the question about the nature of that faith which gives Right to Sacraments : For as it is a matter that comes so frequently into practice , and of such moment to particular persons , to Ministers and to the welfare of the Church , so I do not know of any that hath said so much for that cause which I yet accounted so bad , as Mr. Blake hath done ; and indeed he hath put a fairer gloss on this than on any of the rest . And yet in my judgement he hath left it so naked , that a little diligence and impartially may do much to discover his opinions to be inconsistent ( if reduced into practice ) with the Purity of the Church , and such as is unworthy the patronage of Godly learned men . Yet in this I perceive his writings have success : For I hear that some Reverend Godly men of his acquaintance are so confident that he is in the right , that they marvel that ever I should hold the contrary , and blame me as defending a principal point in the Independent cause . The Lord enlighten us , and pardon it to us , which soever of us it be that is mistaken , and doth wrong the Church of God.  

There are four several Titles that are or may be produced to Baptism : The first is sincere Saving Faith : The second is the profession of such sincere Faith : The third is a Dogmatical Faith , short of Justifying Faith : The fourth is a profession of that Dogmatical Faith. I say , that only they that have the Justifying Faith , have a Promise-right to Baptism , properly so called ; which I called a Right Coram Deo : but that the professors of such a Faith and their seed have an Analogical Consequential Right which followeth on God's Precept to a Minister to Baptise them . This I called Right Coram Ecclesiâ , and is lesle properly a Right . And that the bare word Right might be no occasion of quarrel , I distinguished of Right ; and showed how far I affirmed or denied it : But such distinctions and conclusions are nothing to the business with Mr. Blake ; but fittest to be passed by . I conclude in a word that every professor of a Justifying Faith ( that doth not invalidate his own profession ) hath such a claim to Baptism for himself ( if unbaptised ) and his seed , as the Church must admit : But only the sincere Believer hath a Right from the Promise , and shall be taken by God for one to whom he is actually , as it were , obliged by his Covenant . But for the two later pretended Titles , viz. A Dogmatical Faith not Justifying , and the Profession of such a Faith , I say , they are no just Titles at all . Not but that a man who hath merely a Dogmatical Faith within , may have a Title in Forobosco Ecclesiae ; but this Faith is not his Title , but the profession of a Saving Faith : so that if he profess only his Dogmatical Faith , and not a Saving Faith , the Minister ought not to Baptise him . This is the brief of the state of the Controversy between Master Blake and me : And did I think that any such Reverend brethren would ever have approved his Judgement in such a cause ? Yea and some of them pled from the same effectual mediums , which are alone sufficient to prove the contrary ; it 's the course of Hilary and others against the Arrians ; Hierome , Augustine , and many more against the Pelagians , and other heretics , to call them to the constant practice of the Church in Baptising , for the proving of the nature of that Belief that we are Baptised into , and the quality of the subject . I appeal to Christ's institution of Baptism , and the uninterrupted practice of all Churches that ever I read of on the face of the earth to this day , and to the continued practice of the Churches in England , and all the Reform parties , and all the rest of the Christian world , If they do not generally , Ethiopians , Greeks , Papists , protestants with one consent require the profession of a Justifying Faith , I will quit this cause , and tell Mr. Blake that I have been mistaken , and cry him mercy . Nay if Mr. Blake himself do not require the profession of a Justifying Faith in the Parent of all that he admits to Baptism , I shall think him the only singular man I know alive in this business : But if he practise contrary to all his confident Argumentations , which shall we have respect to , his opinion or his practice ? Where is the Church on earth that doth not Baptise into the name of the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , and require in the adult , or the Parent of Infants , that they profess themselves at present to Believe in the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , and to renounce the World , the Flesh and the Devil ? And therefore they commonly cause them to profess the Articles of the ancient Creed before they do Baptise them ( which though it hath been lately disused by some , I gladly heard some Reverend Ministers in London yet use ) which Creed ( as Parker de Descensu , hath learnedly showed ) is the exposition of the words of the Baptismal Institution ; and the sum of it is , I Believe in the Father , Son and Holy Ghost I think not only Perkins but our Divines commonly against the Papists have proved sufficiently that the words [ I Believe in God the Father , in Jesus Christ , in the Holy Ghost , do signify Affiance , as well as Assent . And I should hope that I need not be put to maintain it , that [ to Believe with Assent and Affiance , in God the Father , Christ the Redeemer , the Holy Ghost , the witness and Sanctifier , renouncing the Devil , the World and the Flesh ] is certainly Justifying Faith , at least . If they that say they thus Believe , do so indeed , I dare not be he that shall tell them they are yet condemned , and deny them to be the justified members of Christ. If they will not so much as profess thus to Believe , ( yea and to Repent ) I will never Baptise them , or theirs upon the●r account . Will Mr. Blake himself Baptise them , that will not thus profess ? would ever the Church of Christ Baptise any but such ? and yet some Reverend brethren tell us , that the Church universally hath gone Mr. Blakes way , against that which I insist on . Now the Lord have mercy upon all our infirmities , and pity his poor Church , and bring his servants to so much Unity , that the universal practice of the Church in all ages and Nations , even among ourselves , which we daily hear , and see , and our own selves practise , may not be among us a matter of controversy ; for then , what are we likely to be agreed in ? 

Again I must crave pardon of this confidence : but if it seem to them to come from self-conceitedness and pride of my own judgement , or a loathness to let go what I have once received ; as I willingly confess that I find such sins within me , and am no Christian , if I blame them not and hate them not in myself ; so I will be bold to tell Mr. Blake and the world the very truth in this business , : which is , that the partiality that I have felt in the study of this point hath been for Mr. Blakes opinion against my own ; and I had rather a great while ( till the light convinced me ) have found his opinion true , than my own . As I knew I should be taken for a defender of the Independents ( which is a censure that I little regard ) so I thought that I should the better comply with some Texts of the old Testament which Mr. Blake much urgeth , and some other reasons did cause Mr. Blakes opinion sometime so far to smile upon me , that I striven against the contrary truth , and studied all that I could to have confuted the Arguments for it , and was very willing to have found the truth on Mr. Blakes side : but it was too hard for me , and overcame me after some such reluctancy . For besides many other Reasons which I have mentioned , I find that there is no footing for a man in his way . He that will not take up with the bare name of a Dogmatical Faith , knows not ( for aught I can find ) what to take up with . I despair of ever prevailing with Mr. Blake , let him write never so much more on the subject , to give us a true Definition or Description of that Faith short of Justifying , which entitleth to Baptism , and to prove it from God's word , or to agree with himself . Commonly he calls it a Dogmatical Faith : one would think now you might know the truth by this plain Name : but when I tell him that if it be merely Dogmatical , than it is only in the understandings Assent , and importeth no consent of the Will , and that this is in the Devils , and may be in those that say , [ We will not have this man reign over us , nor be our Saviour , because he will not let us have our lusts ] ( And would he Baptise those that should say so ? ) Hereupon Mr. Blake will take some consent of the Will , or else it cannot become a covenanting : but sometime he only describes it negatively ( that it is not such as comes up to Justifying Faith ) : but who knows by this what it is ? though he tell us what it is not : sometime he makes the expression of it to contain those two parts : 1.  Confession of the necessity of justifying Faith : 2.  An engagement or promise to Believe with a Justifying Faith. But when I interpret this promise to be [ that he will so believe de futuro ] he asketh me [ how comes de futuro in ? ] as if every promise were not the futuro ; Is it de praesenti ? Doth he promise that he doth at the present so believe ? why this is not to promise , but to profess : and is the thing that I pled for as necessary , which Mr. Blake resisteth : sure than it is de futuro , or it is not intelligible by common capacities . Well , if it must be de futuro , either it 's at the next moment , or some time at longer distance . To say , I consent not now , but I will the next moment , or tomorrow , is ridiculous : partly because as I have proved to him , such a person is not capable of making such a promise , so as should be rationally accepted in a covenant , and partly because we may end the controversy by forbearing his Baptising one moment longer , or one day till he do indeed Believe and consent as he promises . But what time soever it be , as I told him , upon these terms , a man may say , [ I believe the Creed and Scripture to be true , but because I know that I cannot serve God and Mammon , nor have Christ to justify me , and live in my sins , I will not yet have God for my God , or Christ for my Lord and Saviour , nor the Holy Ghost for my Sanctifier , because I will not yet leave my sins , but hereafter I will , ] would Mr. Blake Baptise such a man as this ? In answer to such a question , he saith pag. 133.  [ I think it will be nothing hard for any honest Christian to say , that a man not justified may believe every fundamental Article , as to Assent , and that he may be convinced of the necessity of such Repentance , and accordingly to make profession of it , as Johns Converts were Baptised into etc. ] And pag. 147. he saith [ Seeing Mr. Baxter calls upon me further to declare myself further in this thing , I do believe and profess to hold , that he that upon hearing the Gospel preached , and the truth of it published and opened , shall professedly abjure all other opposite ways whatsoever , and choose the Christian way for Salvation , promising to follow the Rules of it , is to be Baptised and his seed , etc.  ] And are these Descrptions of his Dogmatical faith the same with the former ? Is not Repentance ever concomitant with Faith ? John's Baptism was the Baptism of Repentance for Remission of sins ; and if our Divines mistake not when they maintain to be the same with Christ's , sure Faith was to go with that Repentance , and that Repentance which is for Remission of sins is not common , but saving and special . If therefore saving Repentance must not only be promised de futuro , but professed de praesenti , then doubtless so must that Faith which is inseparable . 2.  And would Mr. Blake have us so Censorious as to say , that those men that [ Abjure all other ways whatsoever , and choose the Christian way for Salvation , promising to follow the Rules of it , ] if they do this sincerely , are not yet justified , or have not justifying faith ? and that if they do it not sincerely , that is not yet justifying faith which they profess ? For my part I am past doubt of it . If this be Mr. Blakes Dogmatical Faith , he and I are not much at distance about the Qualification of the Baptised , but about the nature of justifying Faith. For that 's justifying in my judgement , which is but Dogmatical in his . Christ is the way to Salvation ; the Sanctifying work of the Spirit , and the holy Love and Obedience of the Saints in this way , in subserviency to Christ , all these are the Gospel way to Salvation : the false belief of Erroneous men , and the many by-paths of the unregenerate , are the contrary which Satan persuades them to , and makes them believe may serve the turn . That man that Abjureth all other ways than that are opposite to the Christian way , and doth choose the Christian way for Salvation , is certainly a true Penitent and believeth to justification : or else I can have no hopes of being saved . Election is that term by which Amesius will needs express the proper formal act of justifying Faith. Not one of all these acts that Mr. Blake mentions , either 1.  To Abjure all other opposite ways whatsoever . 2.  To choose the Christian way of Salvation . 3.  To promise to follow the Rules thereof . I say , not one of these can be uprightly and unfeignedly done by the unregenerate ; by any that hath not true Repentance and justifying saith : Much lesle altogether . Judge then whether the profession of this , be not the profession of saving faith ? and whether Mr. Blake know where to fix himself , and how to describe his Dogmatical faith ? and whether he do not yield the cause that I am maintaining ? 

And whereas he takes it for [ an egregious piece of affected nonsense , to say that Justifying faith is a promise ] and still saith [ that Justifying faith with him is the thing promised , or the thing whereto we do restipulate ] pag. 171.  I say , that he can never prove that the Church of Christ did know such a Baptismal covenant , wherein the first justifying faith was the thing promised ( though the continuance may ) : And should I so Baptise any person , at age , ( or an Infant in respect of the Parents Faith , which is his condition of Title ) I should think I made a new covenant and a new Baptism ; I mean , If I Baptised any without the present profession of justifying faith and Repentance , upon a promise that they will begin to Repent and Believe savingly for the time to come . Indeed the first faith and Repentance unto life , are so much above corrupted nature , and so much the special gifts of God , ( which he hath given no man assurance of in particular , that hath them not already ) that we must stay till men have them , before they are meet to be admitted upon promise that they will perform them . 

It hath pleased some of the great Calumniators agents , to censure me as an Arminian , or half one , because I run not so far on the other hand as they . But it 's a hard case that I am in , who must needs be an Arminian , and yet must be forced to descent from so dear a friend as Mr. Blake for fear of becoming one . I am confident that Mr. Blake in those points is Orthodox ; but so could not I be , if I should entertain his opinion . For if I did believe that upon the acts of common Grace men have covenant or promise-right given them by God to be Baptised , I must needs believe that they had Right to Remission of sin in Christ's blood ; seeing God appointed no Baptism but what is for the Remission of sin ; upon which account I have mightily displeased some Reverend friends that before overvalued me , who are favourers of the Arminian way , merely because I oppose Mr. Blake in this point . 

For my part , I still take faith to be the very internal covenanting with God in Christ , and not a condition of our own covenant : though it be the condition of God's covenant or promise : and so that condition of God's covenant , and our own actual covenanting are one and the same thing : our very first covenanting with him , or consent to his terms , is that faith on which he promises us Justification : though there be a further performance required to our Salvation . It is all one , in my account , to believe in Christ , and to become a Christian : and Baptism ( commonly called our Christening ) is not to engage us to begin to be Christians hereafter : but it is the solemnisation of the Christian contract or marriage between Christ and the Soul , which is supposed to be made in heart before : so that they are then actually Christians inaugurated or publicly manifested . And ( for all that Mr. Blake hath said to the contrary ) he that professeth any faith only , that is short of justifying faith , is not a Christian in the covenant-sence , but is only Equivocally or Analogically so called . And whereas Mr. Blake makes it more tolerable if I had used the word [ Analogically ] then to use the word [ Equivocally , ] if he had pleased to observe it , I frequently put them together as here , [ Equivocally or Analogically : ] so that if that will satisfy him , he might have been satisfied sooner . Yet I take the Scotists' controversy to be yet undecided , whether some terms be not both Analogical and Univocal , and some both Analogical and Equivocal ; ( which they handle on the Question , Vtrum Ens dicatur Vnivocè de Deo & Creaturâ ) or rather that the later clause is past doubt ; and therefore in our ease it is both . Nor am I yet persuaded that his old Testament covenanters , ( which are the great moving instance ) did profess only such a faith as was short of Justifying : and they that lived in such scandal as was inconsistent Notoriously with their profession , were by the law to be put to death : and then they were past begetting Children to pled a right in Circumcision . 

And whereas he is so confident that according to my opinion , the Baptism of the unjustifyed is a Nullity , and that they must be Baptised again , and saith , that [ its much to be feared , if not certainly to be concluded , that the Mayor part by far of the Worcestershire combination consists of unbaptised persons , etc. ] pag. 142 , 143.  I answer 1. it is a mere naked unproved assertion , that any such consequent doth follow on these grounds : Nor can he ever prove it . If the outward ordinance were rightly administered , and the inward covenanting of the heart were not performed , it is not that which was well done that must be done again , but that must be done which was at first omitted , even sincere internal covenanting or believing . 2.  But it is much more disputable according to his principles , whether all that he should so Baptise , must not be rebaptised ? For as the ancient Councils which were against Cyprians and the rest of the Carthaginians Rebaptising , did yet decree that all should be rebaptised that were Baptised by the Paulionists ( not that they allowed really of twice Baptising , but that the first was but Baptism Equivocally so called ) because they Baptised not into the Name of the Trinity ; so if we should upon the new Doctrine take up a new Baptism , upon a mere Dogmatical faith , which is not a believing in God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , but only a Believing that there is a Father , Son and Holy Ghost , ( and add , if you will , a Promise to believe in them hereafter ) I should be hardly put to it to prove these persons truly Baptised , and , that it being a Nullity , all were not to be done again : and yet some brethren of Mr. Blakes mind think , that my Judgement opens the way to Rebaptising ; when I doubt it will be hard to avoid it , as to every person , in the way that he disputeth for . Not that I think that any one should be rebaptised that is Baptised by Mr. Blake or any of them . For I am confident that neither he , nor they did ever practise their own doctrine , nor ever Baptised one person but upon the profession of justifying faith itself . 

3.  But why do they not see , that on their own grounds many of their own Baptizing would be Nullities , and the persons be Rebaptised . If a Dogmatical faith itself be of necessity to the Being of Baptism , then what shall be done with those many hundred Children among us , whose Parents discover to us that they have not that Dogmatical faith ? How many have we oft occasion to speak with , that marvel when we tell them what Christ is , and hath done and suffered for us , as if they had never hard it before , when yet they sit under our teaching day by day ? like Dr. John white 's Catechumene , that being asked what Jesus Christ was ? answered that [ she did not know ; she was never taught so far ; but sure enough it is some good thing , or it should never have been put into the Creed . ] Would Mr. Blake have the Children of all these rebaptised , or not ? If yea , than he is more than I for rebaptising : if not , then how will it follow any more from my judgement that the Children of the unjustifyed must be Rebaptised ? I cannot conceive what he can say ( without going to the right of remote ancestors , or the Church which is no more for him than for me , ) but only that it is the profession of a Dogmatical Faith , and not the Faith itself that is necessary to give this Right . But a man would think that if it be not enough for an evidence in our case of an Analogical Right Coram Ecclesiâ , that a man subscribe the Covenant of God ( of which Mr. Blake pag. 143. ) then it can be no good evidence in his cause of a Right Coram Deo & Ecclesiâ , that a man subscribe or speak that which he never understood : or if his Profession of Dogmatical Faith without the Faith itself be a good Title , than the Profession of a justifying Faith without the Faith itself , may so far serve turn as to justify the Baptising , and to prohibit rebaptising . 

4.  And to Mr. Blakes censure ( which I will not censure as it deserves ) of the Mayor part by far of the Worcestershire combination ( as he speaks ) whether it be that he know them better than I ( which is unlikely when he professeth to conjecture on reports ) or whether I be more charitable , or lesle rigorous in judging of men's sincerity or what ever else makes the difference of our censures , I will be bold to say , that I know not one person of all the Worcestershire combination ( as he calls them ) whom I know to be an unjustified unsanctified person , that I can remember : though I confess I have no small doubts and fears of many : Nay more ; I have more hopes than fears , ( I mean I rather think that they are truly Godly , than that they are not ) of the far greatest part of them that I know , even of many to one ; and more comparatively than I will now mention . 

And whereas Mr. Blake doth instead of answering cast aside above twenty of my Arguments as not concerning him , and so put them off with a wet finger ; I say , that 's too easy a way of answering to satisfy me , how ever it may do by those that are more easily satisfied ? and with a word I shall restore and reinforce them , as with a word he puts them by . 

It is one thing to ask , whether the profession of justifying Faith be a duty to all that come to be Baptised ? Another , whether it be so necessary , that they ought not to come nor we to admit them without it ? and a third , whether Baptism without it be a Nullity ? Mr. Blakes general assertion did in the proper sense express the first . And thereupon , because I took his words as he spoke them , he better expoundeth them , and confesseth that justifying Faith is a duty prerequisite to Baptism , but not such a duty , without which Baptism is Dorid , or we may not Baptise : and therefore he puts off above twenty Arguments at once , and saith that they make nothing against him . But I restore them all or most at once ( though one is enough ) by telling him , that they prove that the profession of a Faith that is justifying , must be expected by the Church and found in all that are admitted to Baptism , and that none ought to be Baptised upon the profession of any lower Faith. This they prove : and this is the controversy . 

In conclusion I will add but these two things , ( and I should think such two might serve the turn . ) 1.  Consider when the Right that I denied is a Promise-right , whether Mr. Blake , after all his pains do not yield up the cause , when he expressly saith , pag. 124.  [ So that I conceit no promise of these ordinances made to such a faith , but an actual investiture of every such believer in them . ] What means this if it yield not the cause , and unsay not the rest : if no promise , than no Right by promise , and I seek no more . What is the actual investiture , but actual Baptising and Receiving the Lords Supper ; and he knows that I did not deny that they actually received it . 

2.  Me thinks Mr. Blake and my Reverend brethren of his mind , that marvel at my maintaining of this cause , should bear some reverence to Augustine who so diligently defendeth it . Besides what he saith in Enchirid. ad Laurent . cap. 67 , 68 he hath a well known treatise purposely on this very subject , or on that doth not considerably differ . There were some voluptuous persons especially at Rome , that kept concubines , and yet professed to be Believers , and would have been baptised , but would not yet put away their concubines : whereupon when the Ministers denied them baptism , some lay-men that desired the increase of the Church , and misunderstood the doctrine of justification by faith only , did pled that because by faith only we are justified , and works are to follow as the fruits of faith , therefore these persons upon their believing might be baptised , and afterwards they should be dealt with for the reforming of their lives . Whereupon Augustine writes that Treatise de fide & operibus , to prove the contrary , that they cannot be justified or saved by any faith but that which works by love , and that they must not be baptised , till they actually put away their Concubines and other the like sins , and promise also to forsake them for the future ; so that as it was not any presbyters , but lay-men that , raised this doubt , so both they and Agustine seem agreed , that the same faith that is saving is requisite to baptism ( or as to the Church , the Profession of it . ) And therefore Austin thus repeats the occasion in his Retractions , lib. 2. cap. 38. pag. ( Edit . Paris . ) [ Missa sunt mihi nonnulla , quae ità distinguerent à bonis operibus Christianorum fidem , ut sine hâc non posse , sine illis autem perveniri suaderetur ad aeternam vitam . Quibus respondens librum scripsi , cujus nomen est , de Fide & Operibus , in quo disputavi , non solùm quemadmodum vivere debeant gratiâ Dei regenerati , verùm etiam quales ad lavacrum regenerationis admitti . ] If I cited but a line or leaf you might say I dismembered it , and left behind me the sense , but when the whole book is to this very purpose ▪ no such thing can be said : see especially cap. 21. so that if I err , I have no worse a man then Augustine to lead me the way . 

As for Mr. Blak's impotent accusations of my owning the cause of the Papists , against the Protestant cause in the matter of Justification , because I misliked the by extreme opinions of some men ; as if all had agreed in these opinions , or the Protestant difference with the Papists in the matter of Justification did lie either only or principally in these , I look upon it as such dealing as must be expected from angry men , and as Children of the same Father do sometime use against one another when they fall out . It was doubtless my sin that I was no more cancelor● of provoking him , as it is his to be carried to such injustice by his passions , as that and many other passages do contain . But I am confident he forgiveth me , and I am certain I forgive him , and I am persuaded the Lord whom we most offend , in the abundance of his Grace doth forgive us both . I must confess that when I think I have a call to dispute , I do withal think that I am called to lay open the nakedness of the cause which I oppose to the utmost ; and being persuaded that I speak against that which is against God , me thinks if I do not effectually manifest its falsehood , I do nothing , whereupon I find , that what is spoken against the cause is taken as a dishonour to the person , and he takes himself to be wounded or wronged by it , when I never touch the person at all : so that if I do but once name the Imposture of a common distinction , Mr. Blake comes on , as if I had called all those learned men cheators or impostors that use that distinction ( between fides , qua , & quâ ) yea even those that condescended privately to write to me ; and so parrallels me with Mr. Craudon herein . Mr. Craudon spoke of persons , and I speak of distinctions and reasons : Is not this a mere violence , as if it were to raise an odium , and set men together by the ears ? When I mention the weakness of his own arguing , he tells me , I must not answer a fool according to his folly , and marvails I will set my wit against such a ones . Is not such dealing a sufficient prohibition to dispute ? If I show not the weakness of an Argument I do nothing : If I do , I make the Author a fool . If I show that an Argument is unsound , or a conclusion false : I make him false ; If I show that some common distinction hath unobservedly deceived many , I make all the Learned that use it impostors , even my friends that privately vouchsafe me their writings . Well I am satisfied , and take the prohibition . This book of Mr. Blakes I proclaim unanswerable . These are too hard and unjust terms for me to dispute upon : Especially when the main issue of a large volume , must be but to reckon up a Dear and Reverend Brothers mistakes . 

Yet I must confess that the controversies about the object of Justifying Faith ( whether Christ as Lord ) and the object of Baptism , do seem to me of so great weight and use to the Church , to be well discussed , that I will not peremptorily resolve against meddling so far with his book , if any more judicious do convince me it is my duty . 

But I have run much beyond my first intention : I thought but to give you some reasons , why I should not write any Rejoynder to these learned Reverend men Dr. Owen , Mr. Robertson or Mr. Blake : and giving you my Reasons , I find I have done some of that , which those Reasons were brought against , and from which I intended to excuse myself . 

But having run so far with the other , I shall say the lesle of Mr. Robertson : his dealing with me is like others that have gone before him and do accompany him : and I am now so used to it , that I the lesle marvel at it . Of this zealous Brutus I must needs say . Nescio quid juvenis iste vult ; sed quicquid vult , vehementer vult . it 's enough to make us admire God's patience and mercy , that will forbear and pardon such things to the Sons of men ; and it 's a sad discovery of the lamentable case of the Church on earth , that Grace should have so much corruption with it , and that the Church must make use of such sinful guides as we are , in the way to glory . For though the Scripture saith that a false witness shall not be unpunished , and he that telleth Lies shall not escape ; and that Railors shall not enter into the kingdom of God ; yet I hope they may have Grace that do it in a mistaken zeal for God , though Self may have too much hand in it . But we may see in our miscarriages that it is not for nothing that God hath let lose such Judgements upon Professors , and such floods of reproach upon us ourselves that serve at his Altar , as lately he hath done . I dare say that many a Heathen would have scorned to have given out against his greatest Enemy such volumes of notorious impudent falsehoods and imprudent rail as Mr. Robertson , and other of his spirit have lately done against one that was none of their enemy . Might I but have truth from them , I care not ( for my own part ) for the worst of their words . But who knows how to confute such volumes , whose very substance is compounded of gross falsehoods and calumnies : Either the Reader of Mr. Robertsons Book , and his associates , will also read mine , or they will not . If they will not , let them take their course , and believe what they list , and not what is true : for how can I help it , if I write again what likelihood that they will read it , that will not read that which is written already . If they loose by it no more than I , what cause have I to care ? But if they will but read the book which Mr. Robertson opens his mouth against , I desire no more ; if that will not satisfy them , and make them lament over the spirit of this man , I have no more to say to them , they are none of the men for whom I write . But Mr. Robertson hath little cause to say that I am for Justification by Works , when I hope that such men as he are justified , whose works are such , as I once hoped no man had been so guilty of , that had the least fear of God before his eyes . I profess I marvel what 's the matter that the wasps of the Nation are gathered about my ears , I cannot but hope yet , that there are few more such in England , as those that I have had to deal with . 

His first assault of me is about the Inception of God's immanent acts . But never had I such a confuter before ; no not Mr. Craudon himself . He bestows a whole Epistle , ( on part of his book ) to tell the Reader how he detests my Blasphemy : and that 's my confutation . Not a line of my Book doth he cite and confute . But in general tells me that I affirm new Immanent acts in God : and then cries out upon the blasphemy . Must we write confutations of such men as these ? no : they that will believe them , let them take that they get by it ; it 's nothing to me , that cannot remedy it . What if twenty men will swear that I have written there is no God ? must I write against them all ? I laid down my mind in the case that I am thus dealt with about , in several propositions as plain as I could speak : the sum of the chief part of them was this ; that the substance of the Act ( as commonly called ) that is the Essence of God , is neither multiplied nor begins nor endeth ; but the Relations and extrinsic denominations are many , and may begin and end . Yet would I not presume to determine ( with Pet. Hertado . de Mendoza and others ) that the Relations are ex parte Dei , but only took what the Thomists grant that they are ex parte creatura , whence arise the denominations of God ; and doth not this Brother know that the highest Antiarminians on earth do grant this , and none that I know of did ever deny it . Yet doth this judicious Pedagogue , ( before he understands what I have said , and while Dr. Kendal himself contradicteth him in print ) fall on with such words as these , pag. 7. [ I never did abhor with greater detestation and indignation the Principles of any man , and the defence of them than I did that one most blasphemous Principle of yours and your defence of it about the Immanent acts of God in his knowledge and will as if they were or could be de novo , etc.  ] All the rest is but to prepare the way for this sentence ; and to attend it , and this is his Epistle . 

And that you may see what impossibility there is of pleasing all men , see what he saith of my Apology against Mr. Blake , which cost so much on the other side ; p. 4 , 5. [ Though in the first three or four hours reading that morning , of the first part , of your Apology to Mr. Blake , I was very much taken with so much of a profound , deep & rational Judgement , with such a clear and solid understanding , & with so great a height of a piercing wit , as I did apprehend in some of your reasoning & explications of some points by you holden forth there , etc.  ] And so he goes on to show that in the afternoons Reading against Dr. Kendal , I struck down all the milk that I had given in the morning . Many men , many minds . Even fair fall you Sir , for I see you are a kind man when the fit comes on you ; and when I please you , your commendations swell over the banks of common discretion . But what shall I give you to make Mr. Blake of your opinion ? Or to teach me how I may please you both , with the rest of the offended ? 

Another part of Mr. Robertson's task , is to satisfy the world how ignorant Mr. Hotchkis and I are of the Hebrew , and careless of it aswel as ignorant . And I may undo the man if I should confute him here : for he hath bound himself in a most solemn Obligation , p. 82. that if he [ do not make it good what here is challenged , against all the four eyes of us both , ( that both of us have no eyes at all to see with of our own , & therefore see nothing at all with our own eye in those points , but all the dim sight we have , it 's only by seeing with other men's eyes , etc. ) than he promises to shut & turn away both his own eyes from ever looking upon a book again whilst he breathes , even the Bible itself , which yet he would not do for a kingdom , or his Life . ] And should I be so unmerciful now as to confute this man , if I could do it ? no , let Mr. Hotchkis consider what he hath done in doing it himself . He hath left him under little lesle than a solemn Vow , never to read the Bible or any Book more . Doth not this man think himself very wise in his zeal ? [ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . ] Mr. Hotchkis saith , he had read over the Hebre● Bible before Mr. Robertson was born . 

And is it not ( think you ) an honest and sober dispute upon which he brings out his Hebrew , when I had so fully explained myself in my Confession , of which he is pleased to take no notice ? I still maintain that Punishment properly so called , hath ( at least ) two species , Paradeigmatical and strictly Vindictive , and Nouthetical or Castigatory : and so that Chastisement is truly and properly called punishment ; but not of the same species , with the former vindictive or destructive punishment . Now what doth this Learned Brother but over and over again , so far lay by the ninth Commandment and the fear of God , as to face down me , and assure his Reader , that I affirm and maintain the sufferings of the Godly to be not only Chastisements , but proper Punishments , yea Revenging Punishments for the satisfaction of God as a Judge ? And what should one say to such a man as this ? and how is he to be dealt with ? Proper Punishments ( I say ) they are ; because I maintain that Castigations are proper paternal punishments . And are not all the Philosophers that ever defined punishment , ( so far as I know ) agreed in it ? But is this to say , They are vindictive , satisfactory to Justice , or more than chastisements ? 

If this good man would have made ostentation of his Hebrew , or called for Scholars to his School , let any indifferent man be Judge , whether it had not been a more innocent and honest course to have done as the Montebanks and Lozenge-makers do , to have put it into some weekly News-book , that in such a street , at such a sign , there is a famous Hebrew Schoolmaster , etc. than to do he knows not what ? For Mr. Hotchkis and me the matter 's not great : but he trod under foot Modesty , Conscience , Truth , the Credit of his Profession , the famous Translators of the Bible ( egregiously befriending Gregory Martin and his Rhemists ) : and I wish he have not degraded the far greater part of the godly Ministers of England , for want of Hebrew as well as us : Nay how many can he name from the Apostles days , till a few hundred years ago , that are not degraded by him , in almost all the Church . The Origens and Hieroms' were so few , that woe to the Church if it had no more : And something may be in it to cut the comb of a Paedagogues insolency , that those that were best at Translations , were so bad Divines for all that , as to the sense . We had been sure all marred if the degraded Augustine's that were ignorant of the Hebrew , had not been better Divines than Origen and Hierom were . But what ! hath God bid or permitted this man to speak all this for naught ? no : I hope that some will be stirred up by his language to a more diligent study of the Hebrew Text ; and that this good end may by the overruling providence be attained by it . 

But me thinks he should not trust so much to his great Argument , that [ he is unworthy to be Christ's Messenger that takes the signification of the words upon trust : ] For how doth Mr. Robertson with all his Hebrew know the signification of one Hebrew word , but upon trust ? How knows he it , but on the word of his Master that tells him so ? and what other way is there of knowing the signification of any Language whatsoever ? 

As for that about [ Mental Remission ] which he makes such a stir with , I shall add this to what is said . There are two things among men that are called by some Mental Remission : 1.  A purpose to forgive a fault , ( even before it is committed ) when it is done . 2.  The actual turning of the mind from Anger and thoughts of Punishing , to Reconciliation and Acceptance , and the Remitting those former thoughts of Punishment . The former is not properly pardon at all , and is in God from Eternity . The latter is not properly in God at all : For he changes not his mind , nor Remitteth any Punishing , Purpose , or secret Resolution , or thoughts which he had before : and if he did , that would not dissolve the Gild , that is , the obligation to Punishment , without an outgoing word from God. But yet after the manner of weak man this last sort of Mental Pardon , may from the Effect to the Affect be ascribed Denominatively , to God : But then as it is but Denominatively , so that Denomination must then begin , when the Law of Grace or Promise doth Pardon and Absolve , for then only doth the ground of that Denomination begin , though nothing Real do begin in God.  

And it is worth the noting also , how angrily this man doth tell us , that neither Dr. Twiss nor any that ever was taught or Catechised understandingly in the Church , will deny , or is ignorant of this kind of Pardon or Justification in Law-sense which we maintain ? And yet that Mr. Blake will not be persuaded of any such thing to this day , but disputeth confidently against that , which we are so chidden by Mr. Robertson for imagining that any well Catechised will deny . Again tell me , what a man should do to be of every learned good man's mind , or to escape their censures ? 

And as these brethren deal in the Press , so do some others privately by words and Manuscripts . The last week I received a creeping Paper , against my directions for Peace of Conscience , written by a Minister about the midway between Mr. Blake and me ( Though a Neighbour ; I know not that I ever heard his name before , but once about 16 years ago ; ) who with the spirit and pen of Mr. Robertson and his like , doth furiously fall on me , to conjure out of me the Devil of Pelagianism ; because I say to doubting souls , that , [ If Christ be not yet theirs , he maybe when they will ] or [ they may have him when they will : ] whereupon to his Councils and Fathers he goes against Freewill . This is a Minister of the Gospel : and yet knows not that this is a Truth that almost all the world of Christians are agreed on ; and that Austin purposely defendeth ; and if it be not true , what a case is the world in ? And his Reproaches are cast in the face of the Scripture that saith the same , [ Whoever will , let him take the water of Life freely , rev. 22.17 . ] And Dr. Twiss maintains it at large , that velle Credere is Credere : but doubtless velle Christum oblatum is a great act of saving Faith. And this man might read that I add withal , as Austin doth , that , Though whoever will have Christ as offered may have him , yet no man will so have him , but by the work of special Grace . But is it not a sad case , when the Preachers of the Gospel shall defame and reproach the very substance of the Gospel , as zealously as if men's salvation lay upon it ? 

I have given you now ( I think ) reasons enough to excuse me from wording it with such inconsiderate men . To which I will add one other : I am conscious of so much frailty in myself , that I am likely to be drawn also to injure some of them : And also , I am not able to speak so cautelously , but some words will be very liable to misunderstanding , on which they may plausibly fasten their accusations . To give you one instance : In the Preface to my Confession , I noted a sort of empty men that will not speak to men , nor give them any reasons to convince them , but only secretly behind their backs , will carry it abroad that such or such a man is erroneous , half an Arminian , a dangerous man : and if they speak to us , we shall hear but these general charges of Error : To these I said , I might expect they should be more Judicious , studied , impartial , illuminate , sincere , or at lest the chief of these , before I should value their bare Judgements and Censures , without their Reasons : professing withal that as I doubted not but there are multitudes of Labourers in God's harvest , with whom in these respects I am unworthy to be named , so the Judgement of these I would value ; that is , so far as to suspect anything which they are against , and silence it at least , till Evidence be very cogent . So that I never mentioned the Qualifications of men that write or dispute against me , but only of those that look I should be swayed by their Censures without Arguments . This was my very mind , of which I desire you to observe the words themselves . But no where doth Dr. Owen and Mr. Blake so take me up as here ; mistakingly supposing that I spoke of those that should write or Argue against me ; and that I require all these Qualifications in them . no , I will hear Scripture and Reason from a Child , but I will not be swayed by the Judgement and Censures of a Child . Yet here the one of them talks of the terrible conditions that I impose upon my Answerer ; and the other ( Mr. Blake ) comes on with intimations , as if my words employed that I take myself for more judicious , experienced , holy , etc. than all those from whom I manifest my dissent , the Assembly , and I know not how many , ( feigning me do dissent from men even contrary to my profession . ) These answers will seem as good to Readers that will not by collation make trial , as if they were as good as any . 

So will his citations out of the Fathers ; when among the several points in difference I desired one line from one Ancient to prove that his opinion was ever known to the ancient Church : and for one of them ( the instrumental efficacy of Faith to Justification ) he doth perform it at large : but how ? By a bare citation of Passages from others gathered up , and that without the words , and that only affirming that we are justified by Faith and not by Works : So that if Mr. Blake bring testmonies of the Ancients sense , that [ we are Justified by Faith and not by Works , ] he will take these as testimonies that the Ancients speak for the Instrumental Efficiency of Faith in Justification . And by such consequences he may make them say many things more , that they never said indeed . But we have showed him a tertium , another sense in which a man may be said to be justified by Faith without Works . Sure I am that if I should maintain [ such a Justification by Faith without Works ] as many of those Fathers whom he quotes do assert , ( in terms and sense , ) even in the words before and after and in the places cited , I should be more clamorously called a Papist than yet I have been , at least there were more show of reason for it . 

Moreover , the very naming of untrue Reports and Affirmations , would be offensive to the guilty . As pag. 664. he saith that I say [ Obedience is ( only ) the modification of Faith in the first act of Justification , ] when I never spoke or thought such a thing , but deny it to be existent ( as its distinct from Faith ) in that first act of Justification . 

So pag. 453. he affirmeth , that [ in my opinion ( an infant ) is uncapable of any real change by the spirit ] With many such Assertions , which I never uttered , nor believed . 

And when I told him of such a passage in his former Book , ( about making Sincerity the Rule ) rather than he will acknowledge the visible mistake , he again replieth , as if I wronged him to charge it on him . And why so ? Because he named me not ? when yet it is as plainly manifest that its me that he charges it on , as the rest before and after , which he denyeth not . But again I must recall myself , and draw to an end . 

Upon all these considerations I must be excused from the foresaid unprofitable Works : But if it appear necessary to vindicate any particular Truth in another way , I shall not withdraw , while I am able to do it . As I find that the very Answering of men doth provoke , so when the Cause of God doth not require it , I can believe that I am among those that are to be 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Tit. 2.9 . not contradicting or answering again , as servants must be to their Masters ; much lesle should I 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , but imitate that blessed pattern , 1 Pet. 2.23 . which OH that I could more do ! 

Yet would I not dissuade any from a necessary Defence of Truth : for I know that 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and that we must 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Tit. 1.9 , 10 , 11.  

But for my part , I see not yet any Call to such a Work : and if I err , I desire that no man by me may be drawn into Error ; and if I be in the right , I know not how to importune men to my opinions , if they do not very nearly concern their salvations : If their stomaches be against them , I am not good at drenching or cramming . The Lord pardon all our miscarriages , and direct you and succeed you in your labours for his Church . I remain , 

Your Brother in the Work of the Gospel , RICH BAXTER 

Octob. 1. 1655.  Tales meorum Scriptorum Judices velim , qui Responsionem non semper desiderent ; quum his quae leguntur audierint aliquid contradici . Augustin . The first Postscript . ON the review I observe that the mixture of some passages of some late Papists , with the judgement of Bellarmine and the most , doth make pag. 50 , 51 of the second Disput. lesle clear . To remove the obscurity observe , that there are diverse Questions conjoined : 1.  What is necessary to make a man a true Member of the Catholic Church ? And in that they mostly agree with Bellarmine as cited , that no inward grace is necessary . 2d Question is , what is the Common effect of Baptism on all that Receive it ? And that they say , is the imprinting of a certain Character on the mind . What this Character is , they are not agreed : commonly they think either as Aquinas , that it is a certain qualitative power reducible to the second species of quality , that is , a spiritual power ordinata ad ea quae sunt Divini cultus , ut 3.  Qu. 93. are . 2. c. Or as Durandus and many others of them , that it is but a Relation ; or as Estius and others , that it is such a moral power as is Jus Civitatis , and so is a power of receiving the common privileges of the Church . All the Baptised : But if they should fictè recipere as to the Sacrament itself , they receive not so much as the Character ; nay , saith Aquinas , are to be Baptised again when they Repent . But the grace of justification , and Remission of sin , they say is not common to all that are Baptised ; but only to those that are duly disposed for Baptism . saith Aquinas . 3.  Qu. 63. are . 3. c. Character propriè est signaculum quoddam quo aliquid insignitur , etc. Homo autem fidelis ad deo deputatur : Primò quidem & principaliter ad fruitionem gloriae & ad hoc insignitur signaculo gratiae . 2.  Autem deputatur quisque fidelis ad recipiendum vel tradendum aliis , ea quae pertinent ad cultum Dei , & ad hoc proprié deputatur Character sacramentalis . So that a man in mortal sin may receive the Character , & the Character doth dispose a man to sacramental Grace . So that let them come never so sinfully to it , yet it puts them in a fair way to justification . ( vid Viguerium cap. 16. ver . 15. folio 154. ) And it hath this advantage that the grace is delible , but the Character indelible . Now those Papists that I spoke of in the place I refer to ( pag. 50.51 . ) do think that all should come to Baptism , that have but an historical Belief of the points , absolutely necessary , that so they may receive this Character , and then they have the Church-priviledges , which being unbaptised they have not : and though yet they have not Charity or Justification , yet when by Penance they are brought to the disposition which they wanted the foregoing Baptism will be effectual to do away all the sins that were at the time of Baptism : & Penance will put away the rest that were since committed . Though yet quoad officium they say that men ought to come to Baptism with the due preparations . These requisites they say are , I A Right belief , say some , explicit of the Essentials , and implicit of the rest : say others , it must be rectae fides saltem in communi , ut scilicet Credant quod Ecclesia Credit ( Viguer . Just. c. 16. ver . 4.  § . 1. ) 2.  That he repent of his forepast life , and die to sin . 3.  That he have an intention of Receiving the Sacrament as the Church delivereth it , and Christ hath appointed . And if this intention , and a Right belief be wanting , the party is to be rebaptised ( Viguerius ubi sup . ) But what this Belief is , and what this Repentance is , they are not all agreed . But though some few may require Contrition , yet their commonest opinion is , that Attrition is a sufficient disposition , together with a fides informis , a right Belief without Charity . But yet they require that the will must be towards that Contrition and Charity , or fides formata , which yet it hath not , for it must amplecti Baptismum & Baptismi effectum , saith Thom. 3.  Qu. 69. a. 9 c. that 's the common measure : And Charity and justification are these effects . So that whoever comes with Attrition and a right Belief without Charity , shall certainly there receive Charity , Justification , Remission of guilt and punishment ( poenarum sed non poenalitatum ) both in foro Dei & Ecclesiae , sed non in foro mundano : And this because that this disposition doth . ex congruo merit Justification in the use of Baptism . And for all the rest that come without Attrition or a purpose to leave sin , ( and saith Aquin. without Belief too . 3.  Qu. 68 a. 8. c. ) they receive the Character which putteth them in so fair a way to justification by Penance as aforesaid , recedente fictione de debitâ dispositione . But yet I must say , that it is but few that I hear of , or read of , that will say that wicked men may come to Baptism for these advantages : But the most Learned of them conclude that no man ought to come that hath not a purpose to forsake all his mortal sins , at least , and that they are not to be Baptised that profess not this ; and that others get into the Church praeter intentionem Ecclesiae as Bellarmine saith : so that in this , the chief of their Doctors own the cause that I maintain . Aquin. 3  Qu. 68 are . 4. doth purposely dispute it , Vtrùm peccatores sint Baptizandi ? And resolves it negatively , that though Peccator , quoad reatum , may be Baptised ; yet not Peccator ex voluntate peccandi & proposito persistendi in peccato : & he gives three good Reasons . 1.  Because such are unmeet to be incorporated into Christ , which Baptism doth . 2.  Because Baptism with them cannot attain its end , to take away their sin : and in the works of God and the Church nothing must be done in vain , or that cannot reach the appointed end . 3.  Because else there would be falsehood in the sacramental signs , which must not be . And one would think by his Answers add 2 m & 3 m that he saith as much as I , & is for the necessity of a fides formata and Conversion itself before Baptism . saith he add . 2.  [ Ideo sacramentum baptismi , non est exhibiendum , nisi ei in quo interioris conversionis aliquod signum apparet , sicut nec medicina corporalis adhibetur infirmo , nisi in eo aliquis motua vitalis nature appareat . And ad 3 m answering those objectors that I intended p. 51. he saith [ Dicendum quod Baptismus est fidei sacramentum : Fides autem informis non sufficit ad salutem , nec ipsa est fundamentum , sed sola fides formata , quae per dilectionem operatur ut Aug. l. the side . & oper . Vnde nec sacramentum baptismi salutem confer potest cum voluntate peccandi , quae fidei formam excludit . Non est autem per impressionem Characteris baptismalis aliquis disponendus ad gratiam quamdiu in eo apparet voluntas peccandi , — ] he hear plainly speaks de fide formata ut afferendâ , and not ut recipiendâ per baptismum . So that he is here fully for me in the main cause of these Disputations : and so must they all that do affirm a true death to sin to be one of the prerequisites ; if they will not contradict themselves ( and that 's common ) For it 's a vain conceit that preparatory grace kills sin , and special grace afterwards giveth a new life : that which expelleth death , is life ; and that which expelleth darkness is nothing else but the light itself . Add also what Aquinas saith sup . Qu. 2. a. 3. c. Nullum peccatum dimittitur , nisi quis justificetur , sed ad justificationem requiritur contritio . ] And what he saith 3.  Qu. 49. a. 1. ad 2 m Per fidem applicatur nobis passio Christi ad percipiendum fructum ipsius — Fides autem per quam à peccato mundamur non est fides informis , quae potest esse etiam cum peccato ; sed est fides formata per Charitatem , ut sic passio Christi nobis applicetur , non solùm quantum ad intellectum sed etiam quantum ad effectum . ] 

Yet I know they here confound themselves by their sophistry , telling us that Contrition is before Charity materially , and after it effectively , and that Contritio se habet ut ultima dispositio ad gratiam consequendam ; and that Poenitentia quae est sacramentum , is before Poenitentia q●● est virtus , and is the instrument of effecting it ; as though a dissembling Ceremony , or false profession would work grace ; so that there is no hold of them , at the best ; for they have lost themselves in contradictions . I know also that they make the Sacrament of Baptism to justify and sanctify infallibly all Infants that are offered by the Church , on their allowed Titles , let the Parent be never so bad ; because they think the Church's Faith may serve instead of the Parents , as the Church's Intention may serve instead both of the Ministers ( saith Aquinas ) and the Infants ; yea and the Church itself need not lend an Infant any Contrition : for they are agreed , that neither other men's sins , nor our own Original sin ( which is all that the Infant hath ) are the Object of Contrition ; but only our own actual sin . 

Yet one would think that the ordinary doctrine , that the votum vel propositum may save without Baptism , should imply that before Baptism the desires of it are supposed to have Charity or special Grace : The Roman Catechism saith , Par. 2. pag. 142.  Baptismi suscipiendi propositum atque consilium , & malae acta vitae p●enitentia , satis futura sit ad gratiam & justitiam , si repentinus aliquis Casus impediat , quò minùs solutari aquâ ablui possint . ] And they confess that none can be saved without Charity ; therefore those that die before Baptism must be supposed to have Charity . 

But ordinarily they make Attrition sufficient , and by the Sacrament give to the attrite , justification ; and so Charity is conferred : And thus by an outward act a man that hath but common grace may get special grace . Yea if they Sergeant Attrition itself , yet they receive the foresaid indelible Character which gives them the jura Ecclesiae , and as the Roman Catechism saith , Par. 2. qu. 19 pag. 125. by this Character , ad alia sacramenta percipienda redduntur idonei : And then the other Sacraments , at least by the help of Attrition , will sure justify and save them . And thus they make a common grace sufficient to let them into the Church by Baptism , yea the mere Baptism itself without any grace at all ; and so make their Character and Church-state the way to justification ; which is the thing I charge them with , Pag. 50 , 51.  

And those that do seem exceedingly to comfort and encourage their proselytes , by telling them of the certain efficacy of the Sacraments , and that they surely put away all sin and guilt & open heaven to them , so that one would think there were assurance of Salvation or exceeding comfort reached forth ; yet they take it all away again , and do but Tantalise and delude the people . For they that ( with us ) require Contrition before the Sacrament , do withal tell us , that no man can know by any ordinary means ( but only by Revelation ) whether he be Contrite or not , and consequently , whether he shall be justified , pardoned , or saved ever the more for all the Sacraments : And those that take up with Attrition , do both confound themselves and their followers with their many degrees of Attrition , and quarrels about it , and also assure them that they cannot know whether they have the necessary degree ; and so after all Sacraments , they cannot tell whether they be justified . 

This much I thought meet to add , for further explication of the Papists doctrine , and the state of our Controversies with them herein . Which I shall conclude in the words of Bellarmine with Amesius' Answer to them , Bellarm. Enervat . To. 3. l. 1. c. 3.  [ Bellarm. Fides duplex requiritur in Baptismo : Actualis una , quae praecedit baptismum , ut dispositio quaedam : quae quidem ut plurìmum , non est ex habitu fidei . Altera est quae sequitur Baptismum , quaeque est pars essentialis Justificationis , & non est actus , sed habitus . ] This is the very Doctrine which I oppose in this Disputation . To which Amesius answereth . [ Protest . Repugnat haec distinctio , 1.  Scripturae , quae fidem justificantem antecedere docet Baptismum , Act 15.9.2 . Rationi & experientiae , dictanti , eâdem planè fide recipi Baptismum , quâ recipitur fructus Baptismi . 3.  Confessioni ipsius Bellarm , quae exstat . lib 2. the effect . Sacram. cap. 13.  [ Adulti per fidem & Contritionem veram justificantur , antequam reipsâ ad Sacramentum accedant . ] 

Observe here what the Protestant doctrine is . 

The second Postscript . Since the foregoing Disputations were Printed off , I had occasion to observe , how much some lay the stress of their cause on the supposition of Judas his receiving the Lords Supper ; And thereupon apprehended , that such would think my foregoing answer to the Objection to be too short . I have thought meet therefore to add these few words for the enlargement of it . 

The example of Judas is urged to several ends : 1.  Some urge it to prove that such as Judas , yea known wicked men may not be kept away from the Sacrament . 2.  Some urge it to prove that such may not be excommunicate . 3.  Also it may be urged , to prove that it is not as a sign of the thing professed , that we are to require profession , but simply for itself : because Christ know that Judas was an hypocrite . 4 And it will be urged by others to prove that such as Judas have a Right coram Deo to the Sacrament which may warrant their demanding and receiving it . 

I shall first prove that if Judas had received the Sacrament , it would not warrant any one of these conclusions , and then I shall prove that Judas did not receive the Sacrament : or at least , that it is a thing that no man can prove , and that the contrary is much more probable . 

1.  And ( to begin with the last ) that it proveth not judas right I prove thus . 1.  If judas had such a right to the Sacrament , than Christ could not have denied it him , or excluded him : For he may not deny him his right : But that Christ might nor haved denied it him or excluded him , I have met with none that do affirm . 

2.  If judas his right be hence proved , either it is from Christ's delivering the Sacrament to him , or from his permitting him to take it ; but from neither of these : therefore . 

Not from Christ's delivery : 1.  Because he only offered it , and that in its true Sacramental Nature , and to its proper ends , and propoundeth both internal and external duties to be performed in their order : He offereth himself to the soul , by the representation and under the signs of bread and wine . He offereth not bread and wine alone to any without himself as signified and represented by him . If he say to Judas [ take me as thy Saviour and a sacrifice for sin , and in token thereof , take , eat and drink this . ] He doth not hereby give him any true right before God , to take the bread and wine without taking Christ. For Christ is first to be taken by believing , and this duty is first in the command , and the bread and wine is not to be taken but in signification , that thus we take Christ , and if we do not so , our taking the bread and wine is a lie . Now if Christ offer himself first , and the elements as signs , and require judas to take himself first and the elements but as signs ; then if judas will separate what God hath conjoined , and will take the sign and not the thing signified , and will by this taking the sign profess that he taketh the thing signified when he doth not ; this giveth him no right before God to the sign alone , no more than it warranteth him to make a lying profession : nor is there any show of such a thing . An offer is but a Conditional Gift , and not an Actual ; and therefore giveth no actual right till the Condition be performed : The Condition is Acceptance . The Acceptance must be according to the offer . 1.  Of the whole gift , ( Christ and the signs ) and not of the shell only 2.  Of the thing signified first , and of the sign but consequentially . He therefore that takes the sign alone , takes that which this offer giveth him no right to . 

2.  Moreover , Christ did not offer it to judas particularly ; but to the Disciples in general ; not applying it to each one , but leaving it to themselves to make the application , as is granted and passed doubt . 

3.  And as Christ's offer proved not judas right , so neither did his Permission of his Reception . For Permission gives no Title . All the sins of the world are permitted physically , which makes them not to be no sin . And for a Moral permission , judas had none . To permit , is non impedire , not to hinder . Hindrance is moral by Prohibition . Thus judas was hindered : For God had a standing Law against lying and dissembling . 2.  Or it is Physical , by Natural means : And thus judas was not hindered , either from Receiving what he received , or from betraying his Master : but it justified neither . 

Ob. But at least , judas had right to that standing in the Church , by which he was numbered with those to whom the Sacrament was to be offered . 

Answ. It will not prove that he had any proper right ( by promise or grant which might warrant his claim ) to Church-membership , or Apostleship itself . 

Object . Christ choose him , and called him , and sent him . 

Answ. Christ's Choosing him , was no more but his Calling him out of many that were passed by . His Calling him was not either to Preach , 1.  Only . 2.  Or in the first place . But it was first to Believe in him and so to preach that which he did believe . If he had answered Christ's call , he had done both : But if he will preach what he believeth not , he doth no more answer Christ's call , than if he should speak a lie , or dissemble . 

Object . But when Christ knew that he believed not , yet he sent him to preach . 

Answ. Never to preach before or without believing . Though Christ knew that he did not actually believe , yet he knew withal that he lay under the Command and Obligation to believe , and that in order before preaching . 

2.  And for the next Conclusion , it cannot be proved by the Example of judas that we must take a Profession simply for itself , and not respectively as a sign of the thing Professed ; and so that we must admit a man upon a Profession which is known to us to be false . For , if you argue from Christ's example and say , [ Christ did so , therefore we must do so ] I deny both the Antecedent and the Consequence . 1.  As to the Antecedent : Christ Commanded and Required judas his Profession as a sign of his mind and so of the thing professed ; that is , as True ▪ And he neither Required nor Accepted any other profession : But only he Permitted him to remain in his family , though his profession was false , and not such as he required . 2.  As to the Consequence : no man therefore can hence argue , that we may Require or Accept a profession which is not a sign ( apparent ) of the thing professed ; for that Christ did not ; nor yet that we must permit a known false professor because Christ did . But this will be proved under the next points to which it leads us . The other two depending on the same grounds may be dispatched together . And so I conclude , that it cannot be gathered from the example of Judas , that we must not excommunicate , or keep from the Lords Table , such as we can prove to the Church to be unregenerate , or to be such as Judas was . For 1.  There may be Reasons to suspend the performance of that which ordinarily is to be done . And so Christ had special Reasons to forbear the excommunicating of Judas , till the last , because he was to be the Instrument of his suffering , that the Scripture might be fulfilled . When we are sure that we have as good a Reason to suspend an act of discipline , yet that will not be an excuse for our ordinary suspense , or a Rule for our ordinary practice . 2.  The Lord Jesus would have Ministers lie under a double obligation , for their safe proceeding : The one is , to take seeming Believers and Penitent persons into the Church and to the Sacraments : The other is to take a Credible Profession for the Evidence of that Faith and Repentance . And accordingly he would teach us no more by his example . And therefore no wonder if he did not excommunicate Judas or keep him from the Sacrament : for it was by his Divine heart-searching power , and omniscience that Christ knew Judas to be an hypocrite : while he made a Profession that was Probable or Credible to a mere man All therefore that can hence be gathered is , that if by heart-searching omniscience we knew a man to be an Hypocrite , we might not keep him back or excommunicate him : and yet that will not be proved from the Text neither ; till you can prove that Christ might not have cast out Judas , as well as that he did not ; for , as is said , he might forbear him for some special Cause ; Though I grant that on other grounds it may possibly be proved , that we might not do it , because we cannot communicate our evidence to the Church . But there is no place for this arguing , till men are omniscient . Christ is our pattern as he acteth as a man , and not when he exerciseth Divine omniscience . 

3.  Christ knew what was in man , and need not that any man should tell him , John 2.25 . And yet he questioned with men in human Language ; he asketh some whether they believed , and Peter , whether he loved him ? Did he expect an answer from men , for the bare words sake ? or as a sign of their mind ? Did he oblige them to a true answer , or to a false ? The case is not doubtful . And if by his omniscience he knew that many of these answers were lies , ( and yet he silently permitted the answerer to seem a Disciple ) it will not hence follow , that we must accept a profession simply for itself , and when it is not credible , that is , that we must believe a known lie , or that we must use those that we have no cause to believe as if we did believe them . 

4.  And if their Argument were of any strength , it would not only prove that we must keep in the Church , and admit to the Sacrament those that we know to have the Devil in them , and to be Traitors to Christ , contriving the destruction of his Church ( as Judas did of his person ) and to be Thiefs and Deceivers ( as Christ knew Judas to be , ) and so overthrew all Church Discipline , contrary to the Scripture Laws ; but also that it is not Lawful for a Master to put a known Thief and Traitor out of his Family , or to prohibit him familiarity with him at his Table , and dipping his morsels with him in the same dish . For Christ did this by Judas as well as the other . But it is contrary to Psalm 15. and 101. and Mat. 18.17 . and 1 Cor. 5.11 . and many other Texts that we should hold such familiarity with such men . But that we may not lawfully do otherwise , is a Doctrine that I hope no wise Christian Ruler of a Family will believe . 

5.  The state of Christ's Church being then but in gathering and ordering , was not so ripe for the execution of excommunication as after his Resurrection , and the ordering of the Churches . 

But though I have said all this on the supposition that Christ did give the Sacrament to Judas ; yet I shall now proceed to show , that [ it is either certain that Judas did not receive it , or not probable that he did . ] 

My evidence is this , 1.  There is the Concurrent Testimony of three Evangelists , that may assure us that Judas went out before the Sacrament . Matthew dispatcheth Christ's speeches to Judas before the Sacrament , and to those that remained and did partake of it , he saith , 1.  That he will drink of the fruit of the Vine with them new in the Kingdom of his Father ; which he neither did after his Resurrection , nor will do with Judas . 2.  it 's said , they went into the Mount of Olives : but so did not Judas . 3.  He saith , all ye shall be offended because of me this night : But Judas was none of those All.  

And Mark doth punctually agree with Matthew . 

And Joh. 13. doth clear both the other . For ver . 30. he saith that Judas having received the Sop , went immediately out . Now it is utterly improbable that this Sop was after the Sacrament . Though it be controverted whether the meat which they then eat besides the Paschal Lamb , were before it , or after it , yet there 's evidence enough that it was before the Sacrament . 

I know a Reverend Divine of ours in his Harmony of the Evangelists , thinks that the Supper joh. 13. was not the same with that Mat. 26. and Mar. 14.  When the Sacrament was instituted . But his Reasons seem not cogent to me , but may well be answered ; and there seems to be much evidence of the contrary in the Text , ( to say nothing of the singularity of this exposition . ) And as for the coincident controversies , whether Christ did eat a Supper without the Paschal Lamb , at the Institution of his Sacrament , as Grotius thought , or whether he did eat the Paschal Lamb a day before the Jews , as Causabone , Scaliger , Capellus , etc. think , Or on the same day with the Jews , as Baronius , Tolet , Clopenburgius , and the said Reverend Doctor think , I shall not need on this occasion to inquire ; especially so much being written on it already . See Paul Burgens . in Lyr. and what jansenius comment . hath ex Euthymio and other Greeks on that side : and the Testimony of Philo in Cappellus , and his Reasons are considerable . 

The ancient Doctors were disagreed among themselves upon the Question whether judas did partake of the Sacrament . it 's commonly known that Hilary was for the Negative . And ( saith Estius in differ . loc . in joh. 13. ) Clemens in constit . Apostol . and Dionysius Arcopag . are of the same mind with others : And whoever were the Authors of those writings , the antiquity in this case is considerable . And of the many Doctors that are thought to be on the other side , some speak only de participatione Coenae ; and show not that they mean the Sacrament , and some ground their opinion on a palpable error , viz. that the Sop given to judas was the Sacramental Bread : And Pellargus ( in Mat. 26. ) saith that Theophylact mentioneth a Tradition , that judas took the Bread with him to the Priests , and said [ see hear , my Master saith , this is his body ] and Innocent the Third is express against judas Receiving , and Ammonius , Alexander , and Tacianus in their Harmonies seem to be against it ; and Theophylact saith , diverse were of that mind . Rupertus Tuitiensis is plain and large on it , as you may see in the Author in joh. 13. or in Musculus Loc. commun . pag. ( mihi ) 829. de Coen . where his words are cited at large . 

The Papists and Lutherans indeed are most on the other side : but yet they are divided , especially the Papist : Many Learned protestants of the Reform party have written large discourses to prove that judas received not the Sacrament : we have diverse common in English : and the beyond sea Divines are many of this mind . Beza , Grotius , Piscator , Musculus , Deodat , ( five of the most judicious commentators , I think , that ever wrote on the sacred Scriptures , ) are against judas participation , ( and Calvin thinks it uncertain : ) besides Zanchius , Danaeus , Gomarus , Tossanus , and many more that are against it : Though I know that on the other side diverse are for it . 

And what is there now on the other side to move us to think it probable that judas did Receive the Sacrament ? The slight conjecture of a late learned Annotator I think not fit to trouble you with . I know but one Argument worth the mentioning or much regarding that is brought : and that is from the order of Luke's words , who after the mention of the Sacrament saith , [ But behold the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the Table . ] But to this I must say that I confess it moveth me not to doubt of the matter , considering , 1. that as Grotius & other expositors truly note , it is so usual with Luke to disregard the Order of things spoken , and to repeat sayings together as one continued speech which were spoken at great distance ; and to put that before which was spoken after , and that after which was spoken before : Not by mistake , but because it was the Matter and not the Order that he there purposed to deliver . 2.  And because it is certain that he doth thus even in the matter in hand , for saith Grotius in ver . 21.  Diversos Christi sermons nullâ ordinis habita ratione connectit Lucas . Nam illud de proditore , in Coenâ justâ contigit : admonitio de vitanda ambitione planè ut credibile est , in lotione inter coenam paschalem & coenam justam . Ita 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 saepe Luce est 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . And as Calvin concludes , we cannot from this order in Luke gather that judas Received . And saith Beza , Apparet omnino ex aliis evangelistis ac praesertim , joh. 13.26 . hunc sermonem habitum fuisse in secundis mensis Caenae legalis , quibus demum sublatis suam sacram Coenam instituit Dominus , ut ipse Lucas ver . praeced . expressit . ] 3  And the reason of Luke's mentioning this after all , seems to be , because having begun to speak of Christ's communicatory Action in the feast , he thought it meet to connex his communication of his Sacrament and so dispatch the history of those communicatory acts together ; and then to mention the matter of judas altogether , though the words were not then spoken . 4.  And the reason that Rupertus Tuitiensis gives , is considerable , which you may read at large in Musculus ubi sup . it 's too long to transcribe . See also what Sharpius Symphon . pag. 335. saith ex Augustino & aliis . See also what that Learned judicious man Frid. Wendeline saith against judas Receiving , exercit . 114 § . 1.8 . & . Christ. Theolog. li. 1. c. 23. p. 544.  And it seems there are many of the same mind in the Low Countries now , or else Maresius would not have so complained of their indignation against him for the contrary . See Piscator at large in Mat. 26. schol . And Beza in joh. 13 30.  Quum igitur non nisi mensis secundis sublatis Dominus sacrosanctâ suâ mysteriâ instituerit , ut disertè ait , Luk. 22.20 . & johannes non contentus dixisse Judam accepta offula exiisse , disertè etiam addat adverbium 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; certa videtur esse eorum sententia , qui existimant Judam institutioni sacrae coenae non inter fuisse ; & quod sic narrat Luk. 22.21 . quasi demum peracta coenae , etc. esse ex aliis evangelistis explicandum ; ex quibus liquet habitum fuisse hunc sermonem ante coenae sacrae institutionem . etc. ] 

When I had gone thus far , I remembered that Mr. Gilespio hath said somewhat of this subject , and perusing him I find much of that which I have here spoken , and much more , so that I shall stop here , and desire the Reader to read his Chap. 8 , 9 , 10. of lib. 3.  Aaron's Rod.  

And as to the main controversy about unsanctified men's Right to Sacraments . See Vrsin . Catech. pag. 2. qu. 8. and 82. with the explic . throughout : and Beza epist. 20. ad Qu. propositas à studioso Silesio . Tract . Theol. vol. 3. pag. 227 , 228 , etc. to whom we might add a multitude of Consenters . 

FINIS . 

[ Non ] is put for [ Nam ] in that exceeding false printed Cople .  Mr. Rutheford saith if Scripture ●n where callet Christ the ●ead of the visible Chur●● as su●h , as after cited . Of the Covenant , pag. 205.206 . Mr. Galaspi●'s' Arguments defended against Mr. Blakes answ . Argum. 1.  Galaspie's Argum. 2. defended . Galaspie's Argum. 3. defended . Galaspie's Argum. 4. denfeded . Galaspie's Argum. 5.  & 6. defended . Argum. 7. defended . Argum. 8. defended . Argum. 9 defended . Argum. 10. defended . Argum 11. defended . Argum. 12. defended . Argum 13. defended . Argum. 14. defended . Argum 15. defended . Argum. 16. defended . Argum. 17. defended . Argum. 19 defended .  Mr. Gilespies 20th . Argument , which Mr. Blake passeth by , is that the contrary Doctrine as it joineth with the Papists , so it contradicteth the protestants and the Ancient Churches and Writers . Mr. Blake's Arguments answered . Read Galespie's Chap. 14. l. 3. and there you will see more Arguments answered , and Mr. Blake's cause overthrown . Bed● In 1 Cor. 13. inquit Charitatem esse vestem nuptiaem . Mat. 28.29 . vindicated . Mar. 16.16 . vindicated . Act. 8.37 . vindicated . And it is the Title over the top of his leaves that a Faith short of justifying entitles to Baptism . 1.  Calvin . 2.  Beza . 3.  P. Martyr  4.  Piscator . 5.  Altingius . 6.  junius . 7.  Polanus . 8.  Zanchtus . 9  Ursinus & Paraeus . 10.  Paraeus . 1.  Bucanus . 12.  Nalaeus , Pollander . Riverus , Thysius . 12.  Wendeline . 13.  Keckermin . 15.  Hommius . 16.  Maresius . 17.  Crocius . 18.  Beumlerus . 19 Solinius  20.  Melancthon . 21.  Trelcatius . 22.  Vossiu● . 23.  Wollebius . 24.  Luther . 25.  Alstedius . 26.  Bishop Vsher.  27.  Amesius . 28.  Dr. Willet . 29.  Musculus . 30.  Soharplus . 31. Cartwright  33.  Fulk . 33.  The Annotations of some Divines of the Assembly at Westminster . 34 Deodate . 35.  Bodlus . 36.  Perkins . 37.  Fayus . 38.  Ludovicus de Dieu . 39  Ragerus . 40 Hemmingius . 41.  Yates . 42.  Coccelus . 43.  Prideaux . 44.  Dr. Hammond . 45.  English Catechism . 46.  Bullinger . 47.  Whittaker . 48.  Gataker . 50.  Tzegedinus . 51.  Ravanellus . 52.  The Scottish Church . 53.  Helvetian . Confession . 54 Professores Salmurlenses . 55.  Mollnaeus . 56.  Mr. Crook . 57  Mr. Liford ▪  58.  Three Divines of Scotland .  This is the passage Mr. Humphrey citeth , which I desire may be rightly understood . I have in my Apology desired Mr. Tombs thus to understand me . Quid est Pic. 'thas , nisi Dei cultus ? & unde il●e colitur , nisi Charitate ? Aug. Epist. 29  Second Vindication , pag. 6 , 7 , 8.  Suarez . Merchant Disp. 32. sect . 2. pag. 162.  Calvin . 1.  2.  Beza . & in Eccles. ●st Hom. 24 pag. 470 , 471.  & Annotat. in 1 Tim. 4.1 . ●●●untur crede●e , ●●òd c●edere ul●●antur . 3.  Junius . 4.  Zanchius . 5.  Polanus . 6.  Ravannellus . 7.  Pet. Martyr . 8.  Musculus . 9  Rutherford . 10.  Maccovius . 11.  Cocceius . 12.  Luther . 13.  D● . Sutlive . 14.  Amesius . 15 Wendeline . 16.  Keckerman . 17.  Gomar●us . 18.  D. Humphrey . 19  Sharpius . 20.  Rob. Bodius Troch . 21.  Alstedius . 22.  Geo●g . Sohnius . 23.  Melancthon . Certa & immota veritas decet , non esse membra Ecclesiae eos qui scienter oppugnant verhatem , & stabiliunt idola & vitiosos cultu● . Joan. Manlius Loc. Commun . de Eccles. pag. 468. ex Melancth . 24.  Sideel . 25.  Maresius . 26.  Altingius . 27.  Thes. Saimuriens . 28.  Luc. Trelcatius signior . 29.  Th. Cartwright . 30.  Bucer & Marlorate . 31. Camero  32.  M. jeanes  33.  Mr. Perkins  Some Papists Confessions . Fathers . 