Additions to the poetical fragments of Rich. Baxter written for himself and communicated to such as are more for serious verse than smooth. / Baxter, Richard, 1615-1691. (Printed for B. Simmons,London :1683.)

ADDITIONS TO THE POETICAL FRAGMENTS , OF Rich , Baxter , Written for himself , and Communicated to such as are more for serious Verse than smooth . 

LONDON , Printed for B. Simmons at the Three Golden Cocks at the West-end of St. Paul's , 1683.  

A Supplement TO THE POETICAL FRAGMENTS . I Grace . Gods perfect Power did this great World create , 
God's perfect Wisdom all in Order Placed , 
God's perfect Goodness made all very Good , 
But Sin God's Image on Man's Soul defaced . 


Power caused Necessity , and Wisdom Order , 
And both by Goodness caused Harmony ; 
All in one perfect Frame God's Glory show , 
Praise him and please him with pure Melody . 


Sin could not change Necessity , nor that 
Disorder which God fixed above Man's reach ; 
But the Free Lord Free Agents also made , 
And there by Sin F●●●e-will did make the breach . 


This Breach to Man was Punishment itself , 
For God before had ordered Nature so , 
That Poison would cause Pain , & Wounds cause smart ; 
And Sin to Sinners Misery and Woe . 


Goodness is Love delighting to do good , 
Wisdom resolves this fowl breach to repair , 
And make advantage of Man's Sin and Woe , 
justice and Mercy largely to declare . 


Hurt is soon done : the Wound was quickly made , 
The Cure must be performed by degrees : 
A Saviour's Grace must exercised be , 
Wisdom with Love to do the Work decrees . 


Man's Soul Incorruptible Substance is 
Essential Life ; not made itself to die . 
it 's final State then like itself will be , 
Durable Happiness or Misery . 


But it is placed in Corruptible Flesh 
And the Compounded Frame that 's called Man , 
Must be dissolved ; for Sin hath caused death ; 
And Flesh must turn to Earth , whence it began ▪ 


But He who Man's Salvation undertaken 
Is perfect Primitive Life , Light and Love ; 
And will give Compound Life again to Man , 
In joyful Glory with Himself above . 


But as in Nature God great difference made , 
Stones are not Men ; all have their proper place ; 
Men are not Stars , and Stars are not the Sun , 
So he will make great difference in Grace . 


Man is not helpless left to mear despair , 
Life is again made possible to all , 
The former terms of Innocence now cease , 
Mercies all Sinners to Repentance call . 


A Law of saving Grace is newly made , 
All that accept it and consent shall live , 
Trust but a Saviour for that blessed Life , 
And he will freely Grace and Glory give . 


But yet Man's Life on Earth a Warfar is , 
God's Grace and Satan's Malice daily Fight ; 
And all that will be Saved must overcome ; 
sin 's vanquished by Grace , Darkness by Light.  


Each part their Captain have , & they their bands , 
Not made by Force , but Doctrine and Consent ; 
Each Man as Rational and Free Commands , 
One draws to Sin , the other to Repent . 


Sin hath its Punishment , the worst within , 
When for neglect of Grace , God it suspends 
But the correction of the Flesh for Sin , 
Furthers Repentance , and the Soul amends . 


Thus all on Earth have some degrees of Grace , 
Which Reason tells us , they should not abuse , 
Which bringeth some so far to Adam's case , 
They stand or fall as they these Mercies use . 


But God will not his Grace at random give , 
And leave the event to uncertainty , 
But hath his chosen , who shall surely live , 
In whom his saving Grace shall never die . 


The two first Brothers did this War begin , 
he killed and conquered who was first by birth , 
He that seemed Conquered , Triumphed by death , 
The Victor's a cursed Vagabond on Earth . 


This War continued is unto this day , 
Between the Holy and the Serpent's seed , 
These Brothers the prognostic Instance were , 
Of all that ever after should succeed . 


But the worst War is inward ; Grace and Sin , 
The controversy daily there debate 
That which the Final Victory doth win , 
Determineth Man's everlasting state . 


A Law of Grace thus made to all Mankind , 
In Adam and No common roots of all , 
Ill entertainment with fallen Man did find , 
Who mostly to Idolaty did fall . 


The strength of Sin is Love to Flesh and World , 
And averse strangeness to a better life . 
It stronger grew by custom , and abhorred 
All motions tending to the Souls relief . 


But Gods Electing Grace shall not be void , 
In Abel , Henoch , No he this declared , 
But specially in Abraham whose great Faith , 
He with a special Promise did reward . 


Not calling back the common Law of Grace , 
He choose his Seed as a peculiar Nation , 
Gave them a proper Law , and of them raised 
The Lord Incarnate , Author of Salvation . 


Yet was their Dignity most Typical , 
As was their Law , to show what God would do ▪ 
When he the Nations unto Christ would call , 
And build his Church as Catholic anew . 


Sin soon prevailed ; their Land was dry and small ; 
Seldom from under Enemies and Waste ; 
But they Gods Oracles preserved for us , 
And from their Vine we all Salvation taste . 


But as in Nature God works by degrees , 
From Seed to Infancy , from thence to Youth ; 
From thence to Manhood and Maturity ; 
So did he in revealing Grace and Truth . 


Fallen Man his Infancy and Childhood had , 
In the old Laws , dark Types and Prophecies : 
But in times fullness , God Incarnate came , 
The Sun of Righteousness to Man did rise . 


Three Laws he did fulfil , one as a Man , 
Once made for all ; Another as a Jew : 
The third as Saviour proper to himself ; 
then for his Church , he made another new . 


He Preached God's Will ; Proclaimed saving Grace , 
Brought to light Life and Immortality ; 
Declared Gods Love ; showed Man Gods pleased Face , 
A Sacrifice for sinful Man did die . 


He came to conquer Satan , destroy Sin , 
And heal sick Souls of Worldly Fleshly Love , 
To raise the Earthly Mind of Man to God , 
And bring him to a better Life above . 


Words were too weak for this , his works must do it . 
He was to teach Man how to bear the Cross , 
To deny Life and live above this World , 
For Heaven to count all here as Dung and Loss . 


Wonder of Wonders ? God appears in Flesh , 
Preacheth to Sinners , calls them home to God , 
dies for them as a Sinner on a Cross 
Till the Third day among the Dead Abode . 


Himself the greatest Wonder , many wrought , 
Healed all diseases , gave the blind their Sight , 
Raised the Dead ; by present bare Command ; 
Long , before many , in the open Light.  


The Third day rose from Death , stayed Forty days , 
Describes his Laws , Church-covenant and Seals : 
Commissions his Apostles ; promises 
His Spirit which all saving truth Reveals . 


Ascendeth up to Heaven before their Eyes , 
And before Multitudes at Pentecost , 
Gives them the gift of Miracles and Tongues , 
By giving them the promised Holy Ghost . 


They Preach Christ to the World , speak various Tongues . 
Work Miracles , Heal Sickness , Raise the Dead : 
Convey this Power and Spirit unto others , 
Thus through the World , the word of Life they Spread . 


These many Wonders , not in Corners wrought , 
Converted thousands , Conquered unbelief , 
But above all , his great Convincing Works , 
The Spirits Sanctifying Grace was Chief . 


The erring know the Truth ; Fools are made Wise , 
The Proud made humble , Wrathful ones made meek , 
The world's fond●loverss now do it despise , 
Kill fleshly Lusts , and Heavenly Glory seek . 


Sin is a hated thing , God now is all . 
Love makes all Common , for it makes all One , 
Zeal for good Works , Patience in bearing wrong , 
Were the true Marks by which Christ's flock was known . 


Had not Christ added this convincing Seal , 
Tongues , Miracles and Sanctifying Grace , 
The Wonder of Redemption is so great , 
That Faith to unbelief must needs give place . 


Apostles Mortal were : before they Die , 
For future Ages they Christ's sacred word , 
His Deeds , Laws , Doctrine by the promised Spirit , 
To guide the Church , infallibly record . 


As Moses gave the jews the only Law , 
Which following Priests and Prophets were to Teach , 
So th' Holy Ghost by the Apostles wrote , 
The word which after Ages were to Preach . 


As Moses Law was Sealed with Miracles , 
When such the following Ages did not need , 
So Christ's Apostles did by Wonders Seal , 
Those Records which the after Ages read . 


The Spirit promised to the Apostles was , 
To lead them to all needful saving Truth , 
And bring Christ's words to their remembrance , 
What they by his Commission did , Christ doth . 


Their writings are the Holy Ghosts own Book , 
Though human Imperfection do appear ; 
In Modes and Phrases , it 's no just offence , 
But leaves the Truth , and Use still sure and clear . 


Words but the Vehicle of matter be , 
God's Spirit owns not the Translators words ; 
But if as signs , they with his Words agree , 
The Sense and Matter of them is the Lords . 


This Spirit helps the Church , but not to bring 
Another Gospel , Law or Word from Heaven , 
Nor mend or change God's Laws in word or sense . 
But to preach and obey the word once given . 


To bring new Laws or Messages from God ; 
A Prophet's Office is , and not a Priests , 
To forge such , or make Laws for all the Church , 
The Authors prove , false Prophets , or false Christ's . 


Christian Religion is one established thing , 
Which all the Church from first to last may know , 
It is not human , changeable or new , 
Nor doth by men's decrees increase and grow . 


If Canons no part of Religion be , 
But Laws for Rites and things indifferent ; 
Why must all Christians needs in these agree , 
Or not agreeing by Church-wars be rend . 


The Church hath all one Head , one perfect Law , 
All justified be by Christ's Blood and Merit ; 
All that are true , though weak , Christ doth receive , 
For all are Sanctified by one Spirit . 


The Holy Ghost in all true Christians dwells , 
He doth illuminate , and make them New ; 
This is Christ's Agent , and his Body forms . 
His Witness proving that his Word is true . 


This Spirit did the Gospel first Indite , 
And on it did God's Image first Ingrave , 
And then by it , as his great Instrument : 
That Image Prints on all that he will save . 


Though it be long of their resisting Will , 
That any of this Grace deprived be ; 
Yet Scripture and Experience , clearly tell , 
That diffrencing , electing Grace is free . 


In Children it appears , when God doth choose , 
He gives a reachable and willing Mind ; 
Good Dispositions , and Capacity , 
By Grace their Nature is to good inclined . 


Grace chooseth Parents careful of their Souls , 
Helps them to educate them in God's fear ; 
To commend Virtue , and disgrace all Vice , 
Teach them Gods word , & causeth them to hear . 


God's Seed in such , is often early Sowed , 
And as they grow it spring's up by degrees ; 
As Plants , and Fruits , by Sun & Moisture growed , 
Whose present growth and motion no Man sees . 


The first beginnings of the Spirits work , 
Is in a learning Mind , and fear of Sin ; 
A love and liking of good things and Men , 
Against Sins for Duty , Conscience strives within . 


Grace watcheth over them , provides them helps , 
Meet Teachers , Books , Examples , Company ; 
Keeps off temptations , causeth them to hate 
Lying , bad Words and Deeds , and Ribaldry . 


Bad children's Hearts , are quite averst to good , 
They love not Virtue , relish not God's Law ; 
Tempting Discourse , Examples , Vanities , 
Catch on their Hearts , as Fire doth on Straw . 


If early helps , Parents and Teachers fail , 
And Sin the childish Mind and Life pervert ; 
If Folly , Flesh , and tempting Baits prevail , 
Yet God his chosen will in time convert . 


he 'll either give them better Company , 
Or better helps , and Teachers whom he 'll Bless ; 
Or bring some useful Book unto their Eye , 
And make their Snares , & their Temptations lesle . 


Or he 'll some sharp Affliction on them lay , 
Which may awake the hardened sleepy Heart ; 
Or Conscience shall some quickening motion feel , 
Tell them their Sins , their Danger , and Desert . 


O! How the Case with Sinners now is changed , 
Things all appear now in another Shape ; 
Sin now is Madness ; Mad he calls himself , 
For loving Death , and thinks now how to Escape . 


Now God is Holy , Just , his Word is True , 
He is in earnest , though Sinners be in jest ; 
The Face of all his Works and Ways seem New , 
Those things seem worst , which formerly seemed best . 


The common Texts and Truths he daily heard , 
Do now begin to have some Life and Sense : 
He wonders how he passed them by before , 
As if they had been of no Consequence . 


That wounds , & shames , and grieves , and breaks his heart . 
Which formerly was his Delight and Pleasure , 
that 's Vanity , and mortal Poison now ; 
For which he hungered as his Food and Treasure . 


Now the Mad Prodigal comes to himself , 
Perhaps the World doth him its Husks deny , 
Why , saith he , did I leave a Father's House ? 
There none do want ; here I must starve and die . 


OH that I had not tasted Satan's Bait , 
Nor Pampered Flesh , and pleased vain Appetite , 
Neglected Grace , and things of greatest Weight , 
Nor meddled with Sins poisonous Delight . 


But the time lost can never be recalled , 
The works of Madness cannot be undone ; 
I have undone myself ; is there no help ? 
I know all else is Vain : there is but one . 


A Father's Love affordeth me some hope , 
The World gives none : I must return or die ; 
I 'll go , and humbly , all my Sin confess , 
And cast myself upon his Clemency . 


But God is Just and Holy : how can I , 
Defiled with Sin and Gild , stand in his sight ? 
Now the sick Soul a sure Physician needs , 
There is one Saviour , who is God's Delight . 


He is the Way , by whom Men come to God ; 
He is the Truth , to save the World from Error ; 
He is the Life , to save from endless Death , 
Self-murdering Souls , subject to Hellish Terror . 


And now the Gospel's better understood ; 
Redemption seemeth not a needless thing ; 
His Thoughts are precious , of Christ's precious Blood , 
His Mediator , Prophet , Priest , & King.  


The Gospel now is Tidings of great Joy , 
Pardon of Sin , Adoption , Peace with God , 
Freedom from Terror , Satan , Sin , and Hell , 
Man's self-made , and Gods just Revenging Rod.  


He seas why Love in Man's repair , must be 
As much Admired , as Power in our Creation , 
Sinners cannot immediately God see , 
But by a Mediator have Salvation . 


Now all things else seem loss and dung for Christ ; 
Wisdom is folly where Christ is left out ; 
To know him is the true Philosophy ; 
The rest doth teach Men but to prate and doubt . 


Some glimpse of God and Heaven , blurred Nature yields , 
But it 's but as a Candle to this Sun ; 
Others towards God and Heaven , may grope and creep , 
Christians with joyful hope , believe & run . 


But will Christ to such Sinners Saviour be , 
Who long and wilfully contemned his Grace ? 
Yes , if they have but hearts to him to come ; 
He excepts none : he 'll all their Sins deface . 


The Prodigal now hopefully resolves , 
In Christ I 'll trust , and to my Father go , 
When there 's but one way , who should stand & doubt 
The Vanity of all things else I know . 


If in his House I may the lowest be , 
His wondrous Grace , I will with thanks proclaim ; 
My Sin and Misery I will confess , 
And in Repentance take deserved Shame . 


And when repenting Souls are thus resolved , 
And with design do towards their Father come , 
They are surprised with unexpected love , 
Grace feasts , forgiv's them , bids them welcome home . 


Now the returned Soul doth dwell with God , 
And God in him ; for there his Spirit dwells , 
God hath his highest Love , Heaven his chief hope , 
Christ is his Life ; he trusteth to none else . 


OH how much better , is it with him now ; 
How wise , how safe , to what he was before , 
What he 's yet short of , Faith hath in its view ; 
he 'll choose the way of Sin and Hell no more . 


Now farewell mortal Sin , stoop brutish Flesh , 
Now Pride & Lust come down , submit to Faith ; 
Farewell ensnaring Sports and Company , 
Farewell Deceit , I 'll hear what Scripture saith . 


Now all is New , new Judgements , Love and Life , 
New Hopes , Delights , a new intended End ; 
The means than must be new , or better used ; 
New friends , new thoughts , & all that to it tend . 


But yet , though out of Egypt he be come , 
Through the red Sea , he 's in a Wilderness ; 
Faith must be tried by many Enemies , 
Hard Journeys , Wants , delayed Hopes , Distress . 


And Flesh still strives , Satan still busy is , 
The World will tempt , sin 's not quite overcome ; 
Dark Fears and Unbelief do yet hang on , 
We are in hope , but are not yet at home . 


But yet we have the leading Fire and Cloud , 
The Law , the Angel's presence as we pass ; 
Moses fell in the Wilderness : but there 
The Tempter by our Saviour vanquished was . 


The Law was weak , and nothing perfect made , 
Grace giveth light , and life , & love , and strength ; 
And though it long , and oft assaulted be , 
It Conquereth , and Triumpheth at length . 


It is the work of God , who knows his own , 
And makes them Christ's beloved interest ; 
All that are given him , he love's and keeps , 
And brings them to the promised Land of Rest.  


Grace suited is , to every Time and State , 
To Childhood , Manhood , and decrepit Age ; 
An Antidote against contagious Pleasures , 
Yet grief , wrath , fear , and suffering doth assuage . 


It useth every State for the true end , 
It sanctifies Prosperity and Wealth ; 
Still doing good , and doth to Godward tend , 
To him devoteth time , life , wit , and health . 


It useth Friends and Enemies for God , 
Improveth kindness , easily bears wrong ; 
Love's others as ourselves , doth Right to all , 
Hopes for a blessed end , when sufferings long . 


It takes not too much part with pained Flesh , 
It ruleth Reason , Appetite , and Sense ; 
Conquers Temptation , keepeth inward Peace , 
Keeps near to God , who is our sure Defence . 


It all the way foresees the blessed end , 
Motives to Duty , Comfort in all Grief , 
It fetcheth more from God & Heaven , than Earth , 
In every Case from Christ it finds Relief . 


It spendeth Health and Life in Preparation , 
For foreseen Death , and the Souls final change , 
it 's not surprised without expectation ; 
It trusteth Christ , when things unseen seem strange . 


All this Grace doth , in various degrees , 
In most but weak , Imperfect in the best ; 
Clogged here with Flesh , and contradicting Sin , 
But ends in Glory and Eternal Rest.  


it 's whole work is to bring Man's Will to God , 
As our Original , our Guide and End , 
Thankfully take his Grace , obey his Word , 
And wholly love him as our chiefest Friend . 


And more than so , to love him for himself , 
The final Object of Created Love ; 
This only perfect ones , perfectly do , 
Who see God's Glory in the world above . 


Amen . jan. 6. 1682  / 3.  II Wisdom . HE that by Faith sees not the World of Spirits , 
Which Christ with his blessed Family Inherits , 
The Sense of Providence can never know , 
Nor Judge aright of any thing below . 


Things seem confused and neglected here , 
Because in broken parcels they appear ; 
Who knows a Work in Arras by one Piece , 
Small parcels show not Workmen's Artifice ? 
The Beauty of a Picture is not known , 
When one small part , or Limb alone is shown ; 
They that on some few Letters only look , 
Can never know the meaning of God's Book . 
Who knows a stately Building by one Post , 
●ts but short scraps that one Age sees at most ; 


Heaven seeth all , and therefore knows the Sense , 
Of the whole beauteous frame of Providence . 
His Judgement of God's Kingdom needs must fail , 
Who knows no more of it than this dark Goal : 
If Heaven and Hell were open to men's sight , 
Most Men of present things would judge aright . 


Who would be grieved at prosperous sinners reign 
Who did foresee their everlasting pain ? 
Who would grudge pride & rage , so short a power , 
Who did foresee its fall , and dismal hour . 
who 'd grudge God's Patience to the greatest crime , 
Which will scape Vengeance for so short a time : 
who 'd grudge at any wrong or suffering here , 
Who saw the World of happiness so near . 


If that one Sun a Thousand Fold excel , 
This Earth in bigness , where we Sinners dwell ; 
( And what 's one Sun to all the Heaven beside ? ) 
Is not God's Kingdom Glorious and wide ? 
Who then dare say , God's work is not well done , 
Because an Anthill is not made a Sun : 
Or because Sin and devilish Rage do dwell , 
In this vile Prison , which is next to Hell. 
who 'd measure God's great Kingdom , or his Love , 
By us poor Prisoners who in Fetters move : 


God placed Man in Earthly Paradise , 
Heavens' outward Court , the way to highest bliss ▪ 
And Man himself doing what God forbade , 
His House a Bedlam and a Bridewell made ; 


Man turned it by his sinful base defection , 
Into God's Prison and House of Correction . 
God's wondrous Mercies , which do never fail , 
Fetch many Sons to Heaven out of this Goal : 


If the rest finally neglect God's Grace , 
And choose no better than this sinful place . 
The Dream of Pleasure which will end in shame , 
They had their choice , and whom else can they blame ; 


who 'd censure Good for one poor Bedlams sake , 
But such as of his Madness do partake . 
And though he rage , and sober Men disdains , 
Who love's his Case , or longeth for his Chains ? 


Who envy wicked Men , their hurting Power , 
Who do believe their sad approaching hour ? 
Who the Toads hurtful Venom envieth , 
Who'd have the Basalisks pernicious Breath ? 
Who longs to be a Serpent for the Sting ? 
it 's worse to be a Great , but hurtful King. 
Christians by Patience win a better Crown , 
Than all the Bloody Conqueror's Renown . 
True Christian Kings , who Rule in Peace & Love , 
A better Kingdom have with Christ above . 
Our King may with more peace and safety Rule , 
Than the great Turk , Tartarian , or Mogul : 
no King so Mighty as the Devil is , 
Nor hath Dominions so large as his . 


Yet would no wise Man such a Devil be , 
That he might be as powerful as he ; 
If any would be such , his own desire , 
Makes him a Devil fitted for Hell Fire . 
Madness called Wisdom is , and Rules in chief , 
With all that cannot see beyond this Life : 
To them that see not beyond Flesh and Blood , 
And taste no better than these Senses Food ; 
That know not the true everlasting good , 
Nothing on Earth is rightly understood . 


The Heavenly Light must open Sinners Eyes , 
Before they ever will be truly Wise : 
One real prospect of the Life to come , 
A true belief whither men's Souls are gone , 
Would more felicitating Wisdom give , 
Than foolish sensual Men will now believe . 


Call not that Wisdom which will end in shame , 
Which undoes him who by it wins the Game : 
A Wit that can deceive himself and others , 
Wit to destroy his own Soul , and his Brothers : 
Wit that can prove that Sins a harmless thing , 
That sin 's no Sin , or no great hurt will bring ; 
That with the Serpent can give God the Lie , 
And say , believe not God ; you shall not die . 
Wit that can prove that God speaks but in jest , 
That present Fleshly Pleasue is Man's best : 


Wit that can prove God's Wisdom is deceived , 
And sacred Scriptures should not be received ; 
Wit to confute God's Word , reject his Grace , 
Loose time , Sin boldly , post toward Hell apace . 
Defend the Devil's Cause , his own Damnation , 
'Slight God , neglect a Saviour and Salvation . 
Call not that Wisdom , which Men would disown , 
And wish at last that they had never known , 
To go with honour , ease , and sport to Hell , 
And there with shame & late repentance dwell . 
Truth is for Goodness , Wisdom's Use , and End , 
To which true Learning , and just Studies tend ; 
Is , that this may be thoroughly understood , 
To be Good , do Good , and get endless Good , 
False Wit employed in hurting other Men , 
Writes its own Death in Blood , with its own Pen : 
It forceth many to their self-defence , 
Who fain would live in quiet Innocence . 


Kites , Foxes , Wolves , have wit to cath their prey , 
Yet harmless Sheep , live quietter than they . 
Men keep their Flocks that they may multiply , 
So that but few by Wolves and Lions die ; 
But hurtful ravenous Beasts , all men pursue , 
While all destroy them , there remains but few . 


Some slight God's Word , because weak Men abuse it 
what 's Law or Reason then , when all misuse it . 
Men will not despise God , nor sin , nor die , 
But they will give a learned Reason why . 
What is so false , which Wit cannot defend , 
And that by Volumes confidently penned ; 
Reason can justify the greatest wrong , 
The basest lie can hire a Learned Tongue . 
What cause so vile , that cannot Wit Suborn , 
Men will not without Reason be forsworn . 
Reason can make Rogues of the best of Men , 
And make a Church of Saints a Serpent's Den ; 
Can make usurping Lucifer a Saint , 
And Holy Martyrs , like to Devils paint . 
Even Reverend Wit , can by transforming Skill , 
Make Heretics , and Schismatics at will ; 
It can prove white is black , and black is white , 
That night is day , and grossest darkness Light. 
Say what you will , Reason can prove it true , 
What is 't that drunken Reason cannot do ? 
How rare is that blessed place , that Age or Season , 
Which may not own this Character of Reason . 
And must we therefore brutishness prefer , 
Because well used Reason is so rare . 
But when the Drunken frenzy fit is gone , 
And Devils their deceiving work have done ; 
When Death , the dreaming Sinner doth awake , 
OH what a dreadful change doth God then make ? 
then wise Men only are the pure and just , 
Who Christ , who God obey , and in him trust . 


III Madness . Lord is not Man , though lodged in Flesh and Blood , 
A noble Vital , intellectual Spirit ? 
thou maid'st him in thine Image , wise and good , 
Earth's Paradise , Heavens' Suburbs to inherit . 


How comes a Reasonable human Soul , 
Transformed by such a Monstrous ugly change ? 
Into a Brutish , Raging , Wicked Fool , 
To God , himself and wisdom , blind and strange . 


thou gav'st him sight , who hath put out his Eyes , 
thou gav'st him knowledge , who hath made him mad ? 
Even Satan , promising to make him wise , 
thou mad'st him holy , Sin hath made him bad . 


Did not endeavours , blessed by thy Grace , 
Restore some Holy Wisdom in thine own ; 
The Souls which Sin and Satan did deface , 
Would not from Bruits & Devils well be known . 


it 's strange in Man , how these two twisted be , 
To be a Bruit , and a Malignant Devil ? 
Folly and wickedness too well agree , 
A fool to goodness , is wise to do evil . 


Children do quickly learn to serve the Flesh , 
Their Pride , their Appetite , and their Selfwill , 
Eager for every thing that these can wish , 
But little knowing what is good or ill . 


Their Sense and Fancy do so strongly Rage , 
That Teachers speak in vain , Flesh will not hear , 
Bruitishness gets advantage by their Age , 
Till Grace comes in , and opens heart and ear . 


Depraved Nature , made by custom worse , 
Makes Reason now a fettered slave to Sense ; 
Increased Sin becomes a double Curse , 
Fights against God , and is its own Defence . 


As Flesh grows up , so Sense and Fancy grow . 
Lust and vain Pleasure now do Tyrannise ; 
What crosseth these they hate , & would not know , 
And raging Flesh abhoreth to be wise . 


Yet wise in wickedness , they needs will seem , 
They can confute their Teachers with a breath ; 
All that reproves them they as error deem , 
And become Advocates for Sin and Death . 


And now the same who Infant-christians were , 
And did renounce the Flesh , the World , & Devil ; 
Flesh , World , and Devils , serious Servants are , 
And Christ blaspheme as Patron of their Evil.  


Now God and Conscience , seem their greatest foes , 
God as above them doth control their lust : 
He that pleads Conscience , for an Enemy goes , 
And all that 's done against him goes for just . 


God's called to Sinners Bar , and there condemned , 
As heading Rebels that do him obey : 
Before those fools , his Laws are all contemned , 
Christ must be taught to think and say as they . 


And being once engaged in Satan's war , 
His daring Soldiers , they are quickly made ; 
But little wit and labour needful are , 
To learn the Lying , Hating , Hurting Trade . 


Now valiant Bedlam , drunken , devilish wit , 
Conquers resistance , Triumphs over all : 
Fights against all that help not , or submit , 
To bring Church , Kingdoms , Souls , to Satan's thrall . 


OH what a busy Trade mad worldlings drive , 
They talk , they ride , they run , contend & fight ; 
With craft they plot , with fraud and force they strive , 
For fleshly Lust , and poisonous Delight . 


As the fleet Swallows glides to catch a Fly , 
And toilsome ants , do gather Sticks and Straw : 
At dearer rates Men purchase Vanity , 
For Satan , Lust , and Madness , make their Law.  


May they but a sick Mortal Lust fulfil , 
Get Money , Houses , Land , and large Revenues , 
Look big , and make all stoop to their proud will ; 
Feast , drink , and play , and keep a great Retinue . 


This is the dreaming happiness of Fools , 
Life spent for this , and Heaven for this is lost : 
And this is all for which they sell their Souls , 
A fools cap purchased at the dearest cost . 


All this is done in the known way to Death , 
They have not the least hope , but die they must : 
They are not sure to fetch another breath , 
They know their pampered Flesh will soon be dust . 


Their pomp & wealth for which they God forsake , 
Yea , though their Streets with Slver they could pave ; 
All the vexations , strife , & stir they make , 
They know is but in passing to the Grave . 


Were they but following another's Course , 
Such going towards a Grave would be a shame ; 
But when it 's towards their own , it is far worse , 
A Madness which doth want a proper name . 


Sheep know not when death 's near , yet live in peace 
Birds feed & sing in peace , together got , 
Man always knows his Life will shortly cease , 
Yet madly life's as if he knew it not . 


But when Death comes they are surprised with fear , 
As if till than they knew not they must die ; 
Departing wealth and life , their hearts then tear , 
OH how the Case is changed when death seems nigh . 


How sad doth Dives look ? how deep he groans , 
His Mammon God , now will not hear his cries ; 
Money and Friends now answer not his moans , 
For all his wealth , he trembles , faints and dies . 


The greatest Lord and Prince must now submit , 
Crowns , Titles , Money will not ease his pain ; 
Forced repentance seems to have some wit , 
Preachers may speak now without proud disdain . 


He calls for Mercy , he forgiveth all , 
Instead of Fire and Sword , he speaks for Peace , 
His wit revives as Flesh and Strength do fall , 
Not from a Holy change , but for his ease . 


Now he talks how he 'd live , when life 's ne'er gone , 
He seemeth wise , and promises to mend ; 
He thinks what Time is for , when time is done , 
begins to think of living at his end . 


Might he be saved now for a frighted wish , 
When guilt and terror cause his heart to faint , 
When worldly pleasures all forsake his flesh , 
he 'd have the end and portion of a Saint . 


Now take an Inventory of his Wealth , 
This Corpse was once the Body of a Man : 
It lived in Pleasure , Honour , Ease and Health , 
Goes Naked hence , as Naked Life began . 


That frightful Earthly Face was wont to smile , 
And with proud Scorn on hated persons frown , 
It Comely seemed , which now is Black and Vile , 
That its the same , can hardly now be known . 


Those closed Eyes , the Casements were of Lust , 
There entered Worldly Vanity and Sin , 
That Mouth , those Lips that now must Rot to Dust , 
Have taken many a pleasant Morsel in . 


That Throat , his Fellow-creatures did Devour , 
Made Sumptuous Feasts his Body to maintain , 
With pleasant Liquors , many a merry Hour , 
He did exhilerate both Heart and Brain . 


Those Ears have heard , Jests , Plays and Melody , 
Mens flattering Praise , and many a merry Song , 
The welcome news of their Calamity , 
Whom Wrath and Malice did delight to Wrong . 


That Mouth hath uttered many a merry Jest , 
Vain Worldly talk , Strife , News & feigned Story , 
Oaths , Lies and wanton Speeches , were its Feast , 
Threats , and proud Boasts , & Scorning were its Glory . 


That Nose delighted was with pleasant smell . 
That Black & Sallow Skin was smooth & white ; 
On Eyes and Countenance did Grandeur dwell , 
The Just did fly ; the Poor crouched at his sight . 


Those Limbs could move ; those Hands had nimble Joints , 
The Corpse which now lies Dead , did Ride & Run , 
All did perform what Lust and Pride appoints , 
Many successful Actions he hath done . 


Many deep Plodding Thoughts that Brain hath hatched , 
How to grow Rich , & Great , & have his Will , 
For Means and Seasons , he hath wisely watched , 
All his Desires and Pleasure to fulfil . 


And now what 's left ? To keep him from men's sight , 
A Shroud and Coffin's all that he must have , 
And these unknown , afford him no delight , 
But serve their turn , who bring him to a Grave . 


But where 's his Money , Honours , Lands & Treasures ? 
Left to his Heirs , lest they should wiser be , 
That the strong Snare of fleshly worldly pleasures , 
May tempt them all to Live and Die as he . 


But where is Dives Soul ? Christ saith , In Hell : 
But his Five brethren will not this believe : 
Christ will not lie : And who can better tell : 
But Satan thus Successors doth deceive . 


What hath he taken hence of all his Gains ? 
God's Wrath : The Gild & Conscience of his Sin : 
But not one drop to ease Tormenting Pains : 
Will all his Honours , Lands and riches win . 


A Preacher tells his brethren what Christ saith : 
he 's charged of Slandering so great a Man : 
A Goal , and Scorn , is the success he hath : 
Convince proud , wilful , Sinners , no one can . 


And is not this a doleful Bedlam-case , 
When all a Rich Man's pleasure with him dies ? 
His brethren madly follow the same Chase , 
At the same time , while he in Torment lies . 


he 's paying for his long Contempt of Grace ; 
They build his Tomb , and celebrate his Fame ; 
he 'd have them warned , & not come to that place ; 
They praise his doings , and keep up his Name . 


could one at once but see them & their Brother ; 
Him in his Torment ; them in their Delight ; 
How unlike are their Thoughts to one another ; 
One Groans for that , for which the others fight . 


Faith sees all this : But Flesh and Sense is blind : 
These Bruits believe no more than what they see : 
One from the Dead sent could not change their mind ; 
But it by sense too late , will changed be . 


God gives Men Life : they 'll not consider why : 
Time's short : Fools know not what they have to do , 
Nor think why they were Born , till they must Die , 
Nor whither their departing Souls must go . 


They Live , as if they thought that Heaven & Hell 
Were the only places of Consideration , 
And to be Drunk , or Mad , were to be well : 
And fool away this Life of Preparation . 


iv. Hypocrisy . But none are worse than Learned Reverend Fools , 
Who vend their folly under wisdom's name , 
And are Abaddons keenest hurtful Tools , 
By Usurped Grandeur , and Religious Fame . 


Who Teach Untruths , or Live not as they Teach , 
Pretend to watch for other men's Salvation , 
And hate the Holy Life , for which they Preach , 
And as a Trade , Preach their own Condemnation . 


Who against Christ do fight with Sacred Arms ; 
His Name , & Words , Church-order , forged Commissions , 
And Reverend Titles , are made potent Charms , 
To win the Ignorant to their Conditions . 


They praise God's word , but make it first their own , 
The words are Gods , the Church must make the sense , 
it 's no Law , till their Sentence make it known , 
Not their mere Teaching by Truth's Evidence . 


Religion they corrupt by forged Traditions , 
They think Gods Laws too big , & yet make more , 
all 's not enough without their vain Additions , 
Religion was an Infant-thing before . 


And under Christ , the Churches only Head , 
th' have found one King , or one Church-parliament . 
Whose Sovereign Rule the Christian World must dread , 
And all that will be Saved , must Consent . 


This Sovereign's Kingdom is the whole round Earth , 
The Lands where they can never have Access ; 
From it their Canon-law received its Birth , 
To which they all obedience profess . 


But the false name of Councils-general , 
Is now a Cheat to serve the Roman-king , 
Where are those Councils ? whence : who must them call ? 
Who them from all the Earth together bring . 


could not our Lord without all this ado , 
Have made sufficient Universal Law , 
But our Religion must have so much new , 
Which th' ancient Christians never heard , or saw . 


Communion's made Subjection by this Cheat , 
None can be Saved that are not Canon-proof ; 
Obey them , or they 'll say you Separate , 
They Build the Church , beginning at the Roof . 


Thus can the Flesh such Learned Men deceive , 
And make them love their Enemies as Friends , 
And rule their Faith , and make them all believe , 
That all is good , which serves their Worldly Ends ? 


How Wise and Holy should that Person be , 
Whose Daily Business is to search God's Law ; 
Who should in Heavenly Pleasure Live , but he , 
That Heaven and Hell , as in a Map , still saw . 


Doth Pride and Envy , bitter Strife and Wrath , 
Church Tyranny , or Hatred of the Good , 
Become that Man , who such an Office hath , 
To Preach God's Love , Sealed with Christ's Flesh & Blood.  


What is his Calling , but Souls to Convert , 
And Build them up in Faith and Love with Peace , 
In what Art should he rather be expert , 
then to breed Love , and Hurtfulness suppress . 


If he love Christ , he 'll gently feed his Sheep . 
Cherish and Love the good , strengthen the weak , 
The Flock from Wolves & hurtful Beasts he 'll keep , 
And not against the Just and Upright speak . 


Self-contradicting is a Madmans' mark , 
Judge then what these Malignant Preachers are , 
Self-damning , Self-confuting , in the dark , 
Heart , Tongue & Hand , are in a constant War.  


They are Church-shepherds , & yet hurtful Wolves , 
They Preach for Love to Foes , yet hate Christ's Friends ; 
Preach Life to others , choose Death to themselves ; 
Heavenly words they speak , for Worldly Ends.  


They Pray , that God's great Name may Hallowed be , 
Which they profane , by pleading it for Evil ; 
They Pray , as if Christ's Kingdom they would see , 
But mean their own , that 's ruled by the Devil . 


They hate Gods Will , & Pray it may be done , 
Even as it is in Heaven : A high degree ! 
Yet if one pled Gods Will against their own ; 
who 's hated more , or used worse than he . 


They Pray for Daily Bread ; for Life & Health : 
But without Plenty are not satisfied : 
But seek Preferment , Fullness , Rule & Wealth ; 
And grudge if Fleshly Lust be but denied . 


The ask pardon of the Sin they Love & Cherish : 
And that but as themselves forgive another , 
Yet to fear God , Sin , Hell , as loath to perish , 
they 'll not forgive to a dissenting Brother . 


They pray God not to lead them to Temptation , 
Yet tempt themselves , & love most tempting things 
Strong baits of Flesh are their chief consolation , 
Greedy of all that deadly pleasure brings . 


They ask deliverance from all that 's ill , 
Yet Sin the worst , they love and will not leave . 
They ask , what 's full against their Vicious Will , 
That which God offers , and they 'll not receive . 


They seem to own a God : They Preach his Law , 
But Man and Flesh must be before him served . 
The world 's more loved , of Man they are more in awe ; 
As if God but the Tongue & Knee deserved . 


The Image is their God , and hath the Heart . 
God's made an Image , and hath but the name . 
Religion is with them mere Form and Art , 
Kept up for Peace , by Custom , Fear & Shame . 


Christ is their Saviour called ; their King & Lord , 
To Preach his Grace and Glory is their Trade . 
But to be Saved from Lust & Sin , is Abhorred , 
And he an Underling to Flesh is made . 


They say they do believe the Holy Ghost ; 
But his refining work will not be born , 
A Fleshly Worldly Life doth please them most , 
The Spirits Name & Work some make a Scorn . 


And yet for Holiness , who hath more Zeal ? 
Meaning great Names , & Interest of their own : 
They against Sacrilege to God appeal ; 
As it would Rob their Flesh , and it Dethrone . 


it 's none to hurt Christ's Flock , withhold their Food , 
His Faithful Ministers to Alienate , 
Nor feed proud Flesh with what belongs to God , 
all 's Holy that to it is Dedicated . 


Religion ends with them as it begun , 
They were Baptised , and made the Sacred Vow : 
But this was by a strange Godfather done , 
it 's with great Grief that I must tell you how . 


it 's known an Infant hath no Will to choose . 
The Parents Will and Choice do stand for his . 
Till he be capable his own to use , 
He in the Power of his Parents is . 


And God obliges Christians to devote 
Themselves and theirs , in Covenant , to Christ , 
This he accepts , as many Scriptures note , 
The Parent being Dedicated first . 


But now some other doth the Parent's part , 
Vows for the Child , and its due Education ; 
And ( though he never meant it in his heart ) 
To see it Taught all needful to Salvation . 


Atheists , and Infidels , and Sadduces , 
Their Children are all freely taken in , 
If they have but such Godfathers as these , 
Baptism is said to save them all from Sin.  


Men forbid Parents Godfathers to be , 
And Ministers their presence to require . 
Foreign Kings stand for those they never see . 
Poor Men get such as they for Money hire . 


Parents these Undertakers do not ask , 
Will you these Vows and Promises perform ? 
Baptismal Vows are made a formal task ; 
Thus they began : Thus Men Christ's Laws reform . 


Thus Christians by false Ceremony made , 
religion 's made a Ceremony now , 
Not minding what Suborned Men Vowed or said , 
They boldly break what others falsely Vowed . 


And when in Play & Sin their Childhood's spent , 
For Canting a few words , not understood , 
Mindless what Faith is , or their Baptism meant , 
Confirmed , they boldly claim Christ's Flesh and Blood.  


A Lifeless Image being thus received , 
more Forms and Ceremonies it adorn , 
And Hypocrites by Shadows thus deceived , 
The unknown Holy Life do Hate and Scorn . 


Thus Life is fooled away , till Death seem near , 
Which doth disrobe their splendid cheating Sins , 
But to ease Conscience wakened now by fear , 
Forced Penitence Man's Absolution wins . 


And at the Grave , when Men as bad as he , 
Do hear that God in Mercy took his Soul ; 
And Charity for this hope pleaded be , 
False hopes which should be broken , are kept whole . 


Thus Sinners are befoold till time is done , 
From first to last spent in Hypocrisy ; 
And endless sorrow when all hope is gone , 
Tell them what Mercy they did long deny . 


Yet still the reverend Masters of the Game , 
Cherish the Malady with Zeal and Art ; 
Being themselves diseased by the same , 
By mortal habit both of Head and Heart . 


Tradition , Ceremony , Pomp and Rule , 
A human Image without Divine Life ; 
By Pharisees was used as the tool , 
Of self-deceit , and of malignant strife . 


Dead Saints they honoured , and the living killed , 
The Dead molest them not by their reproof ; 
Their Relics , Days , and Monuments they held , 
In their Devotion as of great behoof . 


Yet none were fiercer Enemies of Christ , 
Nor did his Truth and Servants more oppose ; 
None with more Zeal for Holy Blood did thirst , 
None did more mischief to the Church than those . 


Wolves in Sheep's clothing , by their Fruits are known , 
By hurtful fangs , devouring bloody jaws , 
As Thorns and Briars , prick Men to the Bone , 
So these by hurtful Hands and cruel Laws . 


they 're humble Ministers , but Rule as Lords , 
Servants of all , yet Vice-kings under Christ : 
On pain of Hell , all must obey their words , 
If you will serve God , you must serve them first . 


Heavens' Keys are theirs , their right we must not doubt , 
To curse and cast out those whom Christ takes in , 
These they by words , themselves indeed shut out , 
By mortal fleshly , and malignant Sin.  


Christ's House a place of Merchandise is made , 
Children cast out , his Table spread for Dogs ; 
To make sound Christians odious is their Trade , 
To curse God's Saints , & cast their Pearls to Hogs . 


The Holy Catholic Church , is in their Creed , 
Which is , all true Believers upon Earth ; 
Of whom Christ only is the King and Head , 
To him they joined are in the New Birth . 


But these Men mean one corrupt Sect alone , 
About the Fourth Part of the whole are they ; 
Cut off , and separate from the rest as none , 
Their Pope and Councils that do not obey . 


The Saint's Communion they in words profess 
Themselves , and Dead men's Images they mean ; 
None pass for Saints who do not wear their dress , 
The best , if not their Subjects are unclean . 


Call them but Heretics , and they may kill , 
A Thousand Saints , and by it Heaven may win ; 
Such is the Power of a Papal will , 
To make a Virtue of the greatest Sin.  


On Catholic Communion , they lay , 
Not only all men's Duty , but Salvation ; 
For Schism rends Men from the Church , say they , 
And so from Christ , & therefore brings damnation . 


Yet that 's Man's Duty which they Schism call , 
To own no human universal King ; 
no Legislative Power over all , 
In Councils , Pope , or any human thing . 


none 's capable to Rule all , but the Lord , 
Give Church or State , Law , Judgement or Defence ; 
Man's Universal Soveraignty's abhorred , 
By Nature , Reason , and Experience . 


Among the Mad , those Prince's Monsters are , 
Who subjects be to this Church-soveraigns' claim ; 
And yet with Scorn , and just disdain would hear , 
A Universal Civil Sovereign's Name . 


When certainly it is a harder thing , 
To Rule all Earth , by the Church-power & word : 
Than for the wisest Parliament or King , 
To Rule the whole world by the Civil Sword.  


Thus they impossible Communion make , 
And yet Damn all that do not it observe : 
None can tell whom for Sovereign we must take , 
Nor which the Laws are , from which none must swerve . 


Must Pope or Council , this Great Sovereign be , 
Is 't Monarchy , or Aristocracy ; 
Or is it mixed , and must they both agree , 
Or is it the diffused Democracie ? 


Whom must we take for Pope ? Who must him choose , 
Which is the Pope , when there are two or three ? 
Must they that give the Power which they use , 
Superiors , Equals , or Inferiors be ? 


When one at Rome , one at Avignion was , 
And each a Council had which took his part ; 
Which for the true Communion than must pass , 
Which was the Church from which none must depart ? 


Must all th' Abassians , and Armenians know , 
( And in Cosmography so Skilful be , ) 
Wither there 's such a place as Rome or no , 
whither there be a Pope , and which is he ? 


Is 't the whole Church on Earth that he must rule , 
Why then hath not the whole a choosing Vote ? 
Is all the world save Rome , but the Pope's Mule , 
And that his crown 's Elective all do Note ? 


it 's like , that all the Church consents , they 'll say , 
then he 's no Pope whom three 4th parts disclaim , 
How shall three parts then know whom to obey ? 
Will any serve that will usurp the Name ? 


When Popes damn Popes , & Councils damn them all , 
And Popes damn Councils , what must Christians do ? 
When they each others Laws damn & recall , 
How shall we know whose Power then was true ? 


The French say Councils have this Sovereignty , 
The first Three Hundred Years it was not so ; 
The Sovereign Power , the Church doth Unifie , 
Was it then none , or how could Men it know ? 


An Universal Council never was , 
'T was but one Empire that did make that name ; 
Now that 's dissolved , how should it come to pass ? 
That any Prince on Earth should do the same . 


Hath any one the common Rule of all , 
Or will Turks , Papists , and all Kings agree ? 
Such a true Council , when and where to call , 
Or can one third part Universal be ? 


The Church of Councils Power is not agreed , 
Therefore this doth not it now Unifie : 
Those that stand for their Sovereignty indeed , 
Which were those Councils differ shamefully ? 


Some are for four , some six , some eight , some all , 
Some such as by the Pope approved were ; 
diverse each other Heretics did call , 
And which we must obey cannot appear . 


And is Church Unity no better known , 
And yet is necessary to Salvation : 
And to all those that Christ himself will own ? 
What fallows hence , but general Damnation ? 


An Universal Council none shall see , 
Till the world have an Universal King , 
This the Triple-crowned Pope pretends to be , 
Though not the name , he challengeth the thing . 


The poor Fifth Monarchy Seekers , they pity , 
As seeking that which long hath extant been : 
no Monarch ever matched the Holy City , 
By his Church Keys , thus rules the Man of Sin.  


And if we knew which Powers to obey , 
Which be the Canons , which so needful are ? 
If some , who knows them , if all , then are they 
more necessary than God's Scriptures far . 


Christ hath the Terms of Church-communion made , 
These wiser Men , who make so many more ; 
Will shortly find their Legislative trade , 
Among their greatest Sins set on their Score . 


Baptism Christ made , what was thereto required ? 
The Church still knew , & by God's mercy knows , 
The words then used , the requisites desired , 
Scripture and sure Tradition fully shows . 


The Church by Baptism was specified , 
Christ did command all such to love each other , 
Holy Communion was to none denied , 
All were to take a Christian as a Brother . 


Till by some Heresy or great offence , 
He brought his Covenant-keeping under doubt ▪ 
And having added proved impenitence , 
Was not so much cast as declared out . 


None were Baptised into Peter's Name , 
Much lesle to General Council , or the Pope ; 
They had one God , one Christ , their Creed the same , 
One Spirit , Body , and one future hope . 


But as the Serpent tempting Eve at first , 
By Pride and promised knowledge did Man kill ; 
So from the pure simplicity of Christ , 
By promised Wisdom , he befools Man Still . 


To know this Subject better , read a Book , 
Called the remains of Fulk , Grevile , Lord Brook.  


v. Man  Vain Man ! Why is thy Being no more known , 
Why seeking knowledge readst thou not thyself ? 
How many books in vain dost thou take down ? 
Thy own Book standeth on the nearest Shelf . 


Should vital knowing Spirits clothed in Flesh , 
Mistake so Course , a Garment for the Man ? 
And live as if they did not hope or wish , 
For any other Life than this short Span.  


If Clothing hide thee from thy Neighbour's sight , 
Let it not hide thee also from thine own ; 
Look on thyself , thy Nature is a Light , 
Shall knowing Souls be to themselves unknown . 


Now know thyself before thou art undressed , 
And though through flesh Men cannot see thy heart ; 
Open thy Eyes , unveil thy Face at least , 
That Men may see thou hast a better part . 


How vile a thing is Man , if Flesh be he ? 
Can he look high who thinks himself so base ? 
His brutish sleepy Thoughts and Life must be , 
A dreaming , doting , or despairing Case . 


Where was that Flesh one Year before thy birth ? 
What is it now but warmed moving Clay ? 
What will it be ever long but common Earth ? 
To this thy Pomp and Pleasure is the way . 


Where did God's Art that curious Body form ? 
As in a Dunghill , even in Nature's sink , 
Though Skin and Clothing now do it Adorn ; 
'T was bred between the Dung and Urins stink . 


What was it made of , but the Mother's Food ? 
Curdled and quickened by the Maker's power , 
And there it lay in darkness , filth , and blood ; 
Unmeet for sight till Births appointed hour . 


In pain and danger than it is brought forth , 
A speechless , helpless , and polluted thing ; 
Entering the World with crying at its Birth , 
Foretelling greater griefs which time will bring . 


How long by patient Mother's care and love , 
Doth feeble , useless , troubling Age subsist ; 
Should Man continue such , we could not prove , 
That he in kind is better than a Beast . 


Long do these unripe fleshly Bodies keep , 
The Soul from showing its essential Power ; 
Sense Rules , while Reason lieth half asleep , 
Vain toys and folly , spend our Childish hours . 


By use and prepossession flesh gets strength , 
Resisting Light , and all that 's Wise and Holy ; 
Till Reason be its servile slave at length , 
And greatest Wit become the greatest Folly.  


then Carnal Man life's like a crafty Beast , 
Only to pamper Flesh and please its Lust ; 
To make the Worms and Hell a costly Feast , 
When Souls must part and leave Flesh to the Dust.  


If Flesh be Man , how many Men are one , 
From Birth to Death , when as the Rivers flow ? 
Daily new Flesh succeeds that which is gone , 
And none is what he was one Year ago . 


That beauteous Face , that pampered Body stood , 
But lately on thy Table as thy Meat ; 
'T was Mutton , Beef , Pork , Chicken , or such Food ; 
What now thou art , is what thou then didst eat . 


Part of a Fish , a Swine , a Calf or Lamb , 
Is turned into a Lady , Lord or King ; 
This Metamorphosis of Beast to Man , 
Is surely done by some great unseen thing . 


Yea all of Man that 's seen did lately grow , 
In Fields , and that was Corn , or Fruit , or Grass ; 
Which now is Flesh , or from the Springs did flow , 
To show what Flesh will be , by what it was . 


Vain Man ! know'st thou no deeper than thy Skin ? 
Go see an opened Corpse , and that will show , 
What Garbage Filth and Dung are hid Within , 
What thy vile Body is , thou there mayst know . 


Think that thy noisome stinking Excrement , 
Is one part of that Sumptuous Pleasant Food ; 
Whose other part a while of better scent , 
Is turned into that proud Flesh and Blood.  


If yet deceitful Beauty cheat thy Eyes , 
Look on a Face that 's crusted with the Pocks ; 
Or a white Breast where stinking Cancers rise , 
And pity fools whom Fleshly Pleasure mocks . 


If Health , Wealth , Pomp , or Power , delude thy mind , 
Go to the greatest dying sick Man's Bed , 
Ask him what safety he in these doth find ? 
Yea , go yet further , look upon the Dead . 


Here much unlike to what it was before , 
Is that now loathsome Flesh , that ghastly Face ; 
What hath it now of all its Power and Store , 
Remember this must shortly be thy Case : 


How long the sight and scent can you abide , 
Of your Dead , greatest , wisest , dearest Friend ? 
Unless some Art the frightful Visage hide , 
And from the smell your tender Sense defend . 


We can device no better a dispose , 
Of dearest Friends , than a deep darksome Grave ; 
Where to lie rotting we may them repose , 
The living from their sight and scent to save . 


The worms without repulse there feasted be , 
They feed on Heart and Face without offence ; 
What pampered Bodies are , there you may see , 
If you dig up that Corpse a few Months hence . 


But though what 's out of sight , grows out of mind , 
Pictures and guilded Tombs , are also set , 
The senseless Hearts of Men further to blind ; 
That what Flesh is they may the more forget . 


Yet the next opened Grave casts up in sight 
The Skull , whose holes of Eyes & Mouth you see , 
Where entered formerly the dear delight , 
Think then , thus shortly it will be with me . 


The harmless pretty Bird with Pleasure sings , 
Not so deformed in Life or Death as we ; 
The cruel Bowels of great Lords and Kings , 
To her an honourable Tomb may be . 


Save that to be devoured by bad Men , 
Turns guiltless things into a guilty wight ; 
And makes them sinful , and more fetide than , 
If they had rotten in the open light . 


The labouring Ant lesle burdensome Flesh hath , 
thousands in peace in one stored heap can dwell ; 
In peace by crowds they travel the same path , 
And being dead annoy none by their smell . 


The working Bees in peace together live , 
Fetching their Honey home from many Flowers ; 
Dwelling in quiet order in one Hive , 
But Man destroys them and their store devours . 


God who by Nature gives them flying Wings , 
And their rare mellifying power gave ; 
Doth give them also their defensive Stings , 
Their House , and Young , and Property to save , 


Men kill them , and eat up their gathered Food , 
But make the like no King , no Artist can ; 
Their Work , yea their dead Corpse , are sweet & good 
But sweetest things corrupt and stink in Man  


How swiftly do th● unwearied Swallows flee , 
And mount , and sport , even to an unseen height ; 
Their active fiery part is quick and free , 
Not clogged as Men are by a fleshly weight . 


The mounted Lark hover with nimble wings , 
Dwells above Earth till strength and spirits sail ; 
And peering towards the Sun , she sweetly sings , 
But falls down mute when earthly parts prevail . 


Some say , all motion tends to ceasing rest , 
Of Earth's forced lifeless motion this is true ; 
To Spirits perfect Action is the best , 
Uncessant Love and Pleasure is their due . 


Experience sadly tells Man , that his Soul 
Is clogged by Flesh , perverted by its bent , 
So that dark heathens did its case condole , 
As for old Sins into this Body sent . 


Did not God's Holy Spirit quicken ours , 
And cause us unseen things by Faith to see ; 
Renew and raise our dead corrupted powers , 
None could from Flesh , Lust , Sin , Hell , saved be . 


Flesh is not Sin , it 's made for Holy use , 
In it Souls here must seek and serve the Lord ; 
But it 's the tempting object of abuse , 
While we its Life and Lust too much regard . 


The Body as a Servant we must love , 
But Souls have Sense , and Sense to Flesh is tied ; 
And so drawn down from God and things above , 
The Soul that hath not Faith is bruitifyed . 


The Interest of Flesh perverts the will , 
It conquers Reason , and corrupts the Mind , 
no other Enemy doth so much ill , 
To self-destroying , perishing Mankind . 


And now o Man , is Flesh all that thou art ? 
Worthy of all thy stir , and cost , and care , 
Live not as if thou hadst no better part , 
men's Souls like God , and Kin to Angels are . 


Even Bruits have Souls possessed of Life and Sense , 
Made to serve Man , who 's made his God to praise ; 
whither Distinct or One , when taken hence , 
Subject to us , whom God will higher raise . 


what 's Flesh but Water mixed with senseless Earth ? 
Viler than dirt , when Souls a while are gone , 
it 's unseen Spirit which causeth Life and Birth , 
This moveth all that 's moved , doth all that 's done . 


Man's Soul is made the Image of his God , 
Substantial Virtue of Life , Light , and Love. 
And though in Flesh it now have its abode , 
It's tendency is to the world above . 


It came from God , and unto God returns , 
Though in this Flesh its Life of Trial be ; 
It daily wastes the Oil , as Fire that burns , 
Consumes its Fuel , and then is set free . 


As flames mount upward , Souls tow'rd Heaven ascend , 
And are still restless till they be at home ; 
If Sin depress them not , tow'rd God they tend , 
Blessed and joyful , when to him they come . 


As things Inanimate , are ruled by force , 
By Sense and Objects , Bruits determined be ; 
Both these are carried on in Nature's course , 
Man's will more undetermined is , and free . 


Bruits are not Ruled by a Moral Law. 
Nor moved by the hopes of Life to come ; 
Nor of God's Threats and Justice stand in awe , 
Nor after Death fear any other Doom . 


man 's made in his degree to know the Lord , 
To know his Duty , and to please Gods will ; 
To learn and love , trust and obey his word , 
In hope of Heaven , his course here to fulfil . 


God is Man's supreme King , his Guide , his End , 
His Soul and Life should have no other scope ; 
From Sin and Devils , God will his defend , 
In Life and Death , God is our only hope . 


You see not whither Souls departing go , 
But Heaven and Hell are visible to Faith ; 
God hath revealed enough to make us know , 
That all shall be performed which he saith . 


We no more need to fear his word should fail , 
Or God forsake the Souls that do him please , 
Or any final Hurt , Christ's Flock assail , 
Than Earth to bear , or Sun to shine should cease . 


Is not a Sober , Righteous , Holy Life , 
In certain hope of everlasting Joys , 
Better than Sin , Despair , Care , Fear and Strife , 
For short deceitful pleasant Dreams and Toys . 


IF yet blind Man , thou thinkst thou art a Beast , 
And hast no higher Hopes & Work to mind , 
Become a Tame , and gentle One , at least , 
Not of the wild , fierce , hurtful , bloody Kind . 


Serpents , & Toads , & Wolves , are harmless things , 
Yea Lions , Tigers , and such Beasts of Prey , 
Compaird with many Conquerors and Kings , 
Who do Ten Thousand fold more hurt than they . 


If this short Fleshly pleasure be thy best , 
What need of Wars & Blood , Rage & debate ; 
Sweet Love , and quiet Peace , afford more rest , 
Than Power & Wealth , with hurtful Plots & Hate . 


What need of large Dominions , to prepare 
For Dying Pangs , a Coffin , and a Grave . 
Quiet , Content , and Kindness , fitter are , 
Thy Neighbour's welfare , & thy own to save . 


But of all Beasts , the Man-beast is the worst , 
To others , and himself , the cruelest Foe , 
And turning Serpent , doth become Accursed , 
A Scourge to others , his own endless Woe . 


As Holiness fits Souls for endless Bliss , 
And here hath its beginning and foretaste ; 
So Sin the Plague of Unmanned Nature is , 
And turns Man-beast to Devil at the last . 


If all Men made themselves , & are their own , 
And have no Ruler but Selfwill and Sense ; 
If Man be nothing else but Flesh and Bone , 
Can live here still , and say , I 'll not go hence ; 


If Man can Conquer God , and him Dethrone , 
Kill Christ again , and shut up Paradise ; 
then Saints are Fools , and Worldly Men alone , 
Choosing a Shadow and Despair , are wise . 


But sure if Man be only Mortal Flesh , 
A Squib , a Bubble , a vile Earthy Clod , 
He never will have Power , what ever he wish , 
To save himself , by overcoming God.  


But Heaven is quite above Malignant Powers , 
Our Peace & safety 's far above their reach . 
Christ's Kingdom is not of this World , nor ours , 
it 's unseen Blessedness which he did Preach . 


There Holy Spirits free from Sin and Fear , 
From Cruel Tyrants , Devils , Death and Hell , 
The sweet Celestial Melody still hear , 
In perfect Light and Love together dwell . 


there 's no dark Error , no perplexing doubt , 
no Selfish Envy , Strife or Discontent ; 
All hurtful troubling things are there shut out , 
no Wrathful Sting , no Malice , no Dissent . 


Numberless Numbers there , are all but One , 
Of the same Body , each a Member is , 
Each hath his due degree and place , but none 
A Selfish separated part of Bliss . 


All have one God , one Head , one Vital Spirit ; 
All Love God with one Love ; and all Rejoice 
With one Joy : All one Kingdom do Inherit , 
All sweetly sing God's Praise , as with one Voice . 


True Unity with Difference well Accords , 
And makes up Beauty & Consort ; though there 
Self , Numbers , Many , and such parting words , 
Have not the same dividing sense as here . 


Thus hath one Soul more than one Faculty , 
One Sun ; each sort of Life , Three formal Powers ; 
Some Image of the Divine Trinity ; 
But none on Earth so excellent as ours . 


And as in Being , so in more respects , 
Unity doth with Number well agree , 
Many Concauses have the same effects , 
Yea all God's Creatures One and Many be . 


So diverse Fruits are but parts of one Tree ; 
And every Tree is Rooted in one Ground : 
All Grounds of this One Earth but parcels be , 
This Earth a small part of the World is found . 


Souls are unseen , and so their Union is , 
Many united Individuals , 
Their distinct persons make some think amiss , 
That they are incoherent Integrals . 


God only hath a perfect Unity , 
Of the same World , some Blessed , some Cursed be , 
Some Union stands with great Diversity , 
Apples and Crabs may grow on the same Tree . 


Blessed Union is of Goodthings near of Kin , 
To things Discordant Union causeth pain ; 
An aching Tooth is better out than in , 
To lose a Rotting Member is a Gain . 


The nearest Fuel is Consumed by Fire . 
God's Wrath is near the Wicked , to destroy . 
To Holy Souls , who Gods Love most desire , 
He is their full and everlasting Joy.  


Ten Thousand Stars and Candles give one Light , 
Concordant Sounds make one sweet Melody . 
Two Ears , One hearing Cause , Two Eyes , One Sight ; 
But Light & Darkness have no Unity . 


Here Wicked Men are every where in Wars : 
Men against Men , as Tigers fiercely Rave : 
Our Minds , & Wills , & Passions , have their Jars ; 
Our Souls and Bodies Mortal Discords have . 


Though Life be short , & Death is at the Door , 
Impatient Foes think posting Time too slow , 
They grudge to let us live a few Days more , 
Revenge and Malice long to give the Blow . 


But Heaven hath no such work : there 's no such Men : 
Nothing is there , the Blessed to Annoyed , 
With Christ & Angels Holy Soul shall then , 
Praise God in perfect Life , Light , Love & Joy ! 


Amen , 

Decemb. 17. 1682.  VI The Exit . MY Soul go boldly forth , 
Forsake this Sinful Earth , 
What hath it been to thee 
But Pain and Sorrow , 
And thinkst thou it will be 
Better to Morrow ? 


Love not this Darksome Womb , 
Nor yet a Gilded Tomb , 
Though on it Written be 
Mortal men's Story , 
Look up by Faith , and see 
Sure Joyful Glory . 


Why art thou for Delay , 
thou cam'st not here to stay ? 
What tak'st thou for thy part , 
But Heavenly pleasure ? 
Where then should be thy Heart , 
But where 's thy Treasure ? 


Thy God , thy head 's above , 
There is the World of Love ; 
Mansions there purchased are , 
By Christ's own Merit , 
For these he doth prepare 
Thee by his Spirit . 


Look up towards Heaven , and see 
How vast those Regions be , 
Where Blessed Spirits dwell , 
How Pure and Lightful , 
But Earth is near to Hell , 
How Dark and Frightful . 


Here Life doth strive with Death , 
To lengthen Mortals Breath ; 
Till one short Race be run , 
Which would be ended , 
When it is but begun , 
If not defended . 


Here Life is but a Spark , 
Scarce shining in the Dark ; 
Life is the Element there , 
Which Souls reside in : 
Much like as Air is here , 
Which we abide in . 


Hither thou cam'st from thence : 
The Divine Influence 
In Flesh my Soul did place , 
Among the Living : 
To be of Human Race , 
Was his free giving . 


There I shall know God more : 
There is the Blessed Chore : 
no Wickedness comes there , 
All there is Holy : 
There is no Grief or Fear , 
no Sin or Folly.  


jerusalem above , 
Glorious in Light and Love , 
Is Mother of us all , 
Who shall enjoy them , 
The Wicked Hellward fall ; 
Sin will destroy them . 


OH Blessed Company , 
Where all in Harmony , 
Iehovah's Praises Sing , 
Still without ceasing : 
And all Obey their King , 
With perfect pleasing . 


God there is the Saints Rest , 
God is their constant Feast ; 
He doth them Feed and Bless , 
With Love and Favour , 
Of which they still possess , 
The pleasant Savour . 


God is Essential Love , 
And all the Saints above , 
Are like unto him made , 
Each in his Measure : 
Love is their Life and Trade , 
Their constant Pleasure . 


Love's flame 's in every Breast , 
The Greatest and the least ; 
Strangers to this sweet Life , 
There are not any . 
Love leaves no place for Strife ; 
Makes One of Many . 


Each is to other dear , 
no Malice enters there ; 
no Siding Difference ; 
no Hurt , no Evil ; 
Because no Ignorance , 
no Sin , no Devil . 


What Joy must there needs be , 
Where all God's Glory see ; 
Feeling Gods Vital Love , 
Which still is Burning : 
And Flaming Godward move , 
Full Love returning . 


SELF makes Contention here , 
Love makes all Common there , 
there 's no Propriety , 
Mine is my Brothers . 
Perfect Community 
Makes One's Another's . 


Go out then lingering Soul ; 
From this Vile Serpent's Hole ; 
Where bred as in a Sink , 
They Hiss and Sting us . 
Will not Christ , dost thou think , 
To better bring us . 


Think not that Heaven wants store , 
Think not that Hell hath more , 
If all on Earth were lost : 
Earth's scarce one Tittle , 
To the vast Heavens : at most , 
Exceeding little . 


All those Blessed Myriads be , 
Lovers of Christ and Thee ; 
Angels thy presence wish , 
Christ will receive thee : 
then let not Brutish Flesh , 
Fright and Deceive thee . 


Gladly my Soul go forth ; 
Is Heaven of no more worth , 
then this Cursed Desert is , 
This World of Trouble : 
Prefer Eternal Bliss , 
Before this Bubble . 


Wish not still for Delay : 
Why wouldst thou longer stay 
From Christ , from Home so far , 
In Self-denial : 
And live in longer War , 
A Life of Trial . 


Souls Live when Flesh lies Dead : 
Thy Sin is Pardoned : 
When Christ doth Death disarm , 
Why art thou fearful ; 
And Souls that fear no harm , 
Should pass forth Cheerful . 


Cherish not causeless Doubt , 
That God will shut the out : 
What if he thee assured 
From Heaven by Letter : 
His Son , his Spirit , and Word . 
Have done it better . 


Hath Mercy made Life sweet : 
And is it kind and meet , 
Thus to draw back from God , 
Who doth Protect thee ? 
Look then for his sharp Rod , 
Next to Correct thee ? 


What if Foes should make haste , 
thou wilt the sooner taste 
What all Blessed Souls enjoy , 
With Christ for ever ? 
Where those that thee Annoyed , 
Shall hurt thee never . 


Fear not the World of Light , 
Though out of Mortal's sight : 
As if it doubtful were , 
For want of seeing : 
Gross Bodies Vilest are , 
And the least Being . 


Vain sinful World farewel ; 
I go where Angels dwell ; 
Where Life , Light , Love and Joy , 
Are the Saint's Glory : 
Gods Praises there employ 
The Consistory . 


Christ who knows all his Sheep , 
Will all in safety keep . 
He will not lose his Blood , 
Nor Intercession : 
Nor we the Purchased Good 
Of his dear Passion . 


I know my God is Just , 
To him I wholly Trust ; 
All that I have , and am , 
All that I hope for : 
all 's sure and seen to him , 
Which I here grope for . 


Lord Jesus take my Spirit : 
I trust thy Love and Merit : 
Take home this wandering Sheep , 
For thou hast sought it : 
This Soul in safety keep , 
For thou hast bought it . 


Amen , 

Decemb. 19 1682.  The Valediction . Vain World , what is in thee ? 
What do poor mortals see 
Which should esteemed be , 
Worthy their Pleasure ? 
Is it the Mother's Womb , 
Or Sorrows which soon come , 
Or a dark Grave and Tomb 
Which is their Treasure ? 
How dost thou Man deceive 
By thy vain Glory , 
Why do they still Believe 
Thy false History . 


Is 't children's Book and Rod , 
The Lab'rer's heavy Load , 
Poverty undertrod 
The World desireth ? 
Is it distracting Cares , 
Or Heart-tormenting Fears , 
Or pineing Grief and Tears , 
Which Man requireth ? 
Or is it it Youthful Rage , 
Or Childish Toying ? 
Or is Decrepit Age 
Worth Man's Enjoying ? 


Is it deceitful Wealth , 
Got by Care , Fraud , or Stealth , 
Or short uncertain Health , 
Which thus befool Men ? 
Or do the Serpent's Lies , 
By the World's Flatteries , 
And tempting Vanities , 
Still overrule them ? 
Or do they in a Dream , 
Sleep out their Season ? 
Or born down by Lust's Stream , 
Which Conquers Reason . 


The silly Lambs to day , 
Pleasantly Skip and Play , 
Whom Butchers mean to Slay , 
Perhaps to Morrow : 
In a more Brutish sort , 
Do careless Sinners Sport , 
Or in dead Sleep still Snort , 
As near to Sorrow . 
Till Life , not well begun , 
be sadly Ended , 
And the Web they have Spun , 
Can ne'er be Mended . 


What is the time that 's gone , 
And what is that to come ? 
Is it not now as none , 
The present stays not . 
Time posteth , O how fast 
Unwelcome Death makes haste , 
None can call back what 's past , 
Judgement delays not : 
Though God bring in the Light , 
Sinners awake not , 
Because Hells out of Sight , 
They Sin forsake not . 


Man walks in a vain show , 
They know , yet will not know ; 
Sat still when they should go , 
But run for shadows : 
While they might taste and know 
The living Streams that flow , 
And crop the Flowers that grow 
In Christ's sweet Meadows . 
Life's better slept away , 
Than as they use it . 
In Sin and Drunken Play , 
Vain Men abuse it . 


Malignant World adieu , 
Where no foul Vice is new , 
Only to Satan true , 
God still offended : 
Though taught and warned by God , 
And his Chastising Rod , 
Keeps still the way that 's broad , 
Never amended . 
Baptismal Vows some make , 
But ne'er perform them ; 
If Angels from Heaven spoke , 
'T would not reform them . 


They dig for Hell beneath , 
They Labour hard for Death , 
Run themselves out of Breath 
To overtake it . 
Hell is not had for naught , 
Damnation's dearly bought , 
And with great Labour sought , 
they 'll not forsake it . 
Their Souls are Satan's fee , 
he 'll not abate it . 
Grace is refused that 's free , 
Mad Sinners hate it . 


Vile Man is so perverse , 
it 's too rough work for Verse , 
His badness to Rehearse , 
And show his Folly. 
he 'll die at any rates , 
He God and Conscience hate's , 
Yet Sin he Consecrates , 
And calls it Holy : 
The Grace he 'll not endure , 
Which would renew him : 
Constant to all , and sure , 
Which will undo him . 


His Head comes first at Birth , 
And takes Root in the Earth , 
As Nature shooteth forth , 
His Feet grow highest : 
To kick at all above , 
And spurn at saving Love ; 
His God is in his Grove , 
Because its nighest . 
He love's this World of strife , 
Hate's what would mend it : 
Love's Death that 's called Life , 
Fears what would end it . 


All that is Good he 'd cursh , 
Blindly on Sin doth rush , 
A Pricking thorny Bush , 
Such Christ was Crowned with . 
Their Worship's like to this , 
The Reed , the Judas Kiss , 
Such the Religion is , 
That these abound with . 
They mock Christ with the Knee 
When ever they bow it ; 
As if God did not see 
The Heart , and know it . 


Of Good they choose the least , 
Despise that which is best , 
The joyful Heavenly feast , 
Which Christ would give them : 
Heaven hath scarce one cold wish , 
They live unto the Flesh , 
Like Swine they feed on Wash , 
Satan doth drive them . 
Like weeds they grow in Mire , 
Which Vices nourish ; 
Where warmed by Satan's Fire , 
All Sins do Flourish . 


Is this the World Men choose , 
For which they Heaven refuse , 
And Christ and Grace abuse , 
And not receive it . 
Shall I not guilty be 
Of this in some Degree , 
If hence God would me free , 
And I 'd not leave it . 
My Soul from Sodom fly , 
lest wrath there find thee : 
Thy Refuge-rest is nigh , 
Look not behind thee . 


there 's none of this ado , 
None of the Hellish Crew , 
God's promise is most true , 
Boldly believe it . 
My Friends are gone before , 
And I am near the Shoor , 
My Soul stands at the Door , 
OH Lord receive it . 
It trusts Christ and his Merits , 
The Dead he raises : 
Join it with Blessed Spirits , 
Who sing thy Praises . 


jan. 14. 1682  / 3.  FINIS . 

The Titles . I Grace . pag. 1 II Wisdom . 19 III Madness . 25 IU. Hypocrisy . 34 v. Man  48 VI. The Exit . 62 VII . The Valediction . 70 Books lately Printed for B. Simmons at the Three Golden Cocks at the West-end of St. Paul's , 1683.  MR. Rich. Baxter's Dying Thoughts , preparatory to his approaching Change. Octavo . Of the Immortality of Man's Soul , and the Nature of it , and other Spirits . Two Discourses . Octavo . By Mr. Baxter . Truth and Peace promoted : Or , a Guide for young Christians in the way of Salvation , past the danger of Errors and Difficulties of Curiosity . In a familiar Dialogue between a Minister of Christ , and a Devout private Christian. Twelve . By Adam Martindalt . 