Making light of Christ and salvation too oft the issue of gospel invitations manifested in a sermon preached at Lawrence-dury, in London, by Rich. Baxter. / Baxter, Richard, 1615-1691. (Printed for Nevil Simmons and sold by most booksellers,London :1691.)

Making Light of CHRIST AND SALVATION Too oft the Issue of Gospel-invitations . Manifested in a SERMON Preached at Lawrence-jury , in London . By RICH. BAXTER . 

Heb. 2. 34.  How shall we escape , if we neglect so great Salvation ? The Second Edition . 

LONDON : Printed for Nevil Simmons , and sold by most Booksellers , 1691.  

To the READER . READER , 

Being called on in London to Preach , when I had no time to study , I was fain to preach some Sermons that I had preached in the Country a little before . This was one , which I preached at S. Laurence , in the Church where my Reverend and faithful Brother in Christ , Mr. Richard Vines is Pastor : when I came home , I was followed by such importunities by Letters to Print the Sermon , that I have yielded thereunto ; though I know not fully the ground of their desires . Seeing it must abroad , will the Lord but bless it to the cure of thy contempt of Christ and Grace , how comfortable may the occasion prove to thee and me ! It is the slighting of Christ and Salvation that undoes the World. O happy man , if thou scape but this sin ! thousands do split their Souls on this Rock which they should build them on ! Look into the World , among rich and poor , high and low , young and old , and see whether it appear not by the whole scope of their Conversations , that they set more by something else than Christ ? and for all the proclamations of his Grace in the Gospel , and our common profesing ourselves to be his Disciples , and to believe the Glorious things that he hath promised us in another World , whether it yet appear not by the deceitfulness of our service , by our heartless endeavours to obtain his Kingdom , and by our busy and delightful following of the World , that the most who are called Christians do yet in their hearts make light of Christ ? And if so , what wonder if they perish by their contempt ? wilt thou but soberly peruse this short Discourse , and consider well as thou readest , of its truth and weight , till thy heart be sensible what a sin it is to make light of Christ and thy own Salvation , and till the Lord that bought thee be advanced in the estimation and affections of thy Soul , thou shalt hereby rejoice , and fulfil the desires of 

Thy Servant in the Faith , RICH. BAXTER . 

Matt. 22. 5.  But they made light of it . THE blessed Son of God , that thought it not enough to die for the World , but would himself also be the Preacher of Grace and Salvation , doth comprise in this Parable the sum of his Gospel . By the King that is here said to make the Marriage , is meant , God the Father , that sent his Son into the World to cleanse them from their sins , and espouse them to himself . By his Son , for whom the Marriage is made , is meant , The Lord Jesus Christ , the eternal Son of God , who took to his Godhead the nature of Man , that he might be capable of being their Redeemer when they had lost themselves in sin . By the Marriage , is meant , The Conjunction of Christ to the soul of Sinners , when he giveth up himself to them to be their Saviour , and they give up themselves to him as his Redeemed ones , to be saved and ruled by him ; The perfection of which Marriage will be at the Day of Judgement , when the Conjunction between the whole Church and Christ shall be solemnised . The word here translated Marriage , rather signifieth the Marriage-feast ; and the meaning is , that the World is invited by the Gospel , to come in and partake of Christ and Salvation , which comprehendeth both Pardon , Justification , and Right to Salvation , and all other Privileges of the Members of Christ . The Invitation , is God's offer of Christ and Salvation in the Gospel ; The Servants that invite them , are the Preachers of the Gospel who are sent forth by God to that end ; The preparation for the feast there mentioned , is , The sacrifice of Jesus Christ , and the enacting of a Law of Grace , and opening a way for revolting Sinners to return to God. There is mention of sending second Messenger , because God useth not to take the first denial , but to exercise his patience till Sinners are obstinate . The first persons invited are the Jews ; upon their obstinate Refusal they are sentenced to punishment ; and the Gentiles are invited , and not only invited , but by powerful Preaching , and Miracles , and effectual Grace compelled , that is , infallibly prevailed with to come in . The number of them is so great , that the house is filled with the Guests ; Many come sincerely , not only looking at the pleasure of the Feast , that is , at the Pardon of sin , and Deliverance from the Wrath of God , but also at the honour of the Marriage , that is , of the Redeemer , and their profession by giving up themselves to a holy Conversation ; but some come in only for the Feast , that is , Justification by Christ , having not the wedding Garment of sound Resolution for Obedience in their Life , and looking only at themselves in Believing , and not to the glory of their Redeemer ; and these are sentenced to everlasting Misery , and speed as ill as those that came not in at all ; seeing a Faith that will not work , is but like that of the Devil ; and they that look to be pardoned and saved by it , are mistaken , as James showeth , 2. 24.  

The words of my Text contain a Narration of the ill-entertainment that the Gospel findeth with many to whom it is sent , even after a first and second invitation . They made light of it , and are taken up with other things . Though it be the Jews that were first guilty , they have too many followers among us Gentiles to this day . 

Doct For all the wonderful love and mercy that God hath manifested in giving his Son to be the Redeemer of the World , and which the Son hath manifested in Redeeming them by his Blood ; for all his full preparation by being a sufficient sacrifice for the sins of all ; for all his Personal Excellencies , and that full and glorious Salvation that he hath procured , and for all his free offers of these , and frequent and earnest Invitations of Sinners ; yet many do make light of all this , and prefer their worldly enjoyments before it . The ordinary entertainment of all is by contempt . 

Not that all do so , or that all continue to do so who were once guilty of it : for God hath his chosen , whom he will compel to come in . But till the Spirit of Grace overpower the dead and obstinate hearts of Men , they hear the Gospel as a common story , and the great matters contained in it go not to the heart . 

The Method in which I shall handle this Doctrine , is this : 

1.  I shall show you what it is that Men make light of . 2.  What this sin of making light of it is . 3.  The cause of the sin . 4.  The use of the Doctrine . 1.  The thing that carnal hearers make light of , is , 1.  The Doctrine of the Gospel itself , which they hear regardlessly . 

2.  The benefits offered them therein : which are , 1.  Christ himself . 2.  The benefits which he giveth . 

Concerning Christ himself , the Gospel 1.  Declareth his Person and Nature , and the great things that he hath done and suffered for Man : his Redeeming him from the wrath of God by his Blood , and procuring a grant of Salvation with himself . Furthermore , The same Gospel maketh an offer of Christ to sinners , that if they will accept him on his easy and reasonable terms , he will be their Saviour , the Physician of their Souls , their Husband and their Head.  

2.  The benefits that he offereth them , are these , 1.  That with these blessed Relations to him , himself and interest in him , they shall have the pardon of all their sins past , and be saved from God's Wrath , and be set in a sure way of obtaining a Pardon for all the sins that they shall commit hereafter , so they do but obey sincerely , and turn not again to the Rebellion of their Unregeneracy . 2.  They shall have his Spirit to become their Guide and Sanctifier , and to dwell in their Souls , and help them against their Enemies , and conform them more and more to his Image , and heal their Diseases , and bring them back to God. 3.  They shall have right to everlasting Glory when this Life is ended , and shall be raised up thereto at the last ; besides many excellent privileges in the way , in Means , Preservation and Provision , and the fore taste of what they shall enjoy hereafter : All these benefits the Gospel offereth to them that will have Christ on his reasonable terms . The sum of all is in 1 John 5. 11 , 12.  This is the Record , that God hath given us eternal Life , and this Life is in his Son : He that hath the Son , hath Life , and he that hath not the Son , hath not Life . 

II What this Sin of making light of the Gospel is ? 1.  To make light of the Gospel , is , to take no great heed to what is spoken , as if it were not a certain Truth , or else were a matter that little concerned them , or as if God had not written these things for them . 2.  When the Gospel doth not affect Men , or go to their hearts ; but though they seem to attend to what is said , yet men are not awakened by it from their security , nor doth it work in any measure such holy Passion in their Souls , as matters of such everlasting Consequence should do ; this is making light of the Gospel of Salvation . When we tell men what Christ hath done and suffered for their Souls , and it scarce moveth them : We tell them of keen and cutting Truths , but nothing will pierce them : We can make them hear , but we cannot make them feel : Our words take up in the porch of their Ears and Fancies , but will not enter into the inward parts ; as if we spoke to men that had no hearts or feeling ; this is a making light of Christ and Salvation , Acts 28. 26 , 27. hearing ye shall hear , and shall not understand , seeing ye shall see , and shall not perceive . For the Heart of this People is waxen gross , and their Ears are dull of hearing , their Eyes are closed , etc.  

3.  When Men have no high Estimation of Christ and Salvation , but whatsoever they may say with their tongues , or dreamingly and speculatively believe , yet in their serious and practical thoughts , they have a higher estimation of the matters of this World , than they have of Christ , and the Salvation that he hath purchased ; this is a making light of him . When Men accounted the Doctrine of Christ to be but a matter of words and names , as Gallio , Acts 18. 4. or as Festus , Acts 25. 19  a superstitious matter about one Jesus who was dead , and Paul saith is alive . Or ask the Preachers of the Gospel , as the Athenians , Acts 17. 18.  What will this babbler say ? This is contempt of Christ . 

4.  When Men are informed of the truths of the Gospel , and on what Terms Christ and his Benefits may be had , and how it is the will of God that they should Believe and Accept the offer ; and that he commands them to do it upon pain of damnation ; and yet men will not consent , unless they could have Christ on terms of their own : They will not part with their worldly contents , nor lay down their Pleasures and Profits , and Honour at his Feet , as being content to take so much of them only as he will give them back , and as is consistent with his Will and Interest , but think its a hard saying , that they must forsake all in Resolution for Christ ; this is a making light of him and their Salvation . When men might have part in him and all his Benefits , if they would , and they will not , unless they may keep the World too ; and are resolved to please their flesh , whatever comes of it ; this is a high contempt of Christ and everlasting life , Mat. 13. 21 , 22.  Luke 18. 23. you may find examples of such as I here describe . 

5.  When men will promise fair , and profess their willingness to have Christ on his terms , and to forsake all for him ; but yet do stick to the World and their sinful Courses ; and when it comes to practice , will not be removed by all that Christ hath done and said : this is making light of Christ and Salvation , Jer. 42. 5. compared with 43. 2.  

III The causes of this sin are the next thing to be enquired after . It may seem a wonder that ever Men that have the use of their reason , should be so sottish as to make light of matters of such consequence . But the cause is ; 

1.  Some Men understand not the very sense of the Words of the Gospel , when they hear it , and how can they be taken with that which they understand not ? Though we speak to them in plain English , and study to speak it as plainly as we can ; yet People have so estranged themselves from God , and the matters of their own happiness , that they know not what we say , as if we spoke in another language , and as if they were under that Judgement , Isa . 28. 11. with stammering Lips , and with another Tongue will he speak to his People . 

2.  Some that do understand the Words that we speak , yet because they are carnal , understand not the matter ; for the natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God , neither can he know them , because they are spiritually discerned , 1 Cor. 2. 14.  They are earthly , and these things are heavenly , John 3. 12.  The things of the Spirit are not well known by bare hearsay , but by a spiritual taste , which none have but those that are taught by the Holy Ghost , 1 Cor. 2. 12 , that we may know the things that are given us of God.  

3.  A carnal mind apprehendeth not a suitableness in these spiritual and heavenly things to his mind , and therefore he sets light by them , and hath no mind of them . When you tell him of everlasting glory , he heareth you as if you were persuading him to go play with the Sun : they are matters of another World , and out of his element ; and therefore he hath no more delight in them than a Fish would have to be in the fairest Meadow , or than a Swine hath in a Jewel , or a Dog in a piece of Gold : They may be good to others , but he cannot apprehend them as suitable to him , because he hath a nature that is otherwise inclined : he savoureth not the things of the Spirit , Rome 8. 5.  

4.  The main cause of the slighting of Christ and Salvation , is , a secret root of unbelief in men's hearts . Whatsoever they may pretend , they do not sound and thoroughly believe the Word of God : They are taught in general to say , The Gospel is true ; but they never saw the Evidence of its truth so far , as thoroughly to persuade them of it ; nor have they got their Souls settled on the Infallibility of God's Testimony , nor considered of the Truth of the particular Doctrines revealed in the Scripture , so far as sound to believe them . O did you all but sound believe the words of this Gospel , of the evil of sin , of the need of Christ , and what he hath done for you , and what you must be and do , if ever you will be saved by him ; and what will become of you for ever , if you do it not ; I dare say , it would cure the contempt of Christ , and you would not make so light of the matters of your Salvation . But men do not believe , while they say they do , and would face us down that they do , and verily think that they do themselves . There is a root of bitterness , and an evil Heart of unbelief , that makes them depart from the living God , Heb. 2. 12. and 4. 1 , 2 , 6.  Tell any Man in this Congregation , that he shall have a gift of 10000 l. if he will but go to London for it ; if he believe you , he will go ; but if he believe not , he will not ; and if he will not go , you may be sure he believeth not , supposing that he is able . I know a slight belief may stand with a wicked life . Such as men have of the Truth of a Prognostication , it may be true , and it may be false ; but a true and sound belief is not consistent with so great neglect of the things that are believed . 

5.  Christ and Salvation are made light of by the World , because of their desperate hardness of Heart . The Heart is hard naturally , and by custom in sinning made more hard ; especially by long abuse of Mercy , and neglect of the means of Grace , and resisting the Spirit of God. Hence it is that men are turned into such Stones : and till God cure them of the stone of the Heart , no wonder if they feel not what they know , or regard not what we say , but make light of all ; 't is hard preaching a stone into tears , or making a rock to tremble . You may stand over a dead body long enough , and say to it , O thou Carcase , when thou hast lain roting and mouldering to dust , till the Resurrection , God will then call thee to accounted for thy sin , and cast thee into everlasting fire , before you can make it feel what you say , or fear the misery that is never so truly threatened ; when men's Hearts are like the Highway that is trodden to hardness by long custom in sinning , or like the clay that is hardened to a stone , by the heat of those Mercies which should have melted them into Repentance ; when they have Consciences seared with a hot Iron , as the Apostle speaks , 2 Tim. 4. 2. no wonder then if they be past feeling , and working all uncleanness with greediness , do make light of Christ and Everlasting Glory . O that this were not the case of too many of our Hearers ! Had we but living Souls to speak to , they would hear and feel , and not make light of what we say . I know they are naturally alive , but they are spiritually dead , as Scripture witnesseth , Eph. 2. 3.  O if there were but one spark of the life of Grace in them , the Doctrine of Salvation by Jesus Christ , would appear to them to be the weightiest business in the World. O how confident should I be , methinks , to prevail with men , and to take them off this World , and bring them to mind the matters of another World , if I spoke but to Men that had Life , and Sense , and Reason ! But when we speak to Blocks and dead Men , how should we be regarded ? O how sad a case are these Souls in , that are fallen under this fearful judgement of spiritual madness and deadness ! To have a blind Mind , and a hard Heart , to be sottish and senseless , Mar. 4. 12.  John 12. 40. lest they should be converted , and their sin should be forgiven them . 

6.  Christ and Salvation are made light of by the World , because they are wholly enslaved to their sense , and taken up with lower things ; the matters of another World are out of sight , and so far from their senses , that they cannot regard them ; but present things are nearer them , in their eyes , and in their hands : There must be a living faith to prevail over sense , before Men can be so taken with things that are not seen , though they have the Word of God for their security , as to neglect and let go things that are still before their eyes . Sense works with great advantage ; and therefore doth much in resisting Faith where it is . no wonder then if it carry all before it , where there is no true and lively faith to resist , and to lead the Soul to higher things : this cause of making light of Christ and Salvation , is expressed here in my Text : One went to his Farm , and another to his Merohandize : Men have Houses and Lands to look after ; they have Wife and Children to mind , they have their Body and outward Estate to regard , therefore they forget that they have a God , a Redeemer , a Soul to mind ; These matters of the World are still with them . They see these , but they see not God , nor Christ , nor their Souls , nor everlasting Glory . These things are near at hand , and therefore work naturally , and so more forcibly ; but the other are thought on as a great way off , and therefore too distant to work on their affections , or to be at the present so much regarded by them . Their Body hath life and sense , and therefore if they want meats , or drink , or clotheses , will feel their want , and tell them of it , and give them no rest till their wants be supplied ; and therefore they cannot make light of their bodily necessities ; but their Souls in spiritual respects are dead , and therefore feel not their wants , but will let them alone in their greatest necessities ; and be as quiet when they are starved and languishing to Destruction , as if all were well , and nothing ailed them . And hereupon poor people are wholly taken up in providing for the Body , as if they had nothing else to mind . They have their Trades and Callings to follow , and so much to do from morning to night , that they can find no time for matters of Salvation : Christ would teach them , but they have no leisure to hear him : The Bible is before them , but they cannot have while to read it : A Minister is in the Town with them , but they cannot have while to go to inquire of him what they shall do to be saved : And when they do hear , their Hearts are so full of the World , and carried away with these lower matters , that they cannot mind the things which they hear . They are so full of the thoughts and desires , and cares of this World , that there is no room to pour into them the water of Life : The cares of the World do choke the Word , and make it become unfruitful , Mat. 13. 22.  Men cannot serve two Masters , God and Mammon , but they will lean to the one , and despise the other , Mat. 6. 24.  He that loveth the World , the love of the Father is not in him , 1 John 2. 15 , 16.  Men cannot choose but set light by Christ and Salvation , while they set so much by any thing on Earth ; It is that which is highly esteemed among Men , is abominable in the sight of God , Luke 16. 15.  O this is the ruin of many thousand Souls ! It would grieve the Heart of any honest Christian , to see how eagerly this vain World is followed every where , and how little Men set by Christ , and the World to come : to compare the care that Men have for the World , with the care of their Souls ; and the time that they lay out on the World , with that time they lay out for their Salvation : To see how the World fills their Mouths , their Hands , their Houses , their Hearts ; and Christ hath little more than a bare Title : To come into their company , and hear no discourse but of the World ; to come into their houses , and hear and see nothing but for the World , as if this World would last forever , or would purchase them another . When I ask sometime the Ministers of the Gospel how their labours succeed , they tell me , People continued still the same , and give up themselves wholly to the World , so that they mind not what Ministers say to them , nor will give any full entertainment to the Word , and all because of the deluding World : And , o that too many Ministers themselves did not make light of that Christ whom they preach , being drawn away with the love of this World ! In a word , Men of a worldly Disposition do judge of things according to worldly advantages ; therefore Christ is slighted , Isa . 53. 3.  He is despised and rejected of men , they hide their faces from him , and esteem him not , as seeing no beauty or comeliness in him , that they should desire him . 

7.  Christ and Salvation are made light of , because men do not soberly consider of the truth and weight of these necessary things ; They suffer not their minds so long to dwell upon them , till they procure a due esteem , and deeply affect their Heart ; did they believe them , and not consider of them , how should they work ? O when men have reason given them to think and consider of the things that most concern them , and yet they will not use it , this causeth their contempt . 

8.  Christ and Salvation are made light of , because Men were never sensible of their sin and misery , and extreme necessity of Christ and his Salvation : their eyes were never opened to see themselves as they are ; nor their Hearts sound humbled in the sense of their condition : If this were done , they would soon be brought to value a Saviour : A truly broken Heart can no more make light of Christ and Salvation , than a hungry Man of his food , or a sick man of the means that would give him ease : but till then , our Words cannot have access to their Hearts : while sin and misery is made light of , Christ and Salvation will be made light of ; but when these are perceived an intolerable burden , than nothing will serve the turn but Christ . Till men be truly humbled , they can venture Christ and Salvation for a lust , for a little worldly gain , even for lesle than nothing ; but when God hath illuminated them , and broken their Hearts , than they would give a World for a Christ ; then they must have Christ , or they die ; all things than are loss and dung to them , in regard of the excellent knowledge of Christ , Phil. 3. 8.  When they are once pricked in their hearts for sin and misery , than they cry out , Men and brethren , what shall we do ? Acts 2. 37.  When they are awakened by God's Judgements , as the poor Jailor , Acts 16. 29. then they cry out , Sirs , what shall I do to be saved ? This is the reason why God will bring men so low by humiliation , before he bring them to salvation . 

9  Men take occasion to make light of Christ , by the commonness of the Gospel ; because they do hear of it every day , the frequency is an occasion to dull their affections ; I say an occasion ; for it is no just cause . Were it a rarity , it might take more with them ; but now , if they hear a Minister preach nothing but these saving Truths , they say , We have these every day : They make not light of their bread or drink , their health or life , because they possess them every day ; they make not light of the Sun , because it shines every day ; at least they should not , for the mercy is the greater ; but Christ and Salvation are made light of , because they hear of them often ; This is , say they , a good plain dry Sermon : Pearls are trod in the dirt where they are common ; They loathe this dry Manna , prov. 27. 7.  The full Soul loathes the hony-comb ; but to the hungry every bitter thing is sweet . 

10.  Christ and Salvation are made light of because of this disjunctive Presumption , either that he is sure enough theirs already , and God that is so merciful , and Christ that hath suffered so much for them , is surely resolved to save them , or else it may easily be obtained at any time , if it be not yet so . A conceited facility to have a part in Christ and Salvation at any time , doth occasion men to make light of them . It is true , that Grace is free , and the Offer is universal , according to the extent of the preaching of the Gospel ; and it is true that men may have Christ when they will ; that is , when they are willing to have him on his terms ; but he that hath promised thee Christ , if thou be willing , hath not promised to make thee willing : and if thou art not willing now , how canst thou think thou shalt be willing hereafter ? If thou canst make thine own Heart willing , why is it not done now ? Can you do it better when sin hath more hardened it , and God may have given thee over to thyself ? O sinners ! you might do much , though you are not able of yourselves to come in , if you would now subject yourselves to the working of the Spirit , and set in while the gales of grace continue ; but did you know what a hard and impossible thing it is to be so much as willing to have Christ and Grace , when the Heart is given over to itself , and the Spirit hath withdrawn its former invitations , you would not be so confident of your own strength to believe and repent : nor would you make light of Christ upon such foolish confidence . If indeed it be so easy a matter as you imagine for a sinner to believe and repent at any time ; how comes it to pass that it is done by so few , but most of the World do perish in their impenitency , when they have all the helps and means that we can afford them ? It is true , the thing is very reasonable and easy in itself to a pure nature ; but while Man is blind and dead , these things are in a sort impossible to him , which are never so easy to others . It is the easiest and sweetest life in the World to a gracious soul to live in the love of God , and the delightful thoughts of the life to come , where all their hope and happiness lieth : But to a worldly carnal Heart it is as easy to remove a Mountain , as to bring them to this . However , these Men are their own condemners ; for if they think it so easy a matter to repent and believe , and so have Christ and right to Salvation , then have they no excuse for neglecting this which they thought so easy . OH wretched impenitent Soul ! what mean you to say , when God shall ask you , Why did you not Repent and Love your Redeemer above the World , when you thought it so easy that you could do it at any time ? 

iv. Use 1.  We come now to the Application : and hence you may be informed of the blindness and folly of all carnal men : how contemptible are their judgements that think Christ and Salvation contemptible ? and how little reason there is why any should be moved by them , or discouraged by any of their scorns or contradictions 

How shall we sooner know a man to be a fool , than if he know no difference between Dung and Gold ! Is there such a thing as madness in the World , if that Man be not mad , that sets light by Christ and his own Salvation , while he daily toils for the dung of the earth ? And yet what pity is it to see , that a company of poor ignorant Souls will be ashamed of godliness , if such Men as these do but deride them ! Or will think hardly of a holy life , if such as these do speak against it ! Hearers , if you see any set light by Christ and Salvation , do you set light by that Man's Wit , and by his Words , and hear the reproaches of a holy life , as you would hear the words of a mad Man ; not with regard , but with a Compassion of his misery . 

Use 2.  What wonder if we and our preaching be despised , and the best Ministers complain of ill success , when the Ministry of the Apostles themselves did succeed i no better ? What wonder if for all that we can say or do , our hearers still set light by Christ and their own Salvation ; when the Apostles hearers did the same ? They that did second their Doctrine by Miracles : If any Men could have shaken and torn in pieces the Hearts of Sinners they could have done it : If any could have laid them at their feet , and made them all cry out as some , What shall we do , it would have been they . You may see then that it is not merely for want of good Preachers that men make light of Christ and Salvation : the first News of such a thing as the Pardon of Sin , and the Hopes of Glory , and the Danger of everlasting Misery , would turn the hearts of men within them , if they were as tractable in spiritual matters as in temporal : But alas , it is far otherwise . It must not seem any strange thing , nor must it too much discourage the Preachers of the Gospel , if when they have said all that they can device to say to win the hearts of men to Christ , the most do still slight him , and while they bow the Knee to him , and honour him with their Lips , do yet set so light by him in their hearts , as to prefer every fleshly pleasure or commodity before him . It will be thus with many : let us be glad that it is not thus with All.  

Use 3  But for closer application . Seeing this is the great condemning Sin , before we inquire after it into the hearts of our hearers , it beseems us to begin at home , and see that we who are Preachers of the Gospel , be not guilty of it ourselves . The Lord forbid that they that have undertaken the sacred Office of revealing the Excellencies of Christ to the World , should make light of him themselves , and slight that Salvation which they do daily preach . The Lord knows we are all of us so low in our Estimation of Christ , and do this great Work so negligently , that we have cause to be ashamed of our best Sermons ; but should this Sin prevail in us , we were the most miserable of all men . brethren , I love not censoriousness ; yet dare not befriend so vile a Sin in myself or others under pretence of avoiding it ; especially when there is so great necessity that it should be healed first in them that make it their work to heal it in others . OH that there were no cause to complain that Christ and Salvation are made light of by the Preachers of it . But , 1.  Do not the negligent studies of some speak it out ? 2.  Doth not their dead and drowsy Preaching declare it ? do not they make light of the Doctrine they preach , that do it as if they were half asleep , and feel not what they speak themselves ? 

3.  Doth not the carelessness of some men's private endeavours discover it ? what do they for Souls ? how slightly do they reprove Sin ? how little do they when they are out of the Pulpit for the saving of men's Souls ? 

4.  Doth not the continued neglect of those things wherein the Interest of Christ consisteth , discover it ? 1.  The Church's Purity and Reformation . 2.  it 's Unity . 

5.  Doth not the covetous and worldly lives of too many discover it , losing advantages for men's souls , for a little gain to themselves ? And most of this is because men are Preachers before they are Christians , and tell men of that which they never felt themselves . Of all men on earth , there are few that are in so bad a condition as such Ministers : and if indeed they do believe that Scripture which they preach , methinks it should be terrible to them in their studying and preaching it . 

Use 4.  Beloved hearers ; the Office that God hath called us to , is , by declaring the glory of his grace , to help under Christ , to the saving of men's Souls . I hope you think not that I come hither to day on any other errand . The Lord knows I had not set a foot out of doors but in hope to succeed in this Work for your Souls . I have considered and often considered , what is the mater that so many thousands should perish when God hath done so much for their Salvation ; and I find this that is mentioned in my Text is the cause . It is one of the wonders of the World , that when God hath so loved the World as to send his Son , and Christ hath made a satisfaction by his death sufficient for them all , and offereth the benefits of it so freely to them , even without money or price , that yet the most of the World should perish ; yea the most of those that are thus called by his Word ! Why here is the reason , when Christ hath done all this , men make light of it . God hath showed that he is not unwilling ; and Christ hath showed that he is not unwilling that men should be restored to God's favour and be saved ; but men are actually unwilling themselves . God takes not pleasure in the death of sinners , but rather that they return and live , Ezek. 33. 11.  But men take such pleasure in sin , that they will die before they will return . The Lord Jesus was content to be their Physician , and hath provided them a sufficient plaster of his own blood : but if men make light of it , and will not apply it , what wonder if they perish after all ? This Scripture giveth us the reason of their perdition . This sad experience tells us the most of the World is guilty of . It is a most lamentable thing to see how most men do spend their care , their time , their pains for known vanities ; while God and Glory are cast aside : That he who is all should seem to them as nothing ; and that which is nothing should seem to them as good as all ; that God should set mankind in such a race where heaven or hell is their certain end , and that they should set down , and loiter , or run after the childish Toys of the World , and so much forget the Prize that they should run for . Were it but possible for one of us to see the whole of this business , as the all seeing God doth ; to see at one view both heaven and hell which men are so near , and see what most men in the World are minding , and what they are doing every day , it would be the saddest sight that could be imagined . O how should we marvel at their madness , and lament their self-delusion ! O poor distracted World ! what is it that you run after ? and what is it that you neglect ? If God had never told them what they were sent into the World to do , or whether they were going , or what was before them in another World , than they had been excusable ; but he hath told them over and over , till they were weary of it . Had he left it doubtful , there had been some excuse ; but it is his sealed word , and they profess to believe it , and would take it ill of us if we should question whether they do believe it or not . 

Beloved , I come not to accuse any of you particularly of this crime : but seeing it is the commonest cause of men's Destruction , I suppose you will judge it the fittest matter for our enquiry , and deserving our greatest care for the cure . To which end I shall 1.  Endeavour the Conviction of the guilty . 2.  Shall give them such considerations as may tend to humble and reform them . 3.  I shall conclude with such direction as may help them that are willing to escape the destroying Power of Sin. And for the first ▪ consider ▪ 

1.  It is the case of most sinners to think themselves freest from those sins that they are most enslaved to ; and one reason why we cannot reform them , is , because we cannot convince them of their guilt . It is the nature of sin so far to blind and befool the sinner , that he knoweth not what he doth , but thinketh he is free from it when it reigneth in him , on when he is committing it : It bringeth men to be so much unacquainted with themselves , that they know not what they think , or what they mean and intend , nor what they love or hate , much lesle what they are habituated and disposed to . They are alive to sin , and dead to all the Reason , Consideration and Resolution that should recover them , as if it were only by their sinning that we must know they are alive . May I hope that you that hear me to day , are but willing to know the Truth of your case , and then I shall be encouraged to proceed to an enquiry . God will judge impartially ; why should not we do so ? Let me therefore by these following Questions try whether none of you are slighters of Christ and your own Salvation . And follow me , I beseech you , by putting them close to your own hearts , and faithfully answering them , 

1.  Things that men highly value will be remembered , they will be matter of their freest and sweetest thoughts : this is a known case . 

Do not those than make light of Christ and Salvation , that think of them so seldom and coldly in comparison of other things ? follow thy own heart man , and observe what it daily runneth out after ; and then judge whether it make not light of Christ . 

We cannot persuade men to one hours sober consideration what they should do for an interest in Christ , or in thankfulness for his love , and yet they will not believe that they make light of him . 

2.  Things that we highly value will be matter of our Discourse : The judgement and heart will command the tongue . Freely and delightfully will our speech run after them . This also is a known case . 

Do not those than make light of Christ and Salvation , that eat the mention of his name , unless it be in a vain or sinful use ? Those that love not the company where Christ and Salvation is much talked of ; but think it troublesome precise Discourse : That had rather hear some merry Jests , or idle Tales , or talk of their riches or Business in the World. When you may follow them from morning to night , and scarce have a savoury word of Christ ; but perhaps some slight and weary mention of him sometimes ; judge whether these make not light of Christ and Salvation . How seriously do they talk of the World ? Psal . 144. 8 , 11. and speak vanity ! but how heartlesly do they make mention of Christ and Salvation ! 

3.  The things that we highly value , we would secure the possession of , and therefore would take any convenient Course to have all doubts and fears about them well resolved . Do not those men than make light of Christ and Salvation , that have lived twenty or thirty Years in uncertainty whether they have any part in these or not , and yet never seek out for the right resolution of their doubts ? Are all that hear me this day certain they shall be saved ? O that they were ! O had you not made light of Salvation , you could not so easily bear such doubtings of it ; you could not rest till you had made it sure , or done your best to make it sure . Have you no body to inquire of that might help you in such a Work ? Why you have Ministers that are purposely appointed to that Office. Have you gone to them and told them the doubtfulness of your case , and asked their help in the judging of your condition ? Alas Ministers may sit in their Studies from one year to another , before ten persons among one Thousand , will come to them on such an errand ! Do not these make light of Christ and Salvation ? when the Gospel pierceth the heart indeed , they cry out , Men and brethren , what shall we do to be saved ! Acts 16. 30. and 9 6. trembling and astonished , Paul cries out , Lord , what wilt thou have me to do ? And so did the convinced Jews to Peter , Acts 2. 37.  But when hear we such Questions ? 

4.  The things that we value do deeply affect us , and some motions will be in the heart according to our Estimation of them . O Sirs , If men made not light of these things , what workings would there be in the hearts of all our hearers ? What strange affections would it raise in them to hear of the matters of the World to come ! How would their hearts melt before the Power of the Gospel ? what sorrow would be wrought in the discovery of their sin ? what astonishment at the consideration of their misery ? what unspeakable Joy at the glad Tidings of Salvation by the Blood of Christ ? what resolution would be raised in them upon the discovery of their duty ? O what hearers should we have if it were not for this sin ! whereas now , we are like to weary them , or preach them asleep with matters of unspeakable moment . We talk to them of Christ and Salvation till we make their heads ache ; Little would one think by their careless carriage , that they heard and regarded what we said , or thought we spoke at all to them . 

5.  Our estimation of things will be seen in the diligence of our endeavours . That which we highliest value , we shall think no pains too great to obtain . Do not those men than make light of Christ and Salvation , that think all too much that they do for them , that murmur at his Service , and think it too grievous for them to endure ? that ask of his Service as Judas of the Ointment ; What need this waist ? cannot men be saved without so much ado ? this is more ado than needs . For the World they will labour all the day , and all their lives ; but for Christ and Salvation they are afraid of doing too much . Let us preach to them as long as we will , we cannot bring them to relish or resolve upon a life of holiness . follow them to their houses , and you shall not hear them read a Chapter , nor call upon God with their Families once a day ; Nor will they allow him that one day in seven which he hath separated to his service . But pleasure , or worldly business , or idleness must have a part . And many of them are so far hardened , as to reproach them that will not be as mad as themselves . And is not Christ worth the seeking ? Is not everlasting Salvation worth more than all this ? Doth not that Soul make light of all these , that thinks his ease more worth than they ? Let but common sense judge . 

6.  That which we most highly value , we think we cannot buy too dear : Christ and Salvation are freely given , and yet the most of men go without them , because they cannot enjoy the world and them together . They are called but to part with that which would hinder them from Christ , and they will not do it . They are called but to give God his own , and to resign all to his Will , and let go the Profits and Pleasures of this World , when they must let go either Christ or them , and they will not . They think this too dear a bargain , and say they cannot spare these things : They must hold their credit with men ; they must look to their Estates : how shall they live else ? They must have their pleasure , whatsoever becomes of Christ and Salvation : As if they could live without Christ better than without these ? as if they were afraid of being losers by Christ , or could make a saving match by losing their Souls to gain the World. Christ hath told us over and over , that if we will not forsake all for him , we cannot be his Disciples , Mat. 10.  Far are these men from for saking all , and yet will needs think that they are his Disciples indeed . 

7.  That which men highly esteem , they would help their friends to as well as themselves . Do not those men make light of Christ and Salvation , that can take so much care to leave their Children Portions in the World , and do so little to help them to Heaven ? That provide outward necessaries so carefully for their Families , but do so little to the saving of their Souls ? Their neglected Children and Friends will witness , that either Christ or their children's Souls , or both , were made light of . 

8.  That which men highly esteem , they will so diligently seek after , that you may see it in the success , if it be a matter within their reach . You may see how many make light of Christ , by the little knowledge they have of him , and the little communion with him , and communication from him ; and the little , yea , none of his special graces in them . Alas ! how many Ministers can speak it to the sorrow of their Hearts , that many of their People know almost nothing of Christ , though they hear of him daily ! nor know they what they must do to be saved ; if we ask them an account of these things , they answer , as if they understood not what we say to them , and tell us they are no Scholars , and therefore think they are excusable for their ignorance . O if these men had not made light of Christ and their Salvation , but had bestowed but half so much pains to know and enjoy him , as they have done to understand the matters of their Trades and Callings in the World , they would not have been so ignorant as they are : They make light of these things , and therefore will not be at the pains to study or learn them . When Men that can learn the hardest Trade in a few years , have not learned a Catechism , nor how to understand their Creed , under twenty or thirty years preaching , nor cannot abide to be questioned about such things ; doth not this show that they have slighted them in their Hearts ? How will these despisers of Christ and Salvation be able one day to look him in the face , and to give an account of these neglects ? 

Thus much I have spoken in order to your Conviction . Do not some of your consciences by this time smite you , and say , I am the Man that have made light of my Salvation ? If they do not , it is because you make light of it still , for all that is said to you . But because , if it be the will of the Lord , I would fain have this damning Distemper cured , and am loath to leave you in such a desperate condition , if I knew how to remedy it ; I will give you some Considerations , which may move you , if you be men of reason and understanding , to look better about you ; and I beseech you weigh them , and make use of them as ye go , and lay open your Hearts to the work of Grace , and sadly bethink you what a case you are in , if you prove such as make light of Christ . 

Consider , 1.  thou makest light of him that made not light of thee who didst deserve it . thou wast worthy of nothing but contempt . As a Man , what art thou but a worm to God ? As a Sinner , thou art far viler than a Toad : yet Christ was so far from making light of thee and thy happiness , that he came down into the flesh , and lived a life of suffering , and offered himself a sacrifice to the Justice which thou hadst provoked , that thy miserable Soul might have a remedy . It is no lesle than Miracles of love and mercy that he hath showed to us ; and yet shall we slight them after all ? 

Angels admire them , whom they lesle concern , 1 Pet. 1. 12. and shall redeemed Sinners make light of them ? What barbarous , yea devilish , yea worse than devilish Ingratitude is this ? the Devils never had a Saviour offered them , but thou hast , and dost thou yet make light of him ? 

2.  Consider the work of Man's Salvation by Jesus Christ , is the Masterpiece of all the works of God , wherein he would have his love and mercy to be magnified . As the Creation declareth his Goodness and Power , so doth Redemption his Goodness and Mercy ; he hath contrived the very frame of his Worship so , that it shall much consist in the magnifying of this work ; and after all this , will you make light of it ? His Name is wonderful , Isa . 9 6.  He did the work that none could do , John 15. 24.  Greater love could none show than his , John 15. 13.  How great was the evil and misery that he delivered us from ? the good procured for us ? all are wonders , from his Birth to his Ascension ; from our new Birth to our Glorification , all are wonders of matchless Mercy . And yet do you make light of them ! 

3.  You make light of matters of greatest excellency and moment in the World : you know not what it is that you slight ; had you well known , you could not have done it . As Christ said to the Woman of Samaria , John 4. 10. hadst thou known who it is that speaketh to thee , thou wouldst have asked of him the waters of Life . Had they known , they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory , 1 Cor. 2. 8.  So , had you known what Christ is , you would not have made light of him ; had you been one day in Heaven , and but seen what they possess , and seen also what miserable Souls must endure that are shut out , you would never sure have made so light of Christ again . 

O Sirs , it is no trifle , or jesting matter that the Gospel speaks of . I must needs profess to you , that when I have the most serious thoughts of these things myself , I am ready to marvel that such amazing matters do not overwhelm the souls of Men ; that the greatness of the Subject doth not so overmatch our understandings and affections , as even to drive men besides themselves , but that God hath always somewhat allayed it by the distance ; much more that Men should be so blockish as to make light of them . O Lord , that Men did but know what everlasting Glory , and everlasting Torments are . Would they then hear us as they do ? Would they read and think of these things as they do ? I profess I have been ready to wonder , when I have heard such weighty things delivered , how People can forbear crying out in the Congregation ; much more , how they can rest till they have gone to their Ministers , and learned what they should do to be saved , that this great business might be put out of doubt . O that Heaven and Hell should work no more upon Men ! O that Everlastingness should work no more ! O how can you forbear when you are alone , to think with yourselves what it is to be everlastingly in Joy or in Torment ! I wonder that such thoughts do not break your sleep ; and that they come not in your mind when you are about your labour ! I wonder how you can almost do any thing else : how you can have any quietness in your minds : how you can eat , or drink , or rest , till you have got some ground of everlasting Consolations ! Is that a Man or a Corpse that is not affected with matters of this moment ? That can be readier to sleep than to tremble , when he heareth how he must stand at the Bar of God ? Is that a Man , or a Clod of Clay , that can rise and lie down without being deeply affected with his everlasting Estate ? that can follow his worldly Business , and make nothing of the great business of Salvation or Damnation ; and that when they know it is hard at hand ? Truly Sirs , when I think of the weight of the matter , I wonder at the very best of God's Saints upon Earth , that they are no better , and do no more in so weighty a case . I wonder at those whom the World accounteth more holy than needs , and scorns for making too much ado ; that they can put off Christ and their Souls with so little : that they pour not out their Souls in every Supplication ; that they are not more taken up with God ; that their thoughts be not more serious in preparation for their account . I wonder that they be not an hundred times more strict in their lives ; and more laborious and unwearied in striving for the Crown , than they are . And for myself , as I am ashamed of my dull and careless Heart , and of my slow and unprofitable course of Life ; so , the Lord knows , I am ashamed of every Sermon that I preach , when I think what I have been speaking of , and who sent me ; and that Man's Salvation or Damnation is so much concerned in it . I am ready to tremble , lest God should judge me , as a slighter of his Truth , and the souls of Men , and lest in the best Sermon I should be guilty of their blood . Methinks we should not speak a word to men in matters of such Consequence , without Tears , or the greatest earnestness that possibly we can ; were not we too much guilty of the sin which we reprove , it would be so . Whether , we are alone , or in company , methinks our end , and such an end , should still be in our mind , and as before our eyes ; and we should sooner forget any thing , and set light by any thing , or by all things , than by this . 

Consider 4.  Who is it that sends this weighty Message to you ? Is it not God himself ? Shall the God of Heaven speak , and Men make light of it ? You would not slight the Voice of an Angel or a Prince . 

5.  Whose Salvation is it that you make light of ? Is it not your own ? Are you no more near or dear to yourselves , than to make light of your own happiness or misery ? Why Sirs , do you not care whether you be saved or damned ? Is Self-love lost ? Are you turned your own Enemies ? As he that slighteth his Meat , doth slight his life ; so if you slight Christ , whatsoever you may think , you will find it was your own Salvation that you slighted . Hear what he saith , prov. 1. 36.  All they that hate me , love Death . 

6.  Your sin is greater , in that you profess to believe the Gospel which you make so light of . For a professed Infidel to do it , that believes not that ever Christ died , or rose again ; or doth not believe that there is a Heaven or Hell , this were no such marvel ; but for you that make it your Creed , and your very Religion , and call yourselves Christians , and have been baptised into this Faith , and seemed to stand to it : this is the wonder , and hath no excuse . What! believe that you shall live in endless Joy or Torment , and yet make no more of it , to escape Torment , and obtain that Joy. What! believe that God will shortly judge you , and yet make no more preparation for it ? Either say plainly , I am no Christian , I do not believe these wonderful things ! I will believe nothing but what I see ; or else , let your hearts be affected with your Belief , and live as you say you do believe . What do you think when you repeat the Creed , and mention Christ's Judgement and everlasting Life ? 

7.  What are these things you set so much by , as to prefer them before Christ and the saving of your Souls ? Have you found a better friend , a greater and surer happiness than this ? Good Lord ! What dung is it that men make so much of , while they set so light by everlasting Glory ! What Toys are they that they are daily taken up with , while matters of life and death are neglected ! Why Sirs , If you had every one a Kingdom in your hopes , what were it in comparison of the everlasting Kingdom ? I cannot but look upon all the Glory and Dignity of this World , Lands and Lordships , Crowns and Kingdoms , even as on some brainsick beggarly Fellow , that borroweth fine Clotheses , and plays the part of a King or a Lord , for an hour on a stage , and then comes down , and the sport is ended , and they are beggars again . Were it not for God's interest in the Authority of Magistrates , or for the service they might do him , I should judge no better of them . For as to their own Glory , it is but a smoke : what matter is it whether you live poor or rich , unless it were a greater matter to die rich than it is ? You know well enough that Death levels all : What matter is it at Judgement , whether you be to answer for the life of a rich man , or a poor man ? Is Dives then any better than Lazarus ? O that men knew what a poor deceiving shadow they grasp at , while they let go the everlasting Substance ! The strongest and richest , and most voluptuous Sinners , do but lay in fuel for their sorrows , while they think they are gathering together a treasure . Alas ! they are asleep , and dream that they are happy ; but when they awake , what a change will they find ? Their Crown is made of Thorns ! their pleasure hath such a sting as will stick in the heart through all Eternity , except unfeigned Repentance do prevent it . O how sadly will these wretches be convinced ere long , what a foolish bargain they made in selling Christ and their Salvation for these Trifles ! Let your Farms and Merchandise then save you if they can ; and do that for you that Christ would have done . Cry then to thy Baal to save thee ! O what thoughts have Drunkards and Adulterers , etc. of Christ , that will not part with the basest lust for him ! For a piece of bread , saith Solomon , such men do transgress , prov. 28. 21.  

8.  To set so light by Christ and Salvation is a certain mark that thou hast no part in them , and if thou so continue , that Christ will set as light by thee : Those that honour him he will honour , and those that despise him shall be lightly esteemed , 1 Sam. 2. 30.  thou wilt feel one day that thou canst not live without him . thou wilt confess then thy need of him ; and then thou mayst go look for a Saviour where thou wilt ; for he will be no Saviour for thee hereafter , that wouldst not value him , and submit to him here : then who will prove the loser by thy contempt ? O what a thing will it be for a poor miserable Soul to cry to Christ for help in the day of extremity , and to hear so sad an Answer as this ! thou didst set light by me and my Law in the day of thy Prosperity , and I will now set as light by thee in thy Adversity . Read prov. 1. 24. to the end . thou that as Esau didst sell thy Birthright for a Mess of Pottage , shalt then find no place for repentance , though thou seek it with tears , Heb. 12. 17.  Do you think that Christ shed his blood to save them that continue to make light of it ? and to save them that value a Cup of Drink or a Lust before his Salvation ? I tell you Sirs , though you set light by Christ and Salvation , God doth not so : He will not give them on such Terms as these : He valueth the Blood of his Son , and the everlasting Glory ; and he will make you value them , if ever you have them . Nay , this will be thy condemnation , and leaveth no remedy . All the World cannot save him that sets light by Christ , Heb. 2. 3.  Luke 14 24.  None of them shall taste of his Supper , Mat. 10. 37.  Nor can you blame him to deny you what you made light of yourselves . Can you find fault if you miss of the Salvation which you slighted ? 

9 , The time is near when Christ and Salvation will not be made light of as now they are . When God hath shaken those careless Souls out of their Bodies , and you must answer for all your sins in your own Name ; OH then , what what would you give for a Saviour ? when a thousand Bills shall be brought in against you , and none to relieve you , than you will consider , O , Christ would now have stood between me and the wrath of God : had I not despised him , he would have answered all . When you see the World hath left you , and your companions in sin have deceived themselves and you , and all your merry days are gone ; then what would you give for that Christ and Salvation , that now you accounted not worth your labour ? Do you think when you see the Judgement set , and you are doomed to everlasting Perdition for your Wickedness , that you should then make as light of Christ as now ? Why will you not judge now , as you know you shall judge then ? Will he then be worth ten thousand Worlds , and is he not now worth your highest Estimation , and dearest Affection ? 

10.  God will not only deny thee that Salvation thou madest light of , but he will take from thee all that which thou didst value before it : He that most highly esteems Christ , shall have him and the creatures so far as they are good here , and him without the Creature hereafter , because the Creature is not useful ; and he that sets more by the Creature than by Christ , shall have some of the Creature without Christ here , and neither Christ nor it hereafter . 

So much of these considerations , which may show the true face of this heinous sin . 

What think you now friends of this business ? Do you not see by this time what a case that Soul is in that maketh light of Christ and Salvation ? What need then is there that you should take heed lest this should prove your own case : The Lord knows it is too common a case . Whoever is found guilty at the last of this sin , it were better for that man he had never been born . It were better for him he had been a Turk or Indian , that never had heard the Name of a Saviour , and that never had Salvation offered to him : For such men have no Cloak for their sin , John 15. 22.  Besides all the rest of their sins , they have this kill sin to answer for , which will undo them . And this will aggravate their misery : That Christ whom they set light by , must be their Judge , and for this sin will he judge them . O that such would now consider how they will answer that Question that Christ puts to their Predecessors , Mat. 23. 33.  How will ye escape the Damnation of Hell ? or Heb. 2 ▪ 3.  How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation ? Can you escape without a Christ ? or will a despised Christ save you then ? If he be accursed that set light by Father or Mother , Deut. 27. 16.  What then is he that sets light by Christ ? It was the heinous sin of the Jews , that among them were found such as set light by Father and Mother , Ezek. 22. 7.  But among us men slight the Father of Spirits . In the Name of God brethren , I beseech you to consider how you will then bear his Anger which you now make light of ? You that cannot make light of a little sickness or want , or of natural Death , no not of a Toothache , but groan as if you were undone , how will you then make light of the Fury of the Lord , which will burn against the Contemners of his Grace ? Doth it not behoove you beforehand to think of these things ? 

Hitherto I have been convincing you of the evil of the sin , and the danger that followeth : I come now to know your Resolution for the time to come . What say you ? Do you mean to set as light by Christ and Salvation as hitherto you have done ? and to be the same men after all this ? I hope not . O let not your Ministers that would fain save you , be brought in as Witnesses against you , to condemn you . At least , I beseech you put not this upon me . Why Sirs . If the Lord shall say to us at Judgement , Did you never tell these men what Christ did for their Souls , and what need they had of him , and how nearly it did concern them to look to their Salvation , that they made light of it ? we must needs say the Truth : Yea Lord , we told them of it as plainly as we could ; we would have gone on our knees to them , if we had thought it would have prevailed ; we did entreat them as earnestly as we could , to consider these things : They heard of these things every day ; but alas , we could never got them to their hearts ; they gave us the hearing , but they made light of all that we could say to them . O sad will it prove on your side , if you source us to such an Answer as this . 

But if the Lord do move the hearts of any of you , and you resolve to make light of Christ no more : Or if any of you say , we do not make light of him ; let me tell you here in the conclusion what you must do , or else you shall be judged as slighters of Christ and Salvation . 

And first I will tell you what will not serve the turn . 

1.  You may have a notional knowledge of Christ and the necessity of his blood , and of the excellency of Salvation , and yet perish as neglecters of him . This is too common among professed Christians . You may say all that other men do of him ; What Gospel passages had Balaam ? Jesus I know , and Paul I know , the very Devils could say , who believe and tremble , Jam. 2.  

2.  You may weep at the History of his Passion , when you read how he was used by the Jews ; and yet make light of him , and perish for so doing . 

3.  You may come desirously to his word and ordinances . Herod heard gladly ; so do many that yet must perish as neglecters of Salvation . 

4.  You may in a sit of fear have strong desires after a Christ , to ease you , and to save you from God's wrath : as Saul had of David to play before him ; and yet you may perish for making light of Christ . 

5.  You may obey him in many things , so far as will not ruin you in the World : and escape much of the Pollutions of the World by his knowledge , and yet neglect him . 

6.  You may suffer and lose much for him , so far as leaveth you an earthly Felicity ; as Ananias ; the young man Some parcels of their pleasures and prosits many will part with in hope of Salvation , that shall perish everlastingly , for valuing it no more . 

7.  You may be esteemed by others a man zealous for Christ , and loved and admired upon that account , and yet be one that shall perish for making light of him . 

8.  You may verily think yourselves , that you set more by Christ and Salvation than any thing , and yet be mistaken , and be judged as Contemners of him : Christ justisieth not all that justisie themselves . 

9  You may be zealous Preachers of Christ and Salvation , and reprove others for this neglect , and lament the sin of the World in like expressions as I have done this day ; and yet if you or I have no better evidence to prove our hearty esteem of Christ and Salvation , we are undone for all this . 

You hear brethren what will not serve the turn ; Will you now hear what persons you must be if you would not be condemned as slighters of Christ ? OH search whether it be thus with your Souls , or no.  

1.  Your esteem of Christ and Salvation , must be greater than your esteem of all the Honours , Profits , or Pleasures of this World , or else you slight him : no lesle will be accounted sincere , or accepted to your Salvation : Think not this hard , when there is no comparison in the matters esteemed . To esteem the greatest Glory on Earth before Christ and Everlasting Glory , is a greater Folly , and Wrong to Christ , than to esteem a Dog before your Prince , would be folly in you , and a wrong to him . Scripture is plain in this , Mat. 10. 37.  He that loveth Father or Mother , Wife , Children , House , Land , or his own Life more than me , is not worthy of me , and cannot be my Disciple , as Luke 14. 26.  

2.  You must manifest this esteem of Christ and Salvation in your daily endeavours and seeking after him , and in parting with any thing that he shall require of you . God is a Spirit , and will not take an hypocritical Profession instead of the heart and spiritual Service which he commands . He will have the heart or nothing ; and the chief room in the heart too . These must be had . 

If you say that you do not make light of Christ , or will not hereafter ; let me try you in these few particulars , whether indeed you mean as you say , and do not dissemble . 

1.  Will you for the time to come make Christ and Salvation the chiefest matter of your care and study ? Thrust them not out of your thoughts , as a needless and unprofitable Subject ; nor allow it only some running slight thoughts , which will not affect you . But will you make it your business once a day to bethink you soberly when you are alone , What Christ hath done for you ; and what he will do if you do not make light of it : and what it is to be everlastingly happy or miserable ? and what all things in this World are in comparison of your Salvation ? and how they will shortly leave you ? and what mind you will be then of ; and how you will esteem them ? will you promise me now and then to make it your business to withdraw yourselves from the World , and set yourselves to such considerations as these ? If you will not , are not you slighters of Christ , and Salvation , that will not be persuaded soberly to think on them ? This is my first Question to put you to the Trial , whether you will value Christ or not . 

2.  Will you for the time to come , set more by the Word of God , which contains the discovery of these excellent things , and is your charter for Salvation , and your guide thereunto ? You cannot set by Christ , but you must set by his Word ; Therefore the Despisers of it are threatened with Destruction , prov. 13. 13.  Will you therefore attend to the public preaching of this Word ? will you read it daily ? will you resolve to obey it whatever it may cost you ? If you will not do this , but make light of the Word of God , you shall be judged as such as make light of Christ and Salvation , whatever you may sondly promise to yourselves . 

3.  Will you for the time to come esteem more of the Officers of Christ , whom he he hath purposely appointed to guide you to Salvation ? and will you make use of them for that end ? Alas , it is not to give the Minister a good word , and speak well of him , and pay him his Tithes duly , that will serve the turn : Is it for the necessity of your Souls that God hath set them in his Church ; that they may be as Physicians under Christ , or his Apothecaries to apply his Remedies to your spiritual Diseases , not only in public , but also in private : That you may have some to go to for the resolving of your doubts , and for your instruction where you are ignorant , and for the help of their Exhortations and Prayers . Will you use hereafter to go to your Ministers privately , and solicit them for advice ? and if you have not such of your own as are fit , get advice from others ; and ask them , What you shall do to be saved , how to prepare for Death and Judgement ? and will you obey the Word of God in their Mouths ? If you will not do this much , nor so much as inquire of those that should teach you , nor use the means which Christ hath established in his Church for your help , your own Consciences shall one day witness , that you were such as made light of Christ and Salvation . If any of you doubt whether it be your duty thus to ask counsel of your Teachers , as sick men do of their Physicians , let your own necessities resolve you ; let God's express word resolve you ; see what is said of the Priests of the Lord , even before Christ's coming , when much of their work did lie in Ceremonials ! Mal. 2. 5 , 6.  My Covenant was with him of life and peace : and I gave them to him ( to Levi ) for the fear wherewith he feared me , and was afraid before my name . The Law of Truth was in his mouth , and Iniquity was not found in his lips ; he walked with m● in Peace and Equity , and did turn many away from Iniquity . For the Priests lips should keep knowledge , and they should seek the Law at his Mouth : For he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts . 

Nay , you must not only inquire , and submit to their advice , but also to their just reprehensions , and Church censures : And without proud repining , submit to the Discipline of Christ in their Hands , if it shall be used in the Congregations whereof you are Members . 

4 Will you for the time to come , make Conscience of daily and earnest Prayer to God , that you may have a part in Christ and Salvation ? do not go out of doors till you have breathed out these desires to God ; do not lie down to rest till you have breathed out these desires ; say not , God knoweth my necessity without so often praying ; for though he do , yet he will have you to know them , and feel them , and exercise your desires , and all the graces of his Spirit in these Duties : It is he that hath commanded to pray continually , though he know your needs without , 1 Thess . 5. 17.  Christ himself spent whole nights in prayer , and encourageth us to this course , Luke 18. 1.  If you will not be persuaded to this much , how can you say that you make not light of Christ and Salvation ? 

5.  Will you for the time to come , resolvedly cast away your known sins at the command of Christ ? If you have been proud or contentious , or malicious and revengeful , be so no more . If you have been Adulterers , or Swearers , or Cursers , be so no more . You cannot hold these , and yet set by Christ and Salvation . 

What say you ? Are you resolved to let them go ? If not , when you know 't is the will of Christ , and he hath told you , such shall not enter into his Kingdom , do not you make light of him ? 

6.  Will you for the time to come , serve God in the dearest as well as in the cheapest part of his service ; not only with your tongues , but with your purses and your deeds ? shall the poor find that you set more by Christ than this World ? shall it appear in any good uses that God calls you to be liberal in , according to your Abilities ? Pure Religion and undefiled before God is this ; To visit the Fatherless and the Widows in their afflictions , Jam. 1. ult . Will you resolve to stick to Christ , and make sure this work of Salvation , though it cost you all that you have in the World ? If you think these terms too dear , you make light of Christ , and will be judged accordingly . 

7.  Will you for the time to come make much of all things that tend to your Salvation ; and take every help that God offereth you , and gladly make use of all his Ordinances ? Attend upon his strengthening Sacraments , spend the lord 's own day in these holy Employments . Instruct your Children and Servants in these things , Deut. 6. 6 , 7. get into good company that set their faces Heaven ward , and will teach you the way , and help you thither : and take heed of the wicked Scornors , or foolish , voluptuous , fleshly men , or any that would hinder you in this work . Will you do these things ? Or will you show that you are slighters of Christ by neglecting them ? 

8.  Will you do all this with delight , not as your toil , but as your pleasure ? and take it for your highest Honour that you may be Christ's Disciples , and may be admitted to serve and worship him ; and rejoice with holy Confidence in the sufficiency of that Sacrifice by which you may have pardon of all your failing , and right to the Inheritance of the Saints in light ? If you will do these things sincerely , you will show that you set by Christ and Salvation ; else not . 

Dear Beloved in the Lord , I have now done that work which I came upon ; what effects it hath , or will have upon your Hearts , I know not , nor is it any further in my power , to accomplish that which my soul desireth for you . Were it the Lord's will that I might have my wish herein , the words that you have this day heard , should so stick by you , that the secure should be awakended by them , and none of you should perish by the slighting of your Salvation . I cannot now follow you to your several Habitations , to apply this Word to your particular necessities : but o that I could make every Man's Conscience a Preacher to himself , that it might do it , which is ever with you : that the next time you go Prayerless to Bed , or about your business , Conscience might cry out , Dost thou set no more by Christ and thy Salvation ? that the next time you are tempted to think hardly of a holy and diligent life , ( I will not say to deride it as more ado than needs ) Conscience might cry out , Dost thou set so light by Christ and thy Salvation ? that the next time you are ready to rush upon known sin , and to please your fleshly desires against the command of God , Conscience might cry out , Is Christ and Salvation no more worth , than to cast them away , or venture them for thy Lusts ? that when you are following the World with your most eager desires , forgetting the World to come , and the change that is a little before you , Conscience might cry out to you , Is Christ and Salvation no more worth than so ? That when you are next spending the Lord's day in idleness or vain sports , Conscience might tell you what you are doing . In a word , that in all your neglects of duty , your sticking at the supposed labour or cost of a godly Life ; yea , in all your cold and lazy Prayers and Performances , Conscience might tell you , how unsuitable such endeavours are to the Reward ; and that Christ and Salvation should not be so slighted . I will say no more but this at this time : It is a thousand pities , that when God hath provided a Saviour for the World , and when Christ hath suffered so much for their sins , and made a full satisfaction to Justice , and purchased so glorious a Kingdom for his Saints , and all this is offered so freely to Sinners , to lost unworthy Sinners , even for nothing , that yet so many million should everlastingly perish , because they made light of their Saviour and Salvation , and prefer the vain World and their Lusts before them . I have delivered my Message , the Lord open your Hearts to receive it , I have persuaded you with the Word of truth and soberness ; the Lord persuade you more effectually , or else all this is lost . 

FINIS . 

