Pneumatou diakonia, or, Gospel-churches a standing ordinance of Jesus Christ to continue to his next personal glorious coming, plainly proved : objections particularly answer'd / by an unworthy servant ... R.B. / Baxter, Richard, 1615-1691. (Printed by T.M. for Tho. Parkhurst,London :1682.)

Πνεύματος Διακονία : OR , Gospel-churches , A Standing ORDINANCE OF Jesus Christ , TO continue to His next Personal Glorious Coming , plainly Proved ; Objections particularly Answered . 

By an unworthy servant of Jesus Christ , a Mourner in Zion for the Divisions thereof ; who waits for the day of the Son of Man , R.B.  

Mat. 16.18 . Upon this Rock will I build my Church : And the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it . 

1.  Cor. 11.26 . As often as ye eat this Bread , and drink this Cup , ye do show the Lord's Death till HE COME . 

Eph. 3.21 . Unto him be glory in the CHURCH — throughout all Ages — 

London , Printed by T.M. for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside , near Mercer's Chapel , 1682.  

TO THE READER . Christian Reader , 

IF thou intendest a serious perusal of the ensuing Treatise , 't will not be amiss to stay a while at the Portal . 't is now two full years , and upward , since it was fitted for the Press , the Remora's of its publication are needless to mention to thee . It hath in that time been frequently given up to the Lord , and the service of his Churches ; with earnest cries to him , who Ministers Seed to the Sour , and makes the Seed sown to prospero , that it may be blessed for some Spiritual advantage to them that truly fear him , whether in , or out of the Churches of Christ . What of the leading , help , of the Lord an unworthy dust hath had in the managery of this Work from first to last , is not needful to be mentioned . This I think meet to say to the praise of match-less Grace , that I have not been altogether without them , and in some things , such clear opening , as I never had before . All is submitted to the Judgement of the truly Judicious ; and if the least be contributed for the establishment of the Lords Children ( the weakest of them ) in the Path , and way of the Gospel , let him have the Glory , I obtain the end aimed at . The Reasons of the present undertake are too many to give an account of . I know none that have ex professo handled this Subject . 't is true , the Learned Dr. Owen , some while-since ( and long after this was finished for the Press ) hath written much in a little , touching it : but he tells us , he only debates it 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , in passage . There have been , and still are , some that openly oppose this way of the Gospel , upon various accounts : Of which ( at least some of them ) we give particular notice . That in every Generation , Satan hath set himself against the Churches of Christ , since they have had a being in the World , none are ignorant of , who have thought it any part of their concern to inquire into these matters . Many ways he hath taken to eradicate , root them out ; and hath by some of those ways , greatly disturbed , perplexed , shaken them . As , 

1.  Sore , great Persecutions , hath he oft raised against them from the first days of the Gospel , till now . And though he hath often seen the Vanity of his attempts that way to root them out , yet he is unwearied therein . Million of Saints have been tortured , butchered , destroyed by his Instruments upon the account of their being found in the practice of those Gospel-wayes , Ordinances , we are pleading for . Nor can any oppugn , despise them , but they condemn those Million of innocent ones , and justify Satan ; and his Instruments , in their horrid butcheries of them . Touching which , more afterwards . He early began this cruel work . The Priests , Ecclesiastick-governours amongst the Jews , together with the Roman-rulers , breath forth threatenings against them ; imprison , slaughter , some eminent ones amongst them , to terrify the rest : see Act. 4.  & 7.  & 9  They Excommunicate them , charge them with broaching New-doctrines , endeavouring to overturn the ancient State of Religion , as Seditious , Factious , setting up Separate-meetings , or private Conventicles ; banish , cast them into Prison , compel them to Blaspheme ; Whip , Behead , Stone them . Under Claudius , about A.D. 45.  Herod Agrippa furiously falls upon some of the Disciples of our Lord , kills James ( the Brother of John ) with the Sword ; casts Peter also into Prison , Act. 12.  ( Himulco the Angel of the Lord quickly meets with , Smites , he is eaten up of Worms , gives up the Ghost , v. 23. ) At Antioch the Jews are filled with envy against Paul , and Barnabas , contradicting , Blaspheming ; they raise persecution against them , expel them out of their coast , Act. 13.45 , 50.  At Iconium also , the Vnbelieving Jews stir up the Gentiles against them ; and the Gentiles , and Jews , with their Rulers , make an assault to use them despitefully , and to Stone them , Act. 14.2.5 . To Lystra , from Antioch , and Iconium , come certain Jews ; who stir up the People against them , they stone Paul , and draw him out of the City for dead , Act. 14.19 . At Philippi , Act. 16.  Paul and Silas are dragged into the Court unto the Rulers , v. 19  They are Scourged , cast into Prison , v. 22 , 23.  At Thessalonica an uproar is made against them ; the house of Jason ( where 't is like they met ) assaulted ; but not finding them , they draw Jason , and certain brethren , unto the Rulers of the City , crying , These that have turned the World upside down are come hither also , Act. 17.5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9  Preaching at Barea , the Jews from Thessalonica come thither also , and stir up the People against them , v. 13.  At Corinth , the Jews , with one accord , make insurrection against Paul , bring him to the Judgment-seat , Act. 18.12 . At Ephesus , by Demetrius' a great tumult is raised also , v. 24. to 35.  At Jerusalem , the Jews which are of Asia , stir up the People against him , and lay hands on him , Chap. 21.27 . who would have killed him immediately , ver . 31.  Of his afflictions in Asia , Paul himself speaks , 2 Cor. 1.8 . in Judea , Heb. 10.32 , 33 , 34.  About the Seventeenth Year of Nero ( that Monster ) A.D. 63.  James the Brother of our Lord ( with others ) is slain , Euseb . l. 2. c. 23.  Josephus , l. 20.  Antiq. c. 8.  At Alexandria , Mark the Evangelist ( it 's said ) . was put to death . This Nero Fire's the City of Rome , lays it upon the Christians ; and from hence takes occasion , by public Edict , to raise persecution against them ; He was the first of the Emperors that did so , Tertull. in Apologet. which continued to the end of his Reign : Peter , and Paul ( it 's said ) were slain by him ; with others innumerable . How the hand of the Lord wrought him , is known ; condemned he was by the Senate , to be punished more majorum , i e. to be whipped to death ; to prevent which , he slew himself with this exprobration of his own sordid villainy , Turpiter vixi , turpius morior ; I have lived filthily , I die more dishonourably , Sueton. in Nero. Domitian about A.D.  97. by his Edicts , raises another dreadful persecution against the Christians : Banishes John into the Isle of Patmos , Euseb . l. 3 . c. 18.19 . Eutropius , l. 9 . Timothy , Onesimus , and Dionysius the Areopagite were put to death , Niceph . l. 3 . c. 11. with an innumerable company of the faithful beside : The Wrath of God pursues him , and he is murdered in his own house by his own Servants , Sueton. in Domit. Under Trajan , a great persecution was raised against the Lamb's followers , about A.D.  100  Multitudes of them are destroyed ; some mentioned by name , viz. Simeon the Son of Cleophas ; Clemens , Alexander , Quirinus , and his Daughter Balbilia , Sulpitius , and Servilianus , Nereus , and Achilleus , Phocas , a Bishop in Pontus , Ignatius . This Storm continued fourteen Years . In fine , by a resolution of his joints , nummedness of body , and a choking Water , Trajan miserably perished , Dion . Cassius de Traj . Under Hadrian , about A.D. 120. a Storm falls upon the Christians ; not a few are cut off . About the Second Year of his Reign Aurelius Comes casts about 1250. of them into Prison , whom he at last burns to death . amongst whom was Alexander , the Bishop of Rome ; and Hermes , the Praefect of the City . Zenon a Roman Senator , with ten thousand two hundred and three , it 's said ; were slain , in a Witness for CHRIST , Cent. Mag. Cent. 2. c. 3. p. 12.  At last he perishes with a flux , and casting of blood , Aelius Sparta . in Had. Some add , that he gave the World , this Poetic desperate farewell ; Animula Vagula , blandula , 

Hospes , comesqùe corporis , 

Quae nunc abibis in loca ? 

Pallidula , rigida , nudula , 

Nec ut Soles , dabis jocos . 

Antoninus Pius comes next , about A.D.  139.  Many of the Disciples of Christ are cut off ; at Rome , Felicitas with her seven Sons ; Braxedis — . In Spain , and France , not a few ; amongst the rest , Photinus , Bishop of Lions , with forty nine more : At Alexandria in Egypt , Ptolomaeus , and Licius ; with many others , are Martyred for Christ . Euseb . Chron. Justin . Apol. After he had read the Apologies of Justin and others , he became better affected to the Christians ; and send 's Letters into Asia to stop the Persecution , Euseb . l. 4. c. 26.  For which cause ( perhaps ) the Lord poured not forth his wrath on him as on others , who abode in their enmity against his chosen ones . Under Antoninus Verus , about A.D. 162. the Church had their time of Tribulation ; as the Epistle of the Saints at Vienna , and Lions , to the brethren throughout Asia , and Phrygia , recorded by Eusebius , l. 5. c. 1. does abundantly declare ; wherein they acquaint them , that the fierceness of the Gentiles anger against them , the great things they suffer , cannot be well written or spoken . amongst others that suffered , they mention , Vetius , Epagathus , Sanctus , Maturus , Attalus , Blandina , Ponticus , Photinus , Alexander , etc. by name . At Rome they were persecuted ; amongst others , Justin there fell by wicked hands . In Asia there was great distress , Euseb . l. 5. c. 15 as the Church of God at Smyrna , unto the Church at Philomilium , and to all the Churches throughout Pontus , intimates ; where they at large declare , the manner of the Martyrdom of Policarpus . Nor was there a stop put to this Persecution , by the Apologies made for the Christians , by Melito , Bishop of Sardis , and Apollinarius , Bishop of Hierapolis . At last his Army being sorely distressed in Germany for want of Water , the Christian Legion , by their Prayers , procures Rain , and Thunder , and Lightning , that scare and routs the Enemy ( upon the account whereof , they are termed — 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the Thundering Legion ) ; this comes with some conviction upon the Emperor , who now writes Letters , that they should not suffer as Christians ; that the Informers , Prosecutors of them , as such , should be burned Alive . Tertull. in Apologet. Lying speechless for three days , he dies of an Apoplexy . Cent. Mag. Cent. 2. c. 4. p. 28.  The Church had a little rest under Commodus , the Emperor ( who succeeded Antoninus ) ; yet was his Throne tinctured with some of the blood of the Saints : Apollonius a Roman Senator ( by virtue of an ancient Law made against the Christians , and unrepealed ) lost his head in a witness for Christ . Euseb . Hieron . But in the time of Severus about A.D.  205. the Devil is let loose to purpose ; a fresh Persecution is raised every where against them . Euseb . l. 6. c. 1.  Spartian . The accusations against them were generally , Sedition , Treason , Sacrilege , Incest , Adulteries , ( the Candles being put out ) Leonides the Father of Origen , is beheaded . Euseb . ibid. With many others . Tertul. ad Scapul . Apologetic . contra Gentes . All manner of cruelties were exercised against them , their houses were rifled , their goods taken away , they themselves are murdered , burned in a witness for Christ . But the Emperor at last pays dear for these cruelties . After he had endured great pain in all his members , especially in his feet , he poisons himself to put an end to his torments . Cent. Mag. Cent. 3. c. 3. p. 22.  For a little while the Church had some tranquillity ; but under Maximinus about A.D.  237.  Persecution is raised against the Pastors of the Church , upon this Principle , that they being removed , the rest , the Flock , would deny their Profession . Euseb . l. 6. c. 28.  The distress was short , but smart : He continued Emperor but three Years ; and then he with his Son ( yet a Child ) was torn in pieces of the Soldiers , all crying out , Ex pessimo genere , ne catulum quidem habendum , That not a Whelp was to be left of so cursed a Stock . Aurel. Victor , Capitol . Decius A.D. 247. raises another fierce persecution . Euseb . l. 6. c. 39  Cypr. l. 4.  Epist . 4.  Nicephorus l. 5. c. 29. tells us , that 't is , as easy to number the Sands of the Sea , as the Martyrs that lost their lives by this persecution . Some are mentioned by name ; as at Jerusalem , the Bishop of the Church there , who was cast into Prison , and died ; as did Babylas , the Bishop of Antioch . Niceph. l. 5. c. 26.  Another Babylas Bishop ( or Pastor ) of the Church at Nicomedia , was Martyred . Spec. Vincent . l. 11. c. 52.  Asclepiades , Pastor of the Church at Antioch , with forty Virgins , Id. Ibid. At Lampsac , one Peter . In Troas , Andrew , Paul , Nicomachus , and Dionysia , a Virgin , Id. l. 11. c. 46.  At Caesarea , Germanus , Theophilus , Caesarius , Vitalis , l. 11. c. 52.  At Babylon , Polychronius their Bishop , c. 49.  At Perga in Pamphylia , Nestor , their Bishop . c. 52.  Olympias and Maximus , in Persia — . But the violence of this persecution was in Africa , as is manifest from Tertullian , Cyprian ; and particularly at Alexandria , as Euseb . l. 6. c. 40 , 41 , 42.  Demonstrates from the Epistles of Dionysius , Pastor of the Church there . At Rome , Fabian their Bishop , and Cornelius , Sabel . l. 7.  Ennead . 7. — . As they were an innumerable company , that at this time suffered for the Name , Worship of CHRIST , so were their Sufferings of diverse kinds ; some were driven from house and harbour ; spoiled of their Goods , and Enjoyments , bound with Chains , shut up in Prisons , cast to wild Beasts to be devoured ; consumed in the Flames , Cypr. contr . Demet. Some they beaten with Clubs ; prick Face and Eyes with sharp Quills ; Stone to death ; drag along the Streets ; sorely scourge ; dash against Millstones : They break into their Houses , take away their Jewels , and all of any value ; throw the wooden stuff into the streets , burn it to ashes — Euseb . l. 6. c. 40.  When Decius had scarce Reigned two Years , he was slain , together with his Sons , Euseb . l. 7. c. 1.  Vibius Gallus ascends the Throne , about A.D. 254 ▪ and continues the Persecution by Imperial Edicts , Euseb . l. 7. c. 1.  Vincent . in Speculo . l. 11. c. 53.  But a dreadful pestilence invading the Empire , not much was done . Gallus also himself was quickly slain by Aemilianus , Faseicul . Tempor . folio 45.  About A.D. 257.  Valerian mounts the Throne , who at first was so kind to the People of God , that his whole Palace ( saith Dionysius ) was replenished with the godly , and became a Church of God , Euseb . l. 7. c. 10.  Afterterwards they were sorely Persecuted . They are forbid to keep any Conventicles ; are despoiled of Goods ; imprisoned , scourged , banished , killed with the sword , consumed in the flames , Euseb . l. 7. c. 11.  At Caesarea , Priscus , Malchus , and Alexander , are cast to the Wild Beasts , Euseb . l. 7. c. 12.  Concerning the persecution at Alexandria , Dionysius writes to Domitius , and Didymus , thus , 't is superfluous to go about to reckon the Names of such as suffered amongst us , since they are so many ; but thou mayest know that they are of all sorts , Men , Women , Youths , old Men , Virgins , old Women , Soldiers , and Unlearned , Euseb . l. 7. c. 11.  He makes particular mention of one Faustus , who was killed with the Sword. And Bergomensis in his History of Valerian the Emperor , l. 8. mentions Philippus , Bishop of Alexandria , who suffered after the same manner . And at Carthage , Cyprian was put to death . Sabell . in Chron. Vincentius , l. 11. c. 83. tells us , that three hundred Martyrs suffered at Carthage ; many at Rome , and elsewhere . At last , the cry of the blood of Innocents' , brings vengeance upon the pate of Valerian , and he falls into the hand of Sapores King of Persia , who carried him about in a Cage , and used him as a footstool as oft as he took Horse , Laetus . Aurel. Vict. and being seventy years old , as a just and righteous Judgement of God on him for his like cruelty to his Servants , saith Eusebius , Serm. and convent . Sanct. he was flayed , and saulted alive ; and so died . Valerianus being taken by Sapores King of Persia , Galienus governs alone : about A.D.  262. and by Public Edicts , puts a stop to the Persecution , Euseb . l. 7. c. 13.  & 15.  & 22. from whence , to the time of Dioclesian , and Maximilian , about A.D.  288.  The Church was in a more tranquil state ; but then were they more harassed , persecuted , than ever ; Euseb . l. 8. c. 1.  The persecution began the nineteenth year of his Empire , A.D.  306.  In March , most terrible Edicts come forth , for the pulling down their Meeting - Places , levelling them to the ground , throughout the Roman Empire ; which accordingly was speedily done , Euseb . l. 8. c. 2.  then comes forth another Edict for burning the Scriptures : as also for ejecting with ignominy , out of all Offices , and places of Trust , whoever would not abjure their Religion ; persons in private capacities to be brought under servitude , Euseb . l. 8. c. 3.  Niceph. l. 7. c. 4.  Zonara's , Tom. 2. not long after , other Edicts are published , to seize , imprison their Preachers ; and by all manner of punishments , to compel them to Worship their Idols ; Euseb . l. 8. c. 3.5 . At Tirus above forty were beheaded : At Caesarea the eminent Pamphilus was Martyred , Euseb . l. 8. c. 13.  In Syria all the noted Teachers were first imprisoned , afterwards slain , Id. Ibid. In Mesopotamia , Cappadocia , Tarsus of Cilicia , Nicomedia ; in Bythinia many are hardly used , Butchered , Euseb . l. 8. c. 12.  & 13. & ch . 4.  & 6.  Hermannus Gigas ▪ tells us , that Serena the Emperor Dioclesian's Wife , was also Martyred for Christ . Twenty-thousand were together by Maximianus his cruelty , burned in a Temple , being there assembled to Worship God , Niceph. l. 7. c. 6.  Many in Arabia were cut off , Euseb . l. 8. c. 12.  All the Inhabitants of a City in Phrygia , with their City were destroyed , Euseb . l. 8. c. 11.  In Armenia , Arabrace , the Teachers of the Churches were Murdered by them , Euseb . l. 8. c. 6.  Niceph. l. 7. c. 14.  The persecution severely raged in Egypt . At Thebes a whole Legion of Christians were put to death , Vincent . in Speculo . l. 12. c. 2.  It-reached Africa , and Mauritania , Euseb . l. 8. c. 6. and the Islands , as Lesbos ( Sabel . Ennead . 7. l. 8 ) Samos , and Sicily , where seventy-nine Martyrs were slain , Heinrick . de Erford . At Nicopolis , in Thracia , Niceph. l. 7. c. 14. at Chalcedonia , Vincent . l. 12. c. 77.  At Rome , Bononia , several were murdered , Vinc. l. 12. c. 49.  At Aquileia the Emperor commanded to destroy all the Christians , Id. l. 12. c. 58.  At Florence , Pergamos , Neapolis in Campania , Beneventum , Venusa in Apulia , and in Toscana several were cut off , saith Regino . At Verona in France , at Mediolanum , at Massilia ( or Marseille ) there were many Martyred , Heinric . de Erfor . Vinc. l. 12. c. 2.  In Spain the Blood of the Saints ran down like Rivers , and tinctured the streams of Water , Vincent . l. 12. c. 136.  It reached even to Britain , Beda , l. 1. de ratio . temp . All the Christians here ( almost ) were destroyed , Martin . Chron. Fascic . temp . Maximinus ( who was Emperor with Constantius ) rages in the East against them , Euseb . l. 8. c. 15.  In the midst of Cities , Edicts written in Tables of Brass against them , are hung up , Euseb . l. 9 c. 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7. upon which many are banished , put to death , Euseb . l. 9 c. 7.  Niceph. l. 7. c. 44.  Having made havoc of the Church , and not prevailing against it , Dioclesian with his partner Maximianus , lay aside the Government , and live as private men . But the Vengeance of the Lord reaches them for their bloody cruelty against the Saints . Dioclesian being smitten with madness , slew himself , Euseb . in orat . ad convent Sanct. Maximianus perished with a disease so loathsome , that the Physicians , as they could not cure him ; so were not able to endure the stink of it , Euseb . l. 8. c. 16.  At last Constantine , with Licinius enter Rome as Victors , proclaim liberty to the Christians : yet not long after , Licinius sets himself against them : turns them all out of his Court , such as are Soldiers he cashiers : makes diverse wicked Laws against them , Euseb . l. 10. c. 8. & l. 1. de vit . Constant . Privately murders their Pastors in several Cities of Pontus ; pulls down some of their Temples , shuts up others ; takes away their goods , banishes , puts to death not a few , Sozom. l. 1. c. 2.  Euseb . l. 10. c. 8. l. 1. de Vit. Constant . So that now the Christians betake themselves again to Fields , Woods , Solitudes , Mountains , Euseb . l. 10. c. 14.  Niceph. l. 7. c. 14.  Sozom. l. 9 c. 2.  He would have proceeded further , but conquered by Constantine , a period is also put to this Persecution . 'T were endless to mention the sore distress the Churches underwent by Sapores King of Persia in his Dominions : The cruelties they endured by the Arrians , the Butcheries , Tyrannies , Oppressions of all sorts , they underwent from the Antichristians , the Papists ; are innumerable , ineffable ; Europe is made a shambles , wherein the Blood of million of the Innocent Lambs of Christ hath been poured forth ; ( for which they shall be plagued , destroyed , in the time appointed by the Lord ) . These things are known to all , who have thought it their concern in the least to turn aside to consider of them . The boody cruelties of the Antichristian Party , against the Bohemians ; in Holland also ; the Massacre of Paris , Ireland , the Valleys of Piedmont , etc. wherein many thousands of the lord 's Innocent ones have been barbarously murdered , for no other reason ▪ in the World , but because they laboured according to their Light , to maintain , and be found in the Doctrine , and Worship of Christ , is yet recent in the memory of most . What heart so rocky as to read the Histories of the deep suffeings of those worthy witnesses of our Lord the Waldenses , without pouring forth floods of tears ? What treacheries , clandestine Plots , breach of Covenants , Oaths , have the Antichristians been found guilty of ( pursuant to that bloody principle , Nulla fides — no Faith is to be kept with Heretics ; and all are such in their account , that embrace not their heresy , abomnable Idolatries ) that they might obtain their end , to waste , destroy , root out the Heritage of God. Another way Satan hath taken to accomplish this his design , is 

2.  Schism amongst the Churches of Christ . This was early set on foot , even in the Apostles days , ( CITIZEN Cor. 3.3 . & 11.18 . When ye come together in the Church , I hear that there be divisions ( Schisms ) among you , and I partly believe it : ) and hath been more , or lesle , with cunning , heat , violence , managed ever since by Satan , to the disturbing , breaking , crumbling into nothing some Churches of Christ . The frequent charging and recharging of Schism upon each other , by those that truly fear the Lord , and agree in the fundamentals of Christianity , hath been no small machine of the wicked one to weaken , destroy them . A work he 's still managing , and we are too too little awakened to see his design , and to study in the right Spirit to prevent it . 't would make one's heart to bleed , to see , hear , with what keenness , acrimony , bitterness some protestants are acted against others , who are not of the same mind in all things , whilst the Devil in the Papacy stands laughing to think , what an easy prey hereby he shall make of them all . Ah! alas ! where is the Christian simplicity , amity ? How little respect have some to the great Commandment of Christ , to Love one another , who yet would be accounted his Disciples ? Were it not for a hasty Spirit , bitter envying that is upon some , one would think they had no concern for Religion at all ; and yet even this discovers that they are too little impregnated with the Spirit of the true Religion of Jesus Christ , which engages to love , meekness , condescension , mutual forbearance amongst Saints . 

3.  False Doctrine , Worship . This also had an early entrance amongst the Churches . The denial of the Resurrection of the dead , substituting in the room thereof , a metaphorick Resurrection , betimes infected some ( at least ) of the Church at Corinth , 1 Cor. 15. with 2 Tim. 2.18 . Justification by the Law , by Works was introduced into many of them ; as the Churches at Rome , Galatia , etc. against whom the Apostle of the Gentiles , Paul , smartly disputes in his Epistles directed to them . Into the pure Worship of God , the inventions , traditions of men were at last so introduced , that God could no longer own it as his Worship at all . And in respect of both these , none ever were so degenerate , corrupt as the Synagogue of Rome . To enumerate particulars were endless ; what more contrary to Truth , sound Doctrine , than their assertions , that the Original Hebrew , and Greek , of the Old and New-testament is corrupt ; That the Scripture is not perspicuous , clear : That to one Man ( the Pope ) the interpretation of Scripture doth belong , who is Infallible ; and Judgement , Conscience , all , is to be subjected to him : That he is the alone Judge of Controversies : who hath the Spirit of God , given to him above others for his so doing : That the Pope can dispense with the Law of God : That he is Universal Head of the Church : That he is not to be questioned for his Doctrine , or Actions . ( Si Papa infinitas animas in infernum traheret , tamen nemo debet ei dicere , quid facis ? If the Pope should carry an infinite number of Souls headlong to Hell , none ought to say to him , what dost thou ? For the will of the Pope stands for reason , Glossa ) . By his own Authority he can make Laws to bind the Consciences of the faithful : He hath Power , Authority over Princes ; can crown , un-crown ; set up , depose as he pleases . That the Scriptures are not a sufficient Canon , or rule of Faith , and Manners ; but Traditions written , and un-written , are also necessary : That Traditions are sufficient without the Scriptures ; but the Scriptures are not sufficient , without Traditions : That Christ is mediator only according to his human Nature : That 't is unlawful for Priests to marry : That there is a certain place in which ( as in a prison ) after this life , souls are purged , who were not here perfectly purged ; that being so purged , they might enter into Heaven : That Saints are to be Worshipped : That Images are to be Worshipped with the same Worship that is due to those whose Images they are ( as the Image of God , Christ — ) : yea , so that the Worship be terminated in the Image : That the Sacraments confer grace ex opere operato : That they justify , That there are seven Sacraments : That the Church hath power to Institute new Ceremonies for spiritual ends : That persons unbaptised are damned ; there 's no salvation without it : That Baptism takes away all sin : That the Bread and Wine is converted into the Body and Blood of CHRIST : That the Priest offers up Christ a propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick , and dead , to God the Father : That there are sins in their own nature Venial : That Concupiscence in those that are renewed , is no sin : That men may be saved if they will ; 't is in their own power to believe , etc.  That men are not justified by Faith without Works : That inherent Righteousness justifies : That none can be certain , in this Life , either of their Election , Justification , Perseverance to the end , or Eternal Life : That we are justified by Works , that we merit Eternal Life by them . And these are some of those pure streams that too many have a great mind to return to drink of ; and would by force , bloody cruelty , compel others to drink , and be poisoned with them . 

4.  False Visions , lying Revelations ; upon which many times , false Doctrine , Worship , hath been built , supported . Somewhat of these was also in the Apostles times . Divine Visions , Revelations there were many , see Act. 10.11 — . & 16.9 . & 18.9 , 10.  & 23.11 . & 27.23 , 24.  Gal. 1.12 . & 2.1 , 2. 2  Cor. 12.4 . Act. 7.55 . & 10.3 . Some also there were who were full of their false Visions , Revelations , 2 These . 2.2 . Now we beseech you brethren , by the coming of our Lord Jesus , and by our gathering together unto him , that ye be not shaken in mind — neither by Spirit — i e. by any that shall pretend to Revelations by the Spirit — . To mention what of this kind was in after days , is endless : somewhat is spoken to it , chap. 3.  Of the ensuing Treatise . 

5.  Pretensions to a more than Ordinary Authority , Power . False-prophets , Pseudo-apostles there were even in the Apostles days , 2 Cor. 11.13 . Such are False-apostles Transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ . See Mat. 24.5 , 11.  rev. 2.2 . and many have risen up since , whereby the Faith of some have been perverted , and they have been drawn off from the ways of Christ . 

6.  False Miracles , Lying Signs and Wonders . Of this we have an account , Mat. 24.24 . For there shall arise false Christ's , and false Prophets , and shall show great signs and wonders — . Mar. 13.22 . 2 These . 2.9 . Even him whose coming is after the working of Satan , with all Power , and Signs , and lying wonders , rev. 13.13 , 14.  And he doth great wonders , so that he maketh fire to come down from Heaven on the Earth in the sight of men : and deceives them that dwell on the Earth by the means of those Miracles . Antichrists Kingdom hath been full of such lying signs , and wonders , whereby the Faith of some hath been Shaken , and they drawn off from the pure Worship of Christ . 

7.  Open , avowed , oppositions to Gospel-institutions of this device of Satan to ruin the Churches of Christ , we might give a distinct , and large account ; some there were of old that opposed , denied , some particular Ordinances ; others refused communion with the Churches , as no Churches of Christ . In the third Century , the Manichees denied baptism with Water , August . l. 2. de mor. Manich. and l. 6.  Contra Faust . The Meletians in the fourth century refused communion with the Churches , saith Theodoret. And Augustine , ad quod vult , etc. tells us , that they would not so much as Pray with the Saints . The Audaeans , or Anthropomorphites ( who held that God had a human form , or shape as a man ) denied communion with the Churches in the same Century , Epiphan . in Anacephal . August . ad quod vult , etc. Theodoret , l. 4. c. 10.  The Donatists held in the same century , that the Church of God was wholly lost , and to be restored by them ; amongst whom in Africa 't was only preserved , August . l. 2.  Cont. lit . Petil. c. 15. l. 2.  Cont. Cres . c. 37. ( for which they pretended Miracles , Visions , Dreams ) : What open , avowed oppositions have been ( are ) in our days made to the Churches , Institutions of Christ , is known , and aught to be bewailed by us : These things might have been more at large spoken to , but I am sensible how far I have transcended the due bounds of an Epistle to so small a Treatise , and shall only add , That , 

1.  I pled not for the Continuance of This , or That , particular Church of Christ . Many such have been dischurched , and may be so . God may be so far provoked against This , or That Church , as to write Lo-ammi , Loruhamah upon it ; to disown his relation to it , or its relation to him . Where is the Church of Ephesus , Pergamos , Laodicea , etc. but only argue , that God doth , will , continue the Gospel-church-state , Ordinances , in some particular Church , or Churches in the World , to the next personal coming of Christ . Much lesle , 

2.  Do I pled for the corruptions of Churches , which indeed are too many , and great , perhaps amongst the best , purest Churches at this day ; and in some , at that height ( as the synagogue of Rome ) that there is no communion to be held with them , without God-provoking iniquity , that will without Repentance , bring his Wrath , Vengeance , upon us , rev. 18.4 . 

3.  That persons had need take heed how they speak evil of , slight , oppose , persecute the Churches of CHRIST , his Worship , Institutions , Ordinances . The Judge stands before the door , the Lord of the Vineyards is ready to be revealed , and in flaming fire to take Vengeance on them that know him not , and obey not his Gospel . Nor will it be a sufficient plea at that day , for any to say , we accounted them not thy Churches , Ordinances ; therefore we so managed ourselves towards them , a despising , rejecting these , is one way of casting off the Authority of Christ , as we afterwards demonstrate . 

4.  That it highly concerns all that know the Lord , who are either separated from ; or , were never adjoined to any Church of Christ ; to testify their love , and subjection to him ; by subjecting to his Commandments in this matter , lest not being found where Christ expects them , they be blamed , shamed , at his day . 

5.  That the utmost care should be taken , industry used , to keep those Iniquities out of particular Churches , as may provoke the Lord to spew them out of his mouth , as he did Laodicea of old . Particularly 

1.  Schisms amongst themselves : Which as they are an Argument of Carnality , 1 Cor. 3.3 . so they distaste , greatly provoke the Lord 2.  Formality , Lukewarmness . 3.  Pride , both inwardly , in Heart , Spirit : outwardly , in Apparel , Garb ; God resisteth the Proud ; sets himself in battle-array against them . 4.  Covetousness , which is Idolatry . A wretched spirit , that hath too much overspread , prevailed upon the body of Professors : Such as are Baptised into it , are Enemies to the Cross of Christ , Phil. 3.18 , 19 5.  Sinful compliance with , and Conformity to this World. 6.  Carelessness as to sanctifying the Name of God in every part of Worship : The nature of this great work is opened in the following Treatise ; with many other things , of which we must not now speak . 

6.  That particular Churches ought , to be much , often considering their ways , get a sense of their miscarriages upon them , pollutions amongst them , to remember from whence they are fallen ; repent , do their first works . And if ever 't were the duty of the Churches of Christ to attend carefully to these things , it 's much more now . What languishing , dying Churches have we ? How is Jehovah by word , providential Dispensations crying aloud to them , to be zealous , Repent , return ? What little attendment to his Voice amongst many ? How doth he discover his unwillingness to leave them ? How doth he seem to hover over them ? How many ways hath he been alluring , drawing by cords of Love unto himself ; and if after all , he should pull down these Tabernacles , and erect others for himself in some remote part of the World ; leave poor England , suffer Papal Darkness , Superstition , Idolatry , to overspread the Land ; must we not say , he is Holy , we reap the fruit of our own doings : He is faithful to his Word : Churches ( Ordinances ) He will have in the world to bear his Name , though we are reduced to Rubbish , Ruins . I have been , an trembling within myself , lest he should at last be provoked to leave us ( at least for a season ) : Wo , wo , wo , unto us if he departed from us . Repent o England ; Awake , awake Churches ; awake , awake Professors ; lay hold on God , renew your Covenant with him , labour to find out every accursed thing that may be in the midst of you ; cast it away with loathing , abhorrency ; bemoan yourselves for the sins , iniquities , are with you ; be conscientious in filling up the relation you stand in each to other , as members of the same Body : cry to God to fill you with Presence , Glory ; to communicate the suitable grace to you , that you may be able to glorify him in the Fires ; O Watch and Pray , that you may be accounted worthy to escape the things that are to come to pass , and stand before the son of man Oh! Wait , look for his Coming as those that are indeed ready for it . And if you meet with any spiritual good , and advantage , by the serious perusal of the ensuing Treatise , let God have the Glory , and pray for him , who accounts it his honour , to be , 

A Servant of Christ , and the meanest of his Children , R.B.  

THE PREFACE To the ensuing Discourse . OF the Creation of Man Divine Institutions in the State of Innocency . Man's fall . A New-state of things thereupon introduced . Christ the Foundation of Instituted Worship , and Man's Communion with God therein . A Church-state in Adam's Family . Cain Excommunicated . The Church-state preserved pure , till about the days of Enosh . Separation from carnal Worshippers in his days , Gen. 4.26 . Explained . The Church-state preserved in a great measure of purity for ( about ) a thousand Years . A grand Apostasy therefrom in the days of Noah . The purity of Worship preserved in his Family . Apostates destroyed by the Waters of the Flood . A solemn Covenant made by the Lord with Noah upon his coming out of the Ark. The Statutes God gave to him . The purity of Worship continues uninterrupted for ( about ) forty Years . Ham excommunicated . A dredaful Apostasy about the thousandth Year after the Flood . A remnant kept pure . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Who they are . The general defection , Idolatry that overspread all in Abraham's time . His call . The erection of the pure Worship of God in his Family . Corruptions in Jacob's Family before their going into Egypt , whilst there . Jehovah's bringing them out from thence : giving the Law at Mount Sinai . Their Idolatry . The ten Tribes led captive beyond Assyria ; the two Tribes into Babylon : God looks after them there : brings them from thence . A new Reformation begun by Ezra , Nehemiah , etc.  Their Apostasy afterwards ; yet they are not totally rejected , till they had refused , rejected , crucified the Son of God. then their Church-state is virtually dissolved . A new-church-state set up by Christ . What a Gospel-church is . That 't is of the Institution of Christ , together with the Ordinances thereunto belonging , Proved . 

Before I come to that which is the main design of this Treatise ; viz. A plain Scripture-demonstration of the Continuance of Gospel-churches , to the next Personal , Glorious coming , and Kingdom of Christ , 't will not be altogether unprofitable , nor impertinent to take a view of the Churches of God , that have from the beginning been in the World ; so far at least as any footsteps of them remain in the sacred Scriptures , the alone unerring guide in this matter . 

First then , that God made Adam upright , in his own likeness , after his own Image , and gave him a Law to walk by , with promises of a higher state of Glory , if he continued in his integrity ( figured forth by the Tree of Life in the midst of the Paradise of God ) and threatening of death in case of defection therefrom , is evident , Gen. 2.16 , 17.  That in this state of Innocency , Adam offered Sacrifices to God ; and that the skins wherewith he was afterwards clothed , were the skins of the sacrificed Beasts ( as some affirm ) seems to be an un-scriptural foolish figment . This is certain , that upon man's disobedience , a New-state of things was introduced . 

1.  He that could converse with God , as a friend ; now fly's from him as an enemy , Gen. 3.8 , 9 , 10.  Nor , 

2.  Can he any longer treat with God upon the terms of the first Covenant ; nor draw nigh to him ( as formerly ) immediately by himself in his original , created Righteousness . He had quickly ( by his disobedience ) forfeited all his primitive Glory , Privileges , with which in the day of his Creation he was invested ; and brought miseries , deaths of all kinds , Temporal , Spiritual , Eternal , both upon himself , and all his Posterity that sprang from him by a natural generation : So that in him , All sinned , and came short of the Glory of God , Rom. 3.23 . 

3.  As an immediate discovery of Jehovahs' displeasure against him for his rebellion , he drives him out of Paradise ; and guards the Tree of Life with Cherubims , and a Flaming Sword that he come not at , or eat of the fruit of it , Gen. 3.24 . 

4.  It was therefore necessary that another Foundation be laid for fallen-mans' drawing nigh to God ( from whom he had thus dreadfully Apostatised ) which being provided in the eternal counsel of God , and agreed upon in a Solemn-covenant , betwixt the Father and the Son , is immediately ( of the inconceivable Grace of GOD ) revealed to Adam , viz. the Seed of the Woman , the Lord Jesus , the only Way to the Father , Gen. 3.15 . Joh. 14.4 , 6.  

5.  That upon this Revelation of Jesus Christ ( mankind multiplying exceedingly by the Power of that word of God , Gen. 1.28 . ) there was a Church-state erected by the Authority and Command of God in Adam's Family , where solemn Worship was managed ; as Praying , Preaching , offering Sacrifices , Gen. 4.3 , 4.  And out of this Church , were open notorious offenders Excommunicated . So was Cain , Gen. 4.12 , 14.  By whose ejection the Church was kept pure , till about the Age of Enosh . 

6.  Much about that time , degeneracy in Worship had so far prevailed , that the Rigteous Seed , saw a necessity of separating from the generality of the Worshippers of that day , and gather themselves together as a distinct People , for the solemn carrying on Divine service amongst themselves , Gen. 4.26 . The words are 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , which are variously rendered . He began to invocate the Name of Lord , so the Vulgar Latin , and Syriac . He hoped to invocate the Name of the Lord , so the Seventy . then ( in his days ) the Sons of men ceased from calling upon the Name of the Lord , so the Chaldee . then the Name of God began to be called upon , so the Samaritan , Arabic Translations renders it . I know there are some who will have the words to point at a great degeneracy in Worship , a sad lapse into Idolatry . But that a defection in Worship cannot be intended , is evident ; for there had been long before , a great degeneracy , a total Apostasy therefrom in the Cainites : but somewhat that men began to do , which hitherto had not been attempted , is intimated thereby ; which can be nothing else , than that Segregation , and aggregation in order to purity of Worship before intimated : For men had before , called on the Name of the Lord ; but there was never tell now , so visible a separation from the rest of the World , for the solemn management of Religious Worship amongst themselves . And as they began now to call upon the Name of the Lord , or to call themselves by the Name of the Lord , as the margin reads , so are they upon the account of this act of theirs , Styled , The Sons of God , Gen. 6.2 . 

7.  About one thousand Years after ( all which time there was in a great measure purity preserved amongst them ) great corruption invades the Church . The nature of it together with its occasion , and spring , we have an account at large of , Gen. 6.  And yet even now the Lord leaves not himself without a Witness . The truth and purity of Worship , together with practick-godlinesss , being maintained in Noah's Family , Gen. 6.8 , 9  & 7.1 . who are ensafed in a fluctuating Ark ; whilst the whole body of Apostates , are swallowed up with the Waters of the Flood : of which Peter speaks , 2 Pet. 3.6 . 

8.  When Noah , and his Family are brought out of the Ark , the Waters of the Flood being gone from off the face of the Earth ; Jehovah enters into a solemn Covenant with him ; gives him several Statutes , and Judgements to Conform to , Gen. 9  These are generally said to be seven . 

1.  The First , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; against extraneous Worship , or Idolatry , the Worshipping the Stars , or Images . 

2. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , against Blaspheming the Name of God.  

3. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , against shedding Blood.  

4. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , against unjust , carnal Copulations . 

5. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , against Rapine , or Robbery . 

6. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , of Judgements , or Punishments , against Malefactors . 

7. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , against eating any member or flesh of a Beast taken from it alive . A special blessing as to propagation is given to him , Gen. 9.7 . So that the Church in his Family soon enlarged its borders . The purity of worship continues amongst them uninterrupted for forty years , or thereabouts . When the Wickedness of Ham committed against the light of Nature , in discovering the nakedness of his Father , breaks forth ; by whom he 's Cursed , Excommunicated ; so the purity of the Church-state is preserved , Gen. 9.25 . Cursed be the Father of Canaan ; so the Arabic reads is . About the Hundred year after the Flood , many Apostatised from the pure ways of God , rose up in rebellion against him ; in defiance of him will build a Tower , the top whereof might reach to Heaven . But yet even in this grand defection , there were some ( at least ) of the posterity of Shem that kept pure ; with whom therefore the Hebrew language remained entire , as Genebrardus Chron. lib. 1. tells us : The truth is , as the learned Bochartus saith , in his Geographia Sacra , l. 1. c. 10.  It cannot be imagined , that either Noah , or Shem , or Arphaxad , or Sala , or Heber ( with whom 't is groundedly to be thought not a few continued ) were in this mad attempt . The Spirit of the Lord seems to intimate the contrary ; they which were engaged in it , were 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the Sons of Men , Gen. 11.5 . viz. an apostate , vile crew , who stand in direct opposition to 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the Sons of God , as the faithful were called in the days of Enosh , as was before said . 

How long the purity of Worship remained after this , is uncertain . This is most certain , that when God called Abraham out of Ur of the Chaldees , Superstition , Idolatry , overspread all . At that time both his Father , and he , were Idolaters , Jos . 24.2 . 

9  This call of God to Abraham was effectual , he obeys it , separates from the degenerate , Idolatrous World ; constitutes a New-church , sets up the pure Worship of God in his Family : Enjoys more clear , full opening of Divine Mysteries than any before him . God enters into Covenant with him , institutes circumcision — See Gen. 12.3 , 7 , 8.  & 13.15 , 16.  & 15.1 , 5 , 6.  & 17.1 , 2 , 9  & 22.17 , 18.  So that the Church of God in Abraham's Family grows up in to greater glory , visibility , than before . Several corruptions are not long after amongst them in Jacobs Family before their going into Egypt , which he reforms , Gen. 35.1 , 2 , 3 , 4.  They polluted themselves with Idolatry in the Land of Egypt , Jos . 24.14 . Ezek. 23.2 , 3. ( brought their Whordoms from thence , ver . 8. which they practised in the Wilderness , Exod. 32. ( and never totally left till they were carried captive into Babylon ) : Nevertheless , the Lord casts them not off : but o the wonder of Love ! brings them from under their bonds , leads them to Mount - Sinai ; makes a Covenant with them , gives them good Statutes and Judgements to walk by . And now that Church becomes as a City on a Hill , visible , conspicuous unto the Nations round about : is decked , adorned , with visible excellency , and glory ▪ that her renown goes forth through the Nations , Ezek. 16.14 . But woe , and alas ! after all the grace of the Lord showed to her , his wonders wrought for her , she quickly forgets , departs from him . Is more notorious for spiritual Whordoms , Wickedness , than all the Nations round about her : Yet God gives her not up , woes , allures her to return to him — . But all to no purpose , Israel ( or the ten Tribes ) is led Captive by Salmanassur : Judah ( or the two Tribes ) is not bettered by it ; but though now and then under the conduct of some good Kings , a reformation is introduced ; yet anon all 's spoilt , marred again . Jehovah calls to return , but their ear is deaf , their hearts hardened , none obey his voice : He professes for all this , he knows not how to give them up , his bowels turn within him towards them , repentings are enkindled for them . Yet this affects them not , so that at last he is forced to send them into Babylon ; yet doth not take off his love , care for them there , nor disregards them as a People unchurcht ; looks upon them as his own in Covenant with him , brings them from thence to their own Land again . then is a new , most absolute reformation begun , by Ezra , Nehemiah , etc.  The Temple is rebuilt ; the men of the great Synagogue instituted . A most diligent consideration of the exemplars of the Holy Scriptures is set upon . The word of God is sedulously Preached , Neh. 8.1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8.  The wicked are excommunicated , Ezr. 4.2 , 3.  From the mixed People , there 's a perfect separation , Ezr. chapters 9.10 . Neh. ch . ult . So that the Church seems to be again comely , through the comeliness that God put upon her : But long abides not firm with him , pollutes his Worship , with the inventions , traditions of men ; departs from the Doctrine he had delivered to her ; particularly , the Doctrine of the free Justification of a sinner before God ; in opposition to which , they introduce justification by the works of the Law. In a word , they become as filthy , and abominable every way , as a people can well be ▪ Nevertheless , God bears with them , their Church-state is not dissolved , they have their Temple , Ordinances , and even the most holy amongst them attend there , as Zachary , Elizabeth , Simeon . The Lord sends a Prophet to them , John ( Elias in spirit ) to reform , bring them back from their Apostasy . At last he sends his Son to reclaim them ; Who ▪ would have gathered them as a Chicken under his wings , but they would not . Him they refused , thrust away , by wicked hands , took , condemned , crucified , slew him ; and now the measure of their Father's iniquity being filled up , and the time appointed by Jehovah , to take down that Tabernacle , being fully come , and to set up another in the room of it by the Messiah , CHRIST , he puts a full period to it , apotomizes , cuts them off , perfectly unchurches them , and ( at last ) lays waste , destroys their City , Temple , with an utter Destruction . Now was the total ruin of that Apostatick Judaic Church . And to purpose , in capital letters , is Lo-ammi , and Loruhamah written upon them , viz. ye are not my People , I have no mercy for you ; and not so plainly at any time as now . 'T were easy to make many remarks to the advantage of the present truth we are risen up in the defence of , from the foregoing discourse . The prudent Reader , can do it himself . To whom we leave it . The whole Church-politie of the Jews , being virtually dissolved at the death of Christ , a New-church-state is introduced by him : New Churches form according to his rule , model , new-institutions appointed by him , which 't is the duty of those Churches to conform to . 

Two things must here briefly be enquired into . 

1.  What a Gospel-church , or an Instituted-church of Christ is . 

2.  That such a Church is of the Institution of Christ . 

As touching the first , A Cospel-church is a Society of Believers , once dead in trespasses , and sins ; but now quickened by the Spirit , sanctified , justified , by the Freegrace of God in Christ ; illuminated by the same Spirit in the knowledge of his Will , separated from the World , and voluntarily joined together for the exercise of the Communion of Saints in the due observation of all the Institutions , Ordinances of Christ . This description of a Gospel-church is proved in every part of it , from the ensuing Scriptures , Eph. 2.1 . And you hath he quickened who were dead in trespasses , and sins , ver . 5.  When we were dead in sins , hath quickened us together with Christ . 1 Cor. 6.11 . ye are washed , sanctified , justified , in the name of the Lord Jesus , and by the Spirit of our God. 1 Cor. 1.2 . Unto the Church of God which is at Corinth , to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus , called to be Saints . 2 Cor. 6.16 , 17.  What agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols ? For ye are the Temple of the living God — wherefore come out from amongst them , and be ye separate , saith the Lord , and touch not the unclean thing , and I will receive you . Heb. 3.1 . Holy brethren , partakers of the Heavenly calling . Jam. 1.18 . Of his own will begat he us by the word of Truth . rev. 1.20 . The seven ( Golden ) Candlesticks which thou sawest are seven Churches , 1 Pet. 2.5 . Eph. 2.21 , 22 , 23.  

As touching the second , that such a Church was instituted by Christ , is evident , 

1.  From Christ's appointment , and approbation of such a Church , Mat. 18.15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20.  

2.  Christ charges his Apostles , Mat. 28. to teach those , who should be converted by their Ministry , to observe whatever he commanded them . In pursuance of which charge , we find , that as soon as any were converted to the Faith , by the direction of the Apostles , they were gathered into Church-societies , Acts 2.41 , 42 , 47. 8.1 . 11.26 . 14.23 , 27.  

3.  These are called the Churches of God , of Christ . Act. 20.28 . 1 Cor. 1.2 . & 10.32 . 11.22 . & 15.9 . 2 Cor. 1.1 . Gal. 1.13 . 1 Tim. 3.5 . Rom. 16.16 . because of their institution , establishment by him . 

4.  The Apostles , in the Name , Authority of Christ , direct their Epistles to them as such . 1 Cor. 1.1 . 2 Cor. 1.1 . Gal. 1.2 . Phil. 1.1 . Col. 1.2 . & 4.16 . 1 These . 1.1 . 2 These . 1.1 . Eph. 1.1 . compared with Acts 20.17 . 1 Pet. 5.2 . or unto particular persons , giving directions touching their carriage , deportment , and duty towards them . 1 Tim. 3.15 . Tit. 1.5 . 

5.  Christ calls them his Churches , rev. 1.20 . 

6.  own 's himself to be their Head , Husband , Lord , King ; they his Body , Bride , House , Family — of which afterwards . 

7.  A great part of the Apostolick-writings consists in giving Precepts , Exhortations , Counsels to guide , lead them in their duties to each other , in such a relation ; and for their preservation in Purity , and Order . Of which we shall have occasion particularly to make mention in the ensuing Discourse . 

8.  His special care of them . 

9  The particular notice he takes of them , in the book of the Revelations , sending particular Epistles to them ; Exhorting , reproving , counselling , encouraging them ; taking no notice of any that did not appertain to them , rev. chapters 2. and 3. with much more that might be said , doth abundantly demonstrate that the Church described , was of the institution of Jesus Christ . 

That the Ordinances practised in and amongst those Churches ; such as Preaching the Word , Prayer , Baptism , breaking Bread , etc. were of the Appointment of Christ , will not be denied , se Act. 2.42 . and 6.2 . 1 Cor. 14.3 . 2 Tim. 4.2 . Heb. 13.7 . Act. 6.4 . and 13.2 , 3. CITIZEN  Tim. 2.1 . Mat. 28.19 . and 26.26 , 27. 1  Cor. 11.23 . 

ERRATA . Reader , Some few mistakes in Printing , are here remarked ; the rest being inconsiderable , are left to thee to amend . 

IN the Epistle to the Reader , p. 10. l. 21. r. bloody . l. 36. abominable . p. 13. l. 3. hath . In the body of the Book , p. 7. l. 2. r. it 's . l. 3. this . p. 16. l. 10. blot out , the. p. 17. l. 11. r. letter . p. 20. l. 34. persons . p. 21. l. 15 inasmuch . l. 17. that . p. 30. l. 14. their . p. 39 l. 5. blot out , are . p. 54. l. 8. r ▪ 1 Job . p. 56. l. 32. apostasy . p. 63. l. 15. women . p. 66. l. 33. after much , r. as . p. 73. l. 30. tu es . p. 77. l. 19 increase . p. 79 l. 30 throughout . p. 85. l. 28. for , have . r. are . p. 114. l. 7.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . p. 117. l. 22. after have , add , said . 

Gospel-churches , A Standing ORDINANCE OF Jesus Christ . CHAP. I  Gospel-churches an Institution of Christ , to continue to his next coming , demonstrated from the Appellations given in Scripture to such Churches . They are called , 1.  The Kingdom of God. Why they are so called , opened . Mark 9.1 . Acts 1.3 . and 19.8 , 9  Explained . Several inferences from hence . A twofold Kingdom , viz. of God , and of the Devil , and Antichrist . Several ways Satan takes for the support of the Antichristian Kingdom . An Objection Answered . 2.  A House built upon a Rock , Matth. 16.18 . opened at large . Peter not the Rock , but Christ , proved . The Gates of Hell , what they import . Satan's attempts by subtlety and power , to destroy the Church , invalid . An Objection Answered . 3.  The Kingdom of Heaven . Why the Gospel-church-state is so called , An Objection Answered . 4.  A Kingdom that cannot be shaken , Heb. 12.27 , 28. explained . 5.  The Ministration of the Spirit , 2 Cor. 3.7 , 8. opened at large . 6.  The Body of Christ . Gospel-churches hereby intended , proved . Upon what accounts they are so called , shown . Several inferences from hence demonstrating the continuation of them . 7.  The Temple , Tabernacle , House , Building of the Lord Upon what accounts they are so called . An Objection Answered . 

Having already demonstrated what a particular Church of Christ is , and that as such , 't is one of the Gospel-institutions Commanded , Erected by him ; i e. 't is the Will of Christ that all believers ( ordinarily ) should adjoyn themselves to some one or other such Church . That which is Incumbent on us further to Evince , is , that such Churches ( or the Gospel-church-state ) with the Institutions , Ordinances , Worship thereunto Affixed , shall continue unto his next glorious Coming and Kingdom ; which we now Address ourselves to the dispatch of . 

Demonstration I  The Appellations given in Scripture , to such a Church ( or Churches ) of Christ , do evidently evince the Truth hereof . 

First , 't is called the Kingdom of God , Mar. 1.15 . The Kingdom of God is at hand : And Chap. 9.1 . Till they have seen the Kingdom of God come with Power . He seems to have respect to the day of Pentecost , when the Spirit was poured down from on high on the Apostles , who were then endued with Power from above according to the promise of Christ to them : by which they went forth to preach the Gospel , plant Churches , etc. Mar. 15.43 . Who also waited for the Kingdom of God , i e. the Gospel-ministration , Luke , 7.28 . He that is least in the Kingdom of God is greater than he : See Chap. 10.9 . and 23.51 . Joh. 3 ▪ 3 , 5 Act. 1.3 . And speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God , i e. the Laws , Institutions , Rules , Orders , relating to the Churches . See Ch. 8.12 . and 19.8 , 9 — disputing , and persuading the things concerning The Kingdom of God — But when diverse spoke evil of that way : — What way ? The way of Gospel-ministrations ; or the worship of God in a Gospel-day ; which they spoke evil of as Heretical ( After the way which they call Heresy , so worship I the God of my Fathers , Act. 24.14 . ) Chap. 20 25 ▪ with 28. and 28.33 , 34.  

Upon what Accounts the Gospel-church-state is called , The Kingdom of God , must a little be enquired into . 't is so called upon the Account , 

1.  Of its Glory , and Excellency . persons , and things said to be of God , are therefore so said to be . As men of God , Jud. 13.6 , 8. 1  Sam. 2.27 . and 9.6 . 1 Chron. 23.14 . Hill of God , 1 Sam. 10.5 , 10.  Psal . 24.3 . and 42.6 . and 68.15 . This ministration excels all that went before it , for excellency and glory , 2 Cor. 3.7 , 9 , 10. ( of which more anon . ) 

2.  Of its Extract , and Original . there 's nothing of man in it , 't is all of God : given by the Father to Jesus Christ , who came into the World to reveal , and discover his Will touching that matter , Joh. 1.14 . 

3.  Of Believers open , visible subjection to , owning , acknowledging of God in their Obedience thereunto . 

4.  Of God's care of it , protection over it , engagement to continue , support , maintain , uphold it to the end . Whence it evidently follows , 

1.  That there must be a continuance of this ministration of the Gospel , the Gospel-church-state , with all the Laws , Institutions , Ordinances , Orders , thereto appertaining , till it be suspended , abrogated by Jehovah . Who hath Power , Authority over his Kingdom ? or can presume to disannul , suspend any thing he hath therein Instituted ; but by such an Act he advanceth himself above God , and so proclaims himself to be the Antichrist that was to come ? Denies the Father , and that supreme ? ? Authority , from whence the original of the Gospel-ministration doth flow . 

2.  The veracity , faithfulness , wisdom , power of God , are all engaged for the support , and upholdment of this Ministration . 't is of him , from him : he 's obliged upon that foot of account , to exert , and put forth the perfections of his Nature for the upholdment of it . What Devils , beasts of Prey , yea , what inward lusts , or corruptions in the Saints themselves , shall be able to evert , bring to naught that Kingdom he 's obliged to support , and continue ? 

3.  That there must be a law produced from this High and Sovereign Lawgiver , for the suspension , perioding of this Ministration , or it abides in force , and will do so , whether we be subject to it , or not . Our wills , fancies , humours , imaginations , any pretended Revelation will not justify any person's Nonconformity thereunto . Let any Statute-law , from Jehovah be produced for its suspension , dissolution , and the Controversy is at an end . Where hath God said , My Kingdom shall continue only for a hundred , two , three , or a thousand years , and then period ; after which I 'll leave my Children to act as they please , with respect to any Laws , or Institutions relating to it ? If there be altum silentium , a deep silence with respect to any such Laws , it becomes , and greatly concerns persons to take heed , that they withdraw not themselves from , oppose not his Sovereignty herein , lest they be found fighters against God.  

Besides , 't is not inconsiderable , that there are but two Kingdoms in the World.  

1.  The Kingdom of God ; which , as hath been showed ( as to visibility ) most eminently consists in Gospel-ministrations . 

2.  The Kingdom of the Devil , and Antichrist , ( who receives his Seat , Power , and great Authority from the Dragon , or Devil , rev. 13.2 . ) and to one of these we must needs be visibly subject . Two ways Satan takes for the support of the Antichristian Kingdom ; 

1.  The one is by establishing Laws foreign , yea , contrary to the Laws of Jehovah , and compelling all to subject to them . The other is , 

2.  By casting a slight , contempt , upon the Laws of Divine appointment : and whether the one way , or the other , he prevail upon poor souls , he hath his end ; for Jehovah's Sovereign Authority is thereby trampled upon . 

Objection . If it be Objected , that the legal Ministration is called , The Kingdom of God ; and Christ tells the Jews nevertheless , that it shall be taken from them ( and we know that an actual Period is put thereunto ) Mat. 21.43 . so that the Church-state being called The Kingdom of God , is no Argument to prove its continuance . 

Answer . The Answer is easy , 1.  it 's granted , that the Mosaic Ministration is so called , and that because it had its Original from God , who descending upon Mount Sinai , by the Ministry of Angels , gave forth the Law , with the Statutes , Judgements , and Ordinances . 2.  it 's also granted , that the Whole of that Ministration hath expired for above this One Thousand Six Hundred Years . But 3.  There were frequent intimations in the Scripture , that it should so expire , Deut. 18.15 . 18.  Psal . 40.6 . Isa . 65.17 . Hag. 2.6 , 21.  ( These present Heavens , or Judaic Church-state , with all the Institutions , Ordinances thereto appertaining will I shake , so as to remove , totally abolish . ) Mat. 24.2 . ( The Temple to which the Judaic Solemn-worship was affixed , shall be utterly destroyed ; so the whole of that service thereto appertaining , cease . ) Let but one the like instance of the purpose of God , for the determination of the New-testament-ministration before the next glorious personal Appearance of Christ , be produced , and there 's an end of this Controversy . 4.  They were not the Powers of the world , nor the declensions , apostasies of the Subjects of that Ministration , that put a Period to it ; but the Act of God himself , the Sovereign thereof . 5.  Whatever the corruptions of the Church-state were ( as they were very great ) 't is the commendation of the Lords poor people that they continued in it , as Zachary , Elizabeth , etc. because in so doing , they testify their subjection to the Lord , who Instituted it . 6.  Nor was it actually removed , but by the introduction of a new , more spiritual , sublime Ministration , set on foot by Jesus , the Son of God , fore-prophesied of , as the great Prophet of the Church , who was to period that Ministration , and set up another ; to whom we are charged to attend in all things . 

Secondly , Gospel-churches ( or the Gospel-church-state ) are said to be a House built upon a Rock , Mat. 7.25 . and 16.18 . Upon this Rock I will build my Church . 't is necessary that we Inquire ; 

I What we are to understand by this Rock . 

1.  The Papists tell us , that by this Rock , we are to understand Peter . The vanity of which pretention , is evident : For , 1.  't is not ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , but 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) upon This Peter , but upon This Rock . 2.  Peter no where in any of his Epistles asserts himself to be the Rock upon which the Church is Built , nor do any of the Apostles in any of their Epistles so affirm of him . He accounts himself but as an Apostle of Jesus Christ , 1 Pet. 1.1 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , a Co-elder ( with the rest of the Presbyters , or Elders ) 1 Pet. 5.1 . 3.  Christ is asserted to be the alone Rock , Foundation of his Church , 1 Pet. 2.4 , 5 , 6 , 7. 1  Cor. 3.11 . in opposition to all others . 4.  He himself , as well as other Believers , was built upon the Rock , which bore him , and not he it , or the Church . 5.  Paul expressly asserts , 2 Cor. 11.5 . that he was not inferior to the very chiefest Apostles ; which had been false , if Peter had been constituted the Rock upon which the Church was built . 6.  If he were the Rock when he denied Christ ( as he did dreadfully ) and at last fell asleep , What became of the Rock , Foundation of the Church ? But this vain pretention is hardly worth our considering ; nor should it be granted , would it at all conduce to the support of the Roman Papal Synagogue , to which good service it 's designed . Therefore , 

2.  By the Rock , we are to understand the Lord Jesus Christ , the Mediator of the New-covenant . He is expressly so called , 1 Cor. 10.4 . Upon what account , is not to our purpose at present to Inquire . 

II What we are to understand by the Church . 

1.  Not particular Believers in a scattered , dispersed State.  

But 2.  Saints gathered together in the order , and fellowship of the Gospel . This is evident , as if written with the beams of the Sun ; for to particular Believers , as such , in their scattee red dispersed State , the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven , this Power of binding and losing , doth not appertain ; But to thy , Church ( congregated ) it doth , v. 19  

III What is signified by the gates of Hell ; which 't is said-shall not prevail against this Church . 

First , The subtlety , policy of Satan . Over the gates of the City , was wont to be the Council-house . Let all the Devils in Hell sin in Council against the Lord's Church , they shall not be able , by all their cunning , subtlety , to prevail against it . The subtle attempts of Satan to undermine , destroy this Church , have been ( are ) various . To enumerate particulars , is not our present design : 't is enough , that our Lord assures us , whatever they are , they shall prove ineffectual . Yet perhaps it may not be altogether impertinent to mention some few of his subtleties , with respect to this matter . He hath then attempted to destroy it in subtlety , 

1.  With respect to Doctrine ; labouring to undermine , destroy the fundamental Doctrines of the Gospel , thereby subverting the Faith of some . His attempts against the Person of Christ ; sometimes endeavouring to create a mis-belief , with respect to his Eternal Deity ( to which John opposes himself in his Gospel , by impregnable , undeniable Arguments ) ; at other times , to the verity of his Humanity ( against which the same Apostle advanceth himself in his Epistle , 1 Joh. 1. ) his designs against the Offices of Christ were also early in the Apostle's days , particularly against his Priestly Office , labouring to introduce a justification by the Works of the Law , or , as it were by the works of the Law , Rom. 9.32 . viz. partly by Christ , and partly by Works , or internal Sanctification . A design subtly managed , and carried on by the bloody Jesuits and others , at this day ( as is known ) ; to which the Apostles in their Epistles , and other Worthies since , have opposed themselves . But though he hath hereby drawn off ( at seasons ) not a few , from the simplicity of the Gospel ; yet there hath all along been a Testimony born in the Churches against him , which he hath not been able to withstand , or repel . 

2.  With respect to Worship , and that two ways : 

1.  By introducing human Observances into the service of God , and Christ , so polluting , defiling it , that he accounts it not his Worship . And hereby for a season , he almost totally prevailed upon the body of Professors of Christanity . So that the whole world ( as 't were ) wondered after this Beast , rev. 13.3 . And the whorish Woman , or false Church , being herself bewitched with this intoxicating Cup of Fornication , she held it forth to the Nations ( with External pomp and grandeur ) to drink of it ; and they generally drank of it , and were drunk , and mad with it , rev. 17.2 , 3 , 4 , 5.  Yet all along Christ had his Remnant , that witnesed against these Abominations , ( amongst whom the true Church-state was continued , and the purity of Ordinances remained ) who also Sealed their Testimony with their Blood.  

2.  By reproaching , reviling , contemning , despising the pure Institutions of Christ , as poor , low , and carnal , pretending to a more sublime , high , spiritual Ministration . As some even in the Apostles days , and since . And herein Satan eminently appeared as an Angel of Light , withdrawing persons from the fellowship , ways of the Gospel , under the pretence of greater Spirituality , Heavenliness , leaving the Word of the Beginning , and pressing after Perfection . A brave Pretext ! wherewith the minds of many have been ( are ) not a little taken , ensnared . But neither this way hath he been able to destroy the Church , which hath weathered this point also , with , and prevailed against , him : Being from its own experience ( as from the Scripture ) ascertained , that the more they are in a conscientious Observance of the Institutions of Christ , the more do they grow up into the Spirit , Life , and Power of divine things . Their spiritual progress , and growth in Grace , depending singly upon Jehovah's Blessing ; which is promised solely ( and they meet with it ) in their conscientious attendment on him in divine Appointments . 

Secondly , The force , power , tyranny , oppressive , destroying practices of the Wicked One , are also intended by these Gates . The armoury of the City was over the gates of it . But in this forcible attaque of the Church , he hath also failed . He did his uttermost by bloody cruelty during the first Persecutions . But what was the issue ? The executioners of his wrath the Roman-pagan-emperors , had Torments within them , perpetually gnawing them , whilst the Holy ones that kept the Commandments of Jesus were filled with Peace and Joy , and triumphed over them in the Spirit , and Power of Jesus both living and dying . The vengeance of God eminently wrought on their notorious Persecutors , whilst the blessing , and good will of him that dwelled in the Bush , was with these ; and the more they were Persecuted , the more they grew : So that it became a Maxim , Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae ; The Blood of the Martyrs , the seed of the Church . And Satan not being able to hold it in the Roman-pagan-state , enters into the Papal-antichristian-monarchy , and hath therein hectored , and ranted , breathing forth nothing but threatenings and slaughters against the Saints of the Most-high , who have the Commandments of God , and Testimony of Jesus . Million of the Lords poor People have been destroyed by this Roman-antichristian-beast in days past : & of late not a few ; In the Massacres of Paris , Ireland , and the Valleys of Piedmont , etc.  Not to mention the Bonfires they made of the bodies of our brethren , in the bloody Mary's days : Which ( notwithstanding their haughty confidence ) they 'll shortly pay dearly for . The judgements of the Lord God Almighty will speedily come upon the great Whore , for these cruelties ; his Wrath will consume Her utterly . But what 's the Issue ? The number of the Lambs-followers are multiplied ; their faith , confidence , and courage heightened . And let the Pope , and that bloody Crew , know , that they are ready to withstand him in his next attaque , and advance against them , being encouraged thereunto , by that great Cloud of worthy Witnesses they are encompassed about with ; and that plerophory of assurance , that in this last Attempt , he , with his whole Party , will stumble , fall , go into Perdition never to appear more . 

The sum is , 1.  The Church is built upon a Rock ; who then is able to evert , overturn it ? What winds , blasts , storms , what ragings of Waves , Seas , can over-whelm , destroy it ? Satan hath failed in all his Attempts hitherto against it , and proved in-successful . 2.  Christ hath engaged that it shall continue unshaken , immovable , notwithstanding all attaques by fraud , or force . Is he not faithful ? Will he not make good his Word ? Can he depart from it ? Wants he Will , or Power to accomplish what he hath promised ? What more derogatory to Christ , impious , wicked , can be Asserted ? 

Object . But Churches may Apostatise , and so dis-church themselves : They may provoke the Lord by his judgements to do so . The first , is notoriously Evident in the Church of Rome . The latter manifestly true with respect to other Churches . 

Answ . Both the first , and second , is granted . But , 

1.  The promise of Christ cannot fail . Therefore , 

2.  The defection of this , or that particular Church , the removing the Candlestick from it , the taking away its Church-state was never denied by us . Such a dispensation is not in the least contrary to the promises of Christ , Mat. 16.  But , 

3.  A total Apostasy of all the Churches of Christ in the World , with the suspension , cessation , of the Ordinances of the Gospel-thereupon , is what is impleded by us , as diametrically opposite to this promise of our Lord  

Two things are also heedfully to be attended to , 

1.  That we un-church not a Church , when that is not to be found upon it ; for which the Lord hath declared they are un-churched ; nor before he doth un-church them . Some Errors in doctrine , formality , lukewarmness , departure from first-love , doth not un-church a Church rightly Constituted . These things were found in the Churches of Corinth , Ephesus , Laodicea , etc. yet at the same time true Churches of Christ : The latter are owned , written to by Christ as such , as the former was by the Apostle of the Gentiles , when yet these evils were found amongst them , 1 Cor. 1. 2  Cor. 2.  rev. ch . 23.  

2.  That 't is the Duty of particular Believers , upon the un-churching a Church , to join themselves to some other Church ; or if a number sufficient of themselves so to do , to form themselves into a body , or Church of Christ ; for otherwise they disobey , and offer an open affront to the authority of Christ in that great Gospel-appointment of his , and so indeed lift up themselves against his Kingly Sovereignty over them . 

Thirdly , This Church-state is represented under the Notion of the Kingdom of Heaven , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , that Kingdom of Heavens , Mat. 13.24 , 31 , 33 , 44 , 45 , 47.  & 25.1 . The Kingdom of Heaven shall be likened unto ten Virgins , etc.  And it wants not its weight , that this Kingdom of Heaven , or Gospel-church-state ( notwithstanding the declension , drowsiness , sleepiness , of the subjects of it , or Virgin-professors , visibly Espoused to Christ , in respect of their subjection to his Institutions , 2 Cor. 11.2 . ) is expressly affirmed to continue unto the coming of our Lord , v. 6 , 7 , 10.  And at midnight there was a Cry made , Behold the Bridegroom ( Christ ) cometh , go ye out to meet Him. then all those Virgins arose , and trimmed their Lamps , etc.  And while they went to buy , the Bridegroom came , and they that were ready , went in with him to the Marriage , and the door was shut . 

I Why the Gospel-church-state is represented under the Notion of the Kingdom of Heaven , must a little be enquired into . 't is so upon the account , 

1.  Of its Original from thence . 't is not of man , but from Heaven , as was John's Doctrine , Baptism , Ministry . 

2.  Of its supereminent Glory ; whatever persons accounted of it ; 't is of Heaven , heavenly , beautiful , glorious . 

3.  Of the design of God in the Institution , Erection of it , viz. to lead persons to Heaven , Eternal Life . 

4.  Of its Stability , Duration . Heavenly things are stable , abiding . The Kingdoms of this world are changing , mutable ; the Kingdom of Heaven fixed , permanent . 

II That none but He who dwells in Heaven , is higher than the Highest ; who is the alone , Supreme Sovereign of this Kingdom , hath Power to alter the Frame of it , put a Period to it . The Devil hath no Power , or Authority in it . he 's indeed styled the Prince of this World , Joh. 14.30 . the Prince of the Power of the Air , Eph. 2.2 . The whole World is said to be in subto him , 1 Joh. 5.19 . ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) He hath a Presidency , Authority in the Anti-christian Kingdom , is the Head of it , is Worshipped in it . The Devil gave him ( the Beast , the Pope ) his Power , rev. 13.2 , 4.  And the Antichristians are expressly said to Worship Devils , rev. 9.20 . because they Worship Idols of Gold , Silver , etc.  A Worship Instituted , introduced at first by them . But with respect to the Kingdom of Heaven , he hath nothing to do , nor can he by any of his Wiles , Strength , cause it to pass away . The same may be said , concerning the sons of men . They may 't is true advance against it ; attempt to shake , remove it , ( as they have done , and do with all their force , and cunning ) but 't is a Kingdom so far above them , so supported , strengthened by the King of Heaven , that they never succeed in their Attempts . Vain , ridiculous are their Consultations , Aggregations , together in order hereunto . Can they pull the Stars out of the Firmament ? Stop the Sun in its Course ? Turn it into blackness , darkness ? Pull it from the place God hath Ordained for it ? Are not all Attempts of such a Nature worthy to be scorned , derided at , as acts of the greatest Folly , and desperate Madness ? Such are the advances of the Antichristians against this State , Kingdom : Whilst God sits in the Heavens , he will laugh them to Scorn , and have them in Derision . There must first be a Power , Authority above God's , before this Kingdom can be brought to a Dissolution by any , save he that Erected it . 

Object . But doth not God say , that he will create new-heavens , and a new-earth ; and the former shall not be remembered , nor come into mind , Isa . 65.17 . And the Apostle Peter assures us 2 Pet. 3.7 , 10 , 12 , 13. that the Heavens that now are , are kept in store , reserved unto Fire , etc. that there is a time in which the Heavens shall pass away with a great Noise , etc.  They shall be dissolved ; that the Saints look for New-heavens . 

Answ . 1.  Dato non Concesso , granting for Disputation's-sake , that by Heavens , we are to understand a Church-state ( perhaps somewhat else is intended in the places under considerations , viz. the purifying , delivering the Creation from that vanity , corruption , to which 't was subjected by reason of Sin , the Introduction of the Restitution of all things by Jesus , Act. 3.21 . ) yet , 

2.  It doth not yet appear , nor is it in haste like to be proved , that by the Heavens that are to pass away , more is to be understood , than the removing of the Judaic Church-state ; which indeed passed away , and was melted down by fervent heat , when the Temple to which 't was affixed , was consumed with Fire , not long after Peter written that Epistle . The New-heavens spoken of , may perhaps signify the Gospel-church-state ; there 's not a tittle spoken of their Passing away , but the contrary , Isa . 65.22 . But 

3.  That we may give to this Objection ( such as it is ) the greatest weight it 's capable of , Let it further be granted , that by the Heavens in Peter , which shall Pass away , is to be understood the Gospel-church-state ; and that Isaiah , and Peter speak of a New-church-state which shall succeed that ▪ The first Heavens Pass not away till the consuming Fire is kindled ; nor is it in the Power of man to set Fire to them , to cause them to cease to be ; as the Creation of the New-heavens is the peculiar Act of God ; so is the dissolution of the Old.  

Fourthly . This Church-state is represented under the Notion of A Kingdom which cannot be shaken , moved , Heb. 12.27 , 28.  wherefore , we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved , let us have Grace , whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence , and godly fear . A few things must be enquired into , viz.  

I What we are to understand by this Kingdom ? 

Answ . The Gospel-church-state we are discoursing of . This is Evident , for , 

1.  't is a Kingdom introduced immediately upon the shaking of the Heaven , so as to remove the things shaken , i e. upon the putting a period to the Judaic-church-state , with the removing of all the carnal Ordinances thereunto appertaining . When God gave forth the Law upon mount Sinai , his voice shaken the Earth , v. 26.  But than was the solemn , visible beginning , or creation of their Heaven , or Church-state , which now is shaken by the death of Christ ; so that 't is virtually removed , and Saints are no longer to be subject to it . 

2.  't is a Kingdom introduced by Christ's speaking from Heaven , v. 25. or of his establishment as coming from the bosom of the Father , and declaring his mind to the Sons of Men. Which can be nothing else , but the Gospel-oeconomy , or ministration introduced by him . 

3.  't is a Kingdom which they , the Jews ( believers at least amongst them ) were 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , then receiving , or undertaking , subjecting to , which was the Ministration spoken of : And is indeed one part of the design of the Apostle in this Epistle , to persuade them fully to embrace , or receive , with the rejection of Mosaic antiquated observances . 

4.  't is a Kingdom with respect to which they are said to serve God acceptably , with reverence and godly fear , v. 28.  Gr. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 — which though in the general it denotes to serve in any kind of work or service ; yet it 's special signification , as used by the Seventy in the Old Testament , and Christ and his Apostles in the New , is , to worship God in ways of his own institution , and appointment . 

II In what sense it 's affirmed concerning this Kingdom , and the things appertaining to it , that it cannot be shaken , moved ? That those things which cannot be shaken may remain . The words are variously rendered ; That those things may remain which are immovable , V.L. Which are not to be moved , Ar. Which are not to be shaken , Aeth . Which are void of motion , Sir The words are 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . The word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , signifies to be moved , or shaken , as with Winds or Tempests ; as the ship in the Sea with storms . — The Seventy use it when the earth is said to be moved , 2 King. 22.16 . And the Pillars of it shaken , Job . 9.6 . to be by force removed out of its place , 1 Chron. 16.30 Job 41.15 . Job 9.28 . with respect to which the Gospel-ministration , with the Ordinances of it , are said to be 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Immovables , things that cannot ( are not to ) be removed taken down : Storms and Tempests it meets with , but it abides firm and immovable under all . 

A Kingdom which cannot be moved ; which is also diversely rendered , an immovable Kingdom , V.L. A Kingdom which is not shaken , Ar. Which cannot be shaken , Aeth . The word is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , immoveable , unshaken , firm , stable , that bears up against winds and tides . The most rough winds , impetuous storms , waves , cannot shake , sink it . 

The meaning is , the Mosaic Ministration , the Judaic Church-state , was liable to shake ; 't was at last so to be shaken , as to be utterly removed , taken out of the way ; but this Kingdom , the oeconomy of the Gospel , the Gospel-church-state is not such . 't is true , it shall at last period , but not by any shake that shall dissolve it , as the former to make way for a new , and better Ministration : It shall continue immoveable till it run into , and be swallowed up in the Glorious Visible Kingdom of the Messiah , or New - Jerusalem-state . 

Fifthly , The Church-state is called , the Ministration of the Spirit , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , That Ministration of the Spirit , 2 Cor. 3.7 , 8.  

That by the Ministration of the Spirit , we are to understand the whole Gospel-oeconomy , or Ministration , the Doctrine , Worship , Institutions thereof , is evident , 

1.  From its Antithesis unto the Ministration of the Letter , or legal Mosaic observances , called the Ministration of Death , and Condemnation , v. 6 , 7 , 9 which the Apostle tells us was done away ; now 't was that whole Ministration , as made up of Institutions , Ordinances peculiar to it , that was done away . 

2.  'T was such a Ministration as the Apostles were Ministers of , v. 6. i e. which they Preached , declared from Jesus Christ , according to his charge to them , Matth. 28.20 . and were ministering to him , and the Saints in . 'T was not the Doctrine of the Gospel , inward purity , practic Godliness only , that they declared as the mind of Christ ; but the Worship thereof , institutions of his appointment thereunto appertaining . no sooner were persons converted to the Faith of Christ , but they were gathered by the Apostles into a Church-state ; Acts 2.41 , 42 , 46. and 9.31 . and 11.22 , 26. and 14.23 , 27. and 15.41 . and 16.5 . and 20.28 . This is too evident to be denied . 

3.  'T was such a Ministration , Wherein as in a Glass with open face ( compared to those ▪ veiled , dark sights they had in their Passover , Sacrifices , etc. under the Mosaic Ministration ) they beheld the Glory of the Lord , and were changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory , even as by the Spirit of the Lord , v. 18.  The first Primitive believers , 't will not be denied , attended upon the Lord in Gospel-institutions . 't is evident they did so from the Scriptures but now quoted . In their so doing they beheld the glory of the Lord , had choice discoveries , displays of it ; grew up into a Conformity unto him in their conscientious waiting on him herein . And whatever any say , thousands of believers at this day , that are found waiting upon the Lord in his own institutions , such as the Church-fellowship , Breaking Bread , Prayer , etc. meet with presence , sights of Glory , Divine Transformations , renewals in the Spirit of their minds . When any are found in institutions shaken in their minds , touching them as the institutions of Christ , that by virtue of His Sovereign Authority , Command , they ought to attend to , 't is no wonder if they see not his Glory , know nothing of his transforming power through them . They come not in faith , sanctify not his name in what they do ; therefore meet not with his blessing . 

Quest . The Question is upon what accounts this Ministration is called , The Ministration of the Spirit ? 

Answ . 't is so called with respect . 

1.  To it 's Supereminent , Superexcelling Glory : For Excellency , Glory , far superior unto any Ministration that went before it . What compare is there , betwixt Spirit , and Letter ; that which hath life in it , and that which hath none ? 

2.  To the Communication of the Spirit through it , by it . Gal. 3.2 . Received ye the Spirit by the Works of the Law , or by the hearing of Faith ? 

3.  To its being given forth by Christ through the Holy Spirit , Acts 1.2 . The Lord Jesus being constituted by the Father , Mediator of the New-covenant , Prince , Ruler , Priest , Prophet to the Church ; was to reveal the whole of his mind , and Will , to them as such : For his inablement whereunto the Father pours out of the Spirit without measure upon him ; through this Spirit he gave Commandments to his Apostles relating to Gospel-worship , with a charge to them to Communicate them to others . Matth. 28. ult . Which also they did . 

4.  To that Glorious effusion of the Spirit in the day of Pentecost , Act. 2. at the beginning , or first Public setting up of this Ministration . 

5.  To evince that 't is the highest , last Ministration of institutions , or visible Ordinances , that Saints are to expect : that when it 's taken down , there shall be no more ( nor indeed will there be need of any ; ) what Ministration can be supposed to be higher than the Ministration of the Spirit ? What can supersede it ? Yea , the Apostle fairly intimates that it shall so remain , not to pass away as the Ministration of the ter , or Law that went before it , 2 Cor. 3.7 . which was to be done away . For if that which is done away was Glorious , much more that which remaineth is Glorious . And 't is not to be passed by in silence , that the Apostle makes part of the excelling Glory ( above that of the Law ) of the Gospel-ministration to consist in the duration of it . If that which is done away , was glorious ; much more that which remaineth , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , that fixed , abiding , unalterable Ministration . 

6.  The managery of all the Worship , Ordinances , appertaining to this Ministration , is to be in the Spirit . Without whom all that 's done , is not , will never be acceptable to God.  

7.  The means of its support , upholdment , continuance , progress , is the same Spirit , 2 Cor. 10.4 . The Weapons of our warfare are not Carnal , but Mighty through God — . Antichrist hath other ways to support , promote his filthy Worship , senseless traditions , ridiculous fopperies , viz. the arm of flesh , Horrid , Bloody Plots , Conspiracies , to massacre , destroy , cut off , such as stand in the way of his devices : Prisons , Gibbets , Stakes , Flames to consume , devour such as refuse to drink of the Cup of his Fornications ; but , Lex nova non se vindicat ultore gladio , the Law of Christ knows no such ways , methods for its support , increase . 't is the Spirit , Power of God by which it is ( ever was ) maintained : a neglect of whom ; and turning aside to the Power , Wisdom of Man , warring after the flesh , was the bane of Christianity , and the first spring off the Antichristian apostasy . 

Three things necessarily follow from hence . 

1.  That a slighting , undervaluing , withdrawing from Gospel-institutions , is a slighting of the most glorious Ministration , that ever was set on foot in the World.  

2.  't is a contempt , undervaluing of the Holy Spirit of the Lord ; whose they are , and from whom they did proceed . Let persons pretensions be what they will , it cannot be otherwise . Gospel-institutions are of , through the Spirit ; to slight , these is to cast contempt upon him from whom they are . 

3.  That the Spirit is obliged to support , maintain them against all oppositions . He remains with his People for ever for that end , John 16.13 . Howbeit when the Spirit of Truth is come , he shall guide you into all Truth . v. 14.  He shall Glorify me , for he shall receive of mine , and shall show it unto you . And he hath actually done so hitherto , keeping alive a blessed witness , testimony to them , for them , in his called , chosen witnesses more or lesle , in every day . Though sometimes this their testimony hath cost them dear ; viz. loss of Goods , Enjoyments , Friends , Liberty , Life itself ; yet they have Gloryed , Triumphed under all through this Spirit of Glory , and of God that rested upon them , and enabled them in this work . The very truth is , as the great controversy of Christ , with the Nations of the European World , hath been upon the account of their Spiritual fornications , or false worship ; so the great controversy of Antichrist against the Lord's Children , hath been , is , and will be , till he be destroyed upon the account of their abiding by the institutions of Christ , rev. 12.17 , The Dragon ( or Devil ) was wroth with the Woman , ( the Church ) and went to make War with the remnant of her seed , which keep the Commandments of God. — Commandments ! What Commandments ? Such as relate to what is obvious to the eye of the Devils Instruments , viz. Gospel-institutions ( of which afterwards . ) 

Sixthly , Gospel-churches are said to be the Body of Christ , Rom. 12.4 , 5.  But as we have many members in one body , and all members have not the same Office : So we being many are one body in Christ , and every one members of another . 1 Cor. 12.12 . For as the body is one , and hath many members , and all the members of that one body , being many , are one body , so also is Christ , ( Christ the head , and Saints the members make but one Christ Mystick . ) v. 27.  Now ye are the body of Christ , and members in Particular . Eph. 4.15 , 16.  The Head Christ from whom the whole body fitly joined together , — maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in Love.  

In which places the Church is called a Body , the Body of Christ . Two things are briefly to be enquired into ; 

1.  What we are to understand by the Church ? 

2.  Upon what account it 's called the Body of Christ ? 

I As touching the first , I shall not run over the various acceptions of the word Church in the Scripture , ( I have done it elsewhere . ) That in every one of the places instanced , in a particular instituted Church of Christ , is intended , is evident . For , 

1.  Paul directs his Epistles to them as such . Those whom he styles the Church in the beginning of his Epistles , 1 Cor. 1.2 . or beloved of God , called to be Saints , Rom. 1.7 . ( i e. the particular Church at Rome , Rom. 16.1 , 21. ) Or the Saints which are at Ephesus , the Faithful in Christ Jesus , Eph. 1.1 . ( i e. that particular Church there , rev. 2.1 . ) He afterwards calls the Body of Christ in the places forequoted . 

2.  Such a Church is intended , amongst which a Schism may be , 1 Cor. 12.25 . but Schism is entirely in one Church , among the members of one particular Society . 

3.  't is such a Church as hath Officers set , and placed among them , 1 Cor. 12.28 , 29. see Act. 18.8 , 9 , 10. 1  Cor. 3. 21 , 22.  These are placed of God in particular Churches , relate to them as such , Act. 14.23 . and 15.2 , 4 , 6 , 22 , 23. and 16.4 . and 20.17 . and 21.18 . Tit. 1.5 . Jam. 5.14 . Act. 20.28 . 

II Upon what account this Church is called the Body of Christ , must nextly be considered . 't is so called , because , 

1.  Of the forming , fashioning of Christ ▪ Particular Churches ( whatever is pretended ) may not be modified , form , fashioned according to the wills , humours , or lusts of men ; but according to the Type , or Pattern of them given forth by Jesus . He shall build the Temple of the Lord , Zach. 6.12 . 

2.  Of their Union , with relation to the Lord Jesus . The Union betwixt Head and Body , is a real , near Union ; cannot be separated , but by the Destruction of the whole . 

3.  Of Christ's Love to , care of , defence over it . The Head is careful of the Body — Nor can it be supposed without the highest advance against the Faithfulness , Wisdom , Love of the Lord Jesus , that he should not be so to his Church . 

Three things necessarily follow from hence ; 

1.  That Christ is obliged to preserve his Gospel-church-state , in some particular Churches who may glorify him , in their professed subjection thereto . They are his Body : now every one will nourish , cherish , his own Body . 

2.  That therefore this Church-state , in some particular Churches , is preserved by Jesus Christ . If it be not , he 's unfaithful , fills not up that relation he stands in to his Body , the Church . Besides , if he preserve it not , 't is either for want of Love , or Power so to do . The first cannot be asserted ; for no man yet hated his own flesh , but loves , nourisheth , cherishes it ; nor the second ; for all power in Heaven and Earth is given to Him.  

3.  If the Church-state be not continued ; then Christ hath now no body , is a head without a body . For they are Saints , as walking in such a state , viz. the Order and fellowship of the Gospel , that are so called , as I have proved . 

Seven , Gospel-churches are styled The Temple , Tabernacle , House , Building of the Lord 1 Cor. 3.16 . Know ye not , that ye are the Temple of the Living God. 2 Cor. 6.16 . ye are the Temple of the Living God. rev. 13.6 . And he opened his mouth in Blasphemies against God , to Blaspheme his Name , and his Tabernacle . prov. 9.1 . Wisdom hath builded her House . ( i e. Christ hath done so , builded , Planted , his Churches ) She hath hewn out her seven Pillars . Christ's House ( or Churches ) is said to be built upon seven Pillars , to point out its sure , and stable Foundation . Heb. 3.6 . Whose House are we . 1 Cor. 3.9 . ye are God's Building . 1 Pet. 2.5 . ye also as lively Stones are built up a Spiritual House . Saints are the House , building of Christ saith a reverend , and learned Author , upon a treble account ; 

1.  Of their peusons . In them he dwells really by his Spirit , Eph. 2.20 , 21 , 22. 2  Cor. 3.16 . and 6.19 . John 14.17 . 

2.  Of their being compact together in Church-order , according to his institution , whereby they are built up , cemented , united , and become an House , like the Tabernacle , or Temple of God , Eph. 4.16 . Col. 2.19 . 

3.  Of their Joynt-worship performed in that order ; wherein , and whereby he also dwells among them , or is present with them unto the Consummation of all things , rev. 21.3 . Mat. 28.20 . 

This must be a little further considered . 

Saint's Congregated together in the Fellowship of the Gospel , are his Temple , Tabernacle , House , Building , ( in a scattered divided state , they cannot strictly be so called ) and so denominated in Scripture , with respect to the Tabernacle ; Temple of Old , that were the Lords Building , viz. Built by his Command , express direction in every part of them . These were Types of Gospel-churches . 

Now insomuch as the Temple of Old was the most considerable type hereof ; Let 's a little consider upon what accounts Gospel-churches are so called , with respect to the Building . 

They are so upon various accounts . 

1.  The Temple of Old was built of precious , hewen-stone , ready prepared for the building , 1 King 5.17 , 18. and 6.7 . Gospel-churches are made up of Living-stones , form , prepared , as fit materials for this Royal Building , 1 Pet. 2.4 , 5.  

2.  That was built by Solomon , an Eminent Type of Christ . These by Christ himself , Zach. 6.12 . ( of which afterwards . ) 

3.  That was renowned for its Magnificence , Excellency , and Glory : These however debased , reproached , by one , and another , shall be so , Isa . 60.13 . 

4.  That had in it , the Ark , the Mercy-seat — all Types of Christ , and the special presence of Jehovah . These have most eminently the presence of the Lord with them , Mat. 18.20 . 2.  Cor. 6.16 . rev. 1.13 , 20. and 2.1 . 

5.  Nothing unclean might come into the Temple : nor any impure , unholy persons , into the Churches of Christ . If any such privily creep in , when discovered , they are to be ejected , cast out . 

6.  There was the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , The Daughter of the Voice , the Answer of God ; who spoke unto the people from the Oracle . The secret voice , and teaching of God is amongst these , Isa . 8.16 . The Vial-angels have light into their work in the Temple ( or Gospel-churches ) ; for out of it they come , when they address themselves to it , rev. 15.5 , 6.  

7.  In the Temple every one spoke of his Glory , Psal . 29.9 . in and amongst these is he praised , Eph. 3.21 . 

8.  All the solemn Worship of God was of old affixed to the Temple : 't is now to Gospel-churches . 

9  His special care , protection , was over his Temple to preserve , defend it . So 't is over his Churches , Hence is their continuance , notwithstanding the furious , various advances of Men and Devils against them . 

10.  He severely punished the violaters , destroyers of his Temple , Jer. 50.28 . and 51.11 . He hath done , will do so , with respect to such as attempt the ruin , destruction of these . 

Five things evidently follow from what we have been discoursing touching this matter . 

1.  That Gospel-churches being God's Temple , etc.  He is obliged to support , defend , uphold his own Building , House , Temple . 

2.  That if there be no Churches at this day , he hath no Temple , nor solemn visible Worship . 

3.  That none have Power over these Churches , to plant , pull down ; nor have they , or shall they , have permission so to scatter , destroy them ; that the Church-state should not somewhere , or other , be kept up in the World.  

4.  That Gospel-churches are Honourable , Glorious . They are God's Temple , House , Building . — 

5.  That those who reproach , revile them ; Blaspheme God , his Temple , Tabernacle , and them ; that dwell in Heaven , rev. 13.6 . 

Object . But though the Tabernacle , Temple , were God's Building ; yet both the one , and the other , were taken down , abolished . 

Answ . True ! And so shall the present Church-state be dissolved at last . But , 

1.  Neither the one , nor the other , were taken down , but by God's own Authority and Appointment : and that too ( at last ) to make way for a more glorious State.  

2.  The Worshippers in that Tabernacle , Temple , never deserted it , till God driven them out of it . They offered not violence to it themselves : attempted not with their own hands , to consume , destroy it . 't is true , as to the last Temple , Josephus tells us , that the Jews themselves set fire on 't ; but these were not the Worshippers in it , but a company of apostate , deboyst miscreants , that cared neither for God , Temple , or Worship . 

CHAP. II  The continuance of Gospel-churches farther evinced from the Titles given to Jesus Christ , with respect to such Churches . Christ the Builder of them , Zach. 6.12 . Heb. 3.3 , 4. explained . What Christ did , doth as the Builder of these Churches . Christ the Foundation , Head , Lord of Gospel-churches . In what sense He is so . The Husband , Bridegroom of them . Upon what accounts he is so called . Objections Answered . 

Having in the former Chapter evinced the continuance of Gospel-churches , from the Titles given by the Spirit of the Lord to the Gospel-church-state , and those who Worship him therein : We purpose in this Chapter , further to evince the truth thereof , From , 

Demonstration . II  The Titles , Appellations , given to Jesus Christ , with respect to such Churches ; each of which is an unshaken basis upon which their continuation is founded . We think it necessary to premise , that 't is not our intendment to discourse of all the Titles given to Christ in the Scripture ; but only of such as give countenance , assistance , strength , to the matter of our present enquiry ; and of these only so far as is necessary thereunto . 

I then , the Lord Jesus Christ is styled in Scripture , the Builder of these Churches , Zach. 6.12 . He shall build the Tem-of the Lord So , the Vulgar Latin . The House of the Lord , Seventy , Ar. The Temple of the Lord , Sir The Chaldee reads the whole verse thus , Behold the Man , his Name is Christ , who is to be revealed , and magnified , and about to build the Temple of the Lord For he shall Build the Temple of the Lord , and he shall bear the Glory . The Hebrew is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Behold the famous ( Noble ) Man the Branch . 't is evidently-spoken of Christ , who is frequently called Tsemach , the Branch . Isa . 4.2 . Jer. 23.5 . & 33.15 . Zach. 3.8 . Of whom Joshua was a Type . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , He himself shall build that Temple of Jehovah ; viz. that Temple which was to be erected upon his coming into the world ; whereof the Temple that Joshua , and Zerubbabel , were in building was a Type , viz. Gospel-churches . These Christ is said to Build , because he gave forth Directions , Laws , to his Apostles for their Erection , Establishment . Heb. 3.3 , 4.  Inasmuch as he who hath builded the House , hath more honour than the House : For every House is builded by some Man : But he that built all things , is GOD. ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 is put for , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , all these things , the the Church , persons , Ordinances pertaining thereunto . ) The design of the Apostle is to evince Christ's pre-eminence above Moses : 't is true , Moses was an honourable Person ; he received testimony from God , that he was faithful in his House ; but he was but a servant in it , a part of it ; Christ is the Builder of the House , or Church ; ( For that by House we are to understand the Church , or Churches , with all the Ordinances of Worship in it , was before proved ) Mat. 16.18 . Upon this Rock I will build my Church . 

Three things Christ did , doth , as the Builder of this House . 

1.  Gives forth the idea , and platform of it , in its Laws , Ordinances , and Institutions . 

2.  Provides materials : by his Spirit in the Ministration of the Gospel , quickening , sanctifying , making lovely , excellent , glorious , dead , polluted , vile , base sinners . 

3.  Closely conjoining , compacting these materials , that they may grow up together a spiritual House , an habitation of God through the Spirit . To this he uses not outward Compulsion , Force , Violence ; but sweetly allures , inclines their hearts by the power of his Spirit , making them willing visibly to give up themselves to the Lord , and one another , by the Will of God. And in this work the Lord Jesus met , meets with the greatest opposition imaginable : All the Power , Wisdom of Satan , the greatest , wisest of the World , appearing against it : Sin , Corruption , in the hearts of those that are to be prepared for materials for it , advancing also against it : but Christ being invested with infinite Power , carries the work through the difficulties , and makes the greatest Mountain become a Plain before him ; and having erected , set it up , comes and takes up his dwelling , makes his abode in it , as was before proved . 

Four things necessarily follow from hence . 

1.  That there is really a Glory in the Churches of Christ . 't is true , they have been ( are , as to outward view ) as the Tents of Kedar , Poor , Mean , Contemptible ; so are all the Ordinances , Institutions appertaining to them . The materials of which they are constituted for the most part , are visibly base and contemptible , the poor of the World — But Christ is the builder of them ( a greater than Solomon ) and he builds them for himself , an Ivory Palace for the great King : and therefore they must needs be amiable , lovely , glorious , comely as the curtains of Solomon . 

2.  That none can approach , advance themselves against them without pouring out contempt upon , advancing themselves against Jesus Christ . 

3.  That he is obliged to protect , defend them against all oppositions whatsoever . He hath done , will do so . 

4.  That none hath power to pluck them down ; nor can they be dissolved but by his Authority . For any to go about to do so , is to assume a Power to themselves coequal , nay , superior to Christ who built them . 

II As Christ is called the Builder of these Churches ; so he is said to be the Foundation of them . They are built upon him as their noble , glorious Foundation , 1 Cor. 3.9 , 10 , 12.  ye are God's Building ; according to the Grace of God which is given to me , as a wise Master-builder I have laid the Foundation — other Foundation can no man lay , than that is laid , which is Jesus Christ , Ephes . 2.19 , 20 , 22. 1  Pet. 2.4 , 5.  

Three things necessarily flow from hence ; 

1.  That Gospel-churches are not built upon the Old Covenant , ( as some talk ) except we will suppose Christ to be a part of that Covenant : wherein yet there 's not the least notice of him to be found . 

2.  That they are a firm , unshaken building . Christ himself being their Foundation , they must be so . 

3.  That none can dissolve them , put a period to them , but he who is their Substratum , Foundation ; who as such supports , upholds them , and is obliged so to do . 

III He is also styled their Head , Lord , Ephes . 4.15 . May grow up into him in all things who is the Head , even Christ ; from whom the whole body fitly joined together — Col. 1.18 . He is the Head of the Body the Church . & 2.19 . And not holding the Head from which all the Body — Two things must be considered ; 

1.  Upon what accounts Christ is said to be the Head of the Church . 

2.  What influence this Headship of Christ hath into the confirmation of the truth pleaded for . As touching the first , 't is confessed , that he is not a natural head of the body , the Church . The Expression is Metaphorical . Seven things are pointed forth by it . 

1.  His Preference , Dignity , Excellency , above them all . 

2.  His Comeliness , Beauty . The truth is , all the comeliness of the Body ( the Church ) is Christ . 't is eminently , superlatively in Him ; it flows from him . 

3.  He is the seat of all that Life , Spirits , the Church is made partakers of . all 's in him in fullness . 

4.  His Sympathy with them in all their sorrows , distresses , sufferings . 

5.  Their guidance , direction from Him. He is their dux viae , glorious conduct , leader in the way they should go . 

6.  His Dominion , Ruledom , Authority over them . 

7.  Their Protection , Safety in , and under Him.  

As touching the second particular . 

Secondly , The continuance , abiding of Gospel-churches , is a necessary consequence from hence : For Christ being their Head , 

1.  Vows not love , affection to them , to support , uphold them . Nor , 

2.  Doth he want power so to do . All power is given to him in Heaven and in Earth . He is for that end constituted Head over all things to the Church . Eph. 1.21 , 22. that he might be able to defend , preserve it . 

3.  He is an everlasting Head ; therefore as such , must have a body to rule , govern , by those Laws , Institutions , he hath given forth , for their Ruledom wherein they are to testify their subjection to him . Not to do so , is to cast off his Regiment , deny his Sovereignty , Authority . Nay , 

4.  As such ( being put into Office , deputed , appointed by the Father , as Head , Lord , King over them , Psal . 2.6 . ) he is obliged to protect , defend , preserve them . For him not to do so , were a breach of that trust , charge reposed in him , given to him by the Father . 

iv. Christ is the Husband , Bridegroom of these Churches , 2 Cor. 11.2 . For I have espoused you ( the Church of God , which is at Corinth , chap. 1.1 . ) to one Husband ( viz. the Lord Jesus ) that I may present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ . Mat. 25.1 , 5 , 6.  then shall the Kingdom of Heaven , ( or Gospel-church-state ) be likened unto ten Virgins , which — went forth to meet the Bridegroom . While the Bridegroom tarried — Behold the Bridegroom cometh . And these Churches are called the Bride , the Lamb's Wife , rev. 19.7.21.9.22.17 . 

Upon what account the Lord Jesus is said to be the Husband of the Church , and She his Bride , Wife , must be considered . 

He is so called upon the account . 

1.  Of his entire , cordial love , and affection to her . He dearly , above all , love's his Churches . Psal . 87.2 . The Lord loveth the Gates of Zion ( Saints gathered together in Gospel-fellowship , solemnly worshipping him in a community ) more than all the Dwellings of Jacob. He therefore calls them his Love , his Dove , his Undefiled , Cant. 5.2 . expressions demonstrative of his kindness to them . They also are full of love , endearment to him , Cant. 1.7 . 1 Pet. 1.8 . The truth whereof they evidence by keeping his Commandments , John 14.21 , 23 , 24. viz. those Commandments he by the Spirit gave forth to them , relating to the institutions , worship of the Gospel , Acts 1.2 . 

2.  His giving himself to them , taking them for his own , above all the People in the World. God is said upon this foot of account , to be the God of Israel , Exod. 5.1 . & 32.27 . Num. 16.9 . Jos . 8.30 . 13.33 . etc. They his portion , peculiar treasure , Deut. 32.9 . Exod. 19.5 . Psal . 135.4 . To be married to them , Jer. 3.14 . Christ is said to have them , Joh. 3.29 . He that hath the Bride , is the Bridegroom . They give themselves to him , solemnly own , avouch him to be their Husband in their visible subjection to his appointments . Nor do , or can any be said so to own him , but with respect to such a subjection , 2 Cor. 8.5 . They first gave their own selves to the Lord , and unto us by the will of God. They are Christ's , 1 Cor. 3.23 . All are yours , and ye are Christ's . Departure from , forsaking his institutions , is therefore called , adultery , fornication , whoredom , Jer. 3.8 . Ezek. 23.37 . rev. 2.22 . Ezek. 16.26 , 29.  rev. 9.21 . & 17.2 , 4.  & 18.3 , 9  & 19.2 . Ezek. 16.17 . Hos . 1.2 . Jer. 3.2 . And the false Church is called , the Whore , rev. 17.1 , 15 , 16.  & 19.2 . because hereby they are unfaithful to Christ in this marriage-relation , whereinto he hath taken them . 

3.  His care , watchful eye over them . He watcheth over them for good : keeps them day , and night ; with much more that might be added touching this matter . 

Now , can it be imagined , that the Lord Jesus , who hath taken a people unto himself in such a relation , love's them with such a dear , intense love ; gives himself to them , is obliged by Virtue of that relation , that he hath taken them unto himself into , to care for , watch over them , should when in some singleness of spirit they are testifying their love to him ( though with many infirmities , weaknesses ) in subjecting to his appointments ; so holding fast his name , and bearing a testimony to him in the World ; I say , can it be imagined , that he should at once reject , cast them off , unchurch them ? credat Apella ! Is this the manner of Husbands ( poor mortals , of weak love , finite bowels ) to those , whom they take as Brides to themselves ? Hath not this Lord said , that 't is not lawful for a man to put away his Wife , but in case of Fornication , Mat. 5.32 . and shall it be supposed that he who is infinite in bowels , choicest love , will reject his , when they are not to be charged with such wickedness . God once took Israel for a People unto himself ; and though actually guilty of spiritual adultery , worshipping in a way that never entered into his heart to prescribe , serving Idols , offering their Children to Moloch , persecuting also the Servants of the Lord , that laboured to recall them to primitive institutions ; yet how long did he bear with them ? He woe 's them after they had committed whoredom with many lovers , to return again to him ; with promises of pardon , reception , new embraces , as if they had never so offended him , Jer. 3. 1 , 12 , 22.  & 4.1 . And when he hath thoughts of giving them up , with what seeming regret is it , Hos . 11.8 . Nor did he totally do so , till he had sent his Son , whom they by wicked hands took , cast out , slew , Mat. 21.37 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 45.  And are the bowels of the Lord dried up ? Hath he forgotten to be gracious ? Is not his Covenant-relation with his People in a Gospel-day , as strong , efficacious , as in the times of the Law ? Besides , hath he any where in all the Scriptures given us the least jota , or syllable , upon which we may conclude , That this his relation , with at least some particular Churches , should cease , or expire ? En tabulas ! let the Scriptures , Prophecies thereof be consulted . 

Object . God took Israel into such a relation to himself . Calls himself their Husband , Jer. 31.32 . saith he is married to them , Jer. 3.14 . Yet afterwards rejects them . 

Answ . 1.  This Objection is in part obviated already , and enough said to an intelligent Reader . 

2.  Let it be granted that God calls himself their Husband , Jer. 31.32 . Though a better . Translator renders the words otherwise then we read them , viz. Paul , Heb. 8.9 . Because they continued not in my Covenant , and I regarded them not , saith the Lord : That which we translate , although I was an Husband to them ; the Apostle renders , and I regarded them not . And the learned Pocock in his Miscellanies , Cap. 1. p. 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12. at large demonstrates that the word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Baalti , ( which we read , I was an Husband ) signifies , not to regard , to neglect , refuse , despise ; so also the Greek , and Syriac tender it . But I say , let it be granted , as indeed the Lord doth own himself to be the Husband , to be Married to them , though in the place instanced in , he doth not do so : Let a few things further be considered , and the impertinency of what is objected , with respect to that we are pleading for , will soon appear . For , 

1.  He himself by signal providences breaking to pieces , destroying their Church-state , and that Temple to which their solemn Worship , as a Church was affixed , apotomized , cut them off : no such act of God with respect to his Gospel-churches can be instanced in . 

2.  He bore long with them , before he cast them off ; and actually continued with them in that relation for about two thousand years . Nor , 

3.  Did he reject them , till they had for many years rejected Him , despised his Institutions , Ordinances : committed adultery with many lovers , Jer. 3.1 . In that matter did worse than the Nations round about them , Ezek. 5.6 , 7.  If this can be charged upon any of the Churches , let them pled their own cause ; I 'll be no advocate for them ; nor is it necessary , with respect to our present controversy , since there are Churches to whom nothing like it can be imputed . Though this I must say , I know none of the Churches of Christ at this day but are pure , and unchargeable as to any such guilt . 

Oject . 2.  The Church of Rome was a true Church , had Christ for her Husband , Bridegroom . Is it thus with her now ? Is not her Church-state perioded ? Is she not the apostatick Synagogue ? no Bride of Christ , but the Whore , the Mother of Harlots , and abominations of the Earth ! 

Answ . 1.  God forbid that I should pled for that filthy Strumpet , Synagogue of Satan , the generation of God's curse , against whom he hath indignation for ever . 

2.  The Church of Rome ( so called ) that now is , is in nothing like the Church of Rome that then was , as to its Constitution , Matter , Form , Worship , Ordinances . That was a particular-church of Christ ; this ( pretends to be ) Catholic , Universal . That was constituted according to the Mind of Christ ; its matter , visible Saints ; its form , their free , spontaneous giving up themselves to the Lord , and to one another , according to the Will of God : This constituted by the cunning , subtlety , lying Miracles of the man of Sin ; by the Lusts , Laws , Compulsions of an arm of Flesh . it 's Worship , Ordinances had for their Substratum the Law , Commandment , Authority of Jesus Christ : the Worship of Rome is bottomed upon the Authority , Canons , Laws , Traditions of Popes , sinful men , false pretences to the personal appearance of Christ , the Virgin Mary , etc. to them ; giving them in charge to practise this , and that , as his Worship , Appointment , not found in the Scriptures , contrary to them . So that the Church of Rome ( so called ) that now is , was never a Church of Christ , but a Synagogue of Satan , set up in opposition to his True Churches . 

3.  Had it been never so much a True Church of Christ ; it hath actually dis-churched itself , by its horrid Idolatry worse than the Heathen Worshipping Idols of Gold , Silver , Wood , Stone , with the same Worship , that is due to them , whom they set these up to represent ; so as that their Worship ( as Bellarmin tells us ) is terminated in these ; which scarce ever entered into the heart of an ingenuous Heathen to affirm ; upon the account whereof they are called Gentiles , rev. 11.2 . Her persecution also , bloody cruelty against Christ in his members , sufficiently bespeaks her to be deserted , rejected by the Lord , actuated by another Spirit , than the Spirit of the Gospel , which is pure , peaceable , gentle , meek : so far from having any resemblance of the Churches of Christ , that it 's the very shambles of Satan , by whom as his butcherly , bloody instruments , they have destroyed , poured forth the blood of million of the meek , innocent Lambs of the Lord Jesus . 

4.  Let the argument be considered ; There was a Gospel-church of Christ at Rome ; the members of it fell asleep in Jesus , having served the Lord in their generation : by the subtlety of Satan , and the man of Sin upon that spot spring's up a sort of Professors , bearing the name of Christ , calling themselves a Church ; that ( at last , at least ) have nothing to be found upon them , like unto what they pretend to be ; therefore there 's a period put to the Church-state , to all Churches , Christ's relation to them as the Builder , Foundation , Head , Husband notwithstanding . And why so I pray ? May not there be true Churches of Christ , and he stand thus related to them , and as their Builder , etc. support , uphold , preserve his Church-state amongst them ; though that , and many other Churches prevaricate , departed from him ? That he hath actually done so from the time of his first planting Churches to this day , we shall ( if the Lord will ) in the ensuing discourse demonstrate . In a word , let it be proved against the present Churches , That they have unchurched themselves by Idolatry , bloody cruelty against the Saints — as this pretended Church of Rome hath done , or this objection must be acknowledged to be of no weight . 

To shut up all we have to say upon this argument ; Christ is the Builder , Foundation , Head , Lord , Husband of particular Churches , and so called with respect unto a special relation to them as such , as hath been proved ; either than there must be such Churches , or this relation is at an end . And thus far touching the second argument . 

CHAP. III  The continuation of Gospel-churches further demonstrated . The Scripture , the sole Directory both with respect to Doctrine and Worship . Whatsoever Christ hath instituted , given in charge therein , 't is the duty of Saints in every day to be found in the practice of . Christ of old prophesied of , as the great Prophet whom God would raise up to instruct his People , whom they were bound to attend . Deut. 18.18 , 19 explained . Christ's instructions contained in the Scriptures . no other way or means , intimated by God the Father , or Christ , for the indoctrination of the Saints as to Doctrine , or Worship , besides the Scriptures . Of Popish Traditions , Visions . The Personal appearance of the Virgin Mary , of Christ to them . These the Foundation of their festivals , religious orders . God sends us to the Scripture for Direction in Faith and Worship : hath under each Ministration commanded his People to observe whatever he hath appointed therein without Addition , or Substraction . it 's sufficient to instruct and guide us . 2 Pet. 1.19 . Explained . Objections Answered . Of pretensions to Christ's personal appearance : That there hath been no personal appearance of Christ , on the Earth , to any since his Ascension , proved . Of the appearance of Christ to Stephen , Paul , John : That he conversed not with them on Earth , proved . 

Demonstration . III  That the Scripture is our sole Directory , both with respect to Doctrine , and Worship : that 't is the duty of the Saints in every generation to attend to the Laws , Commandments , Rules of our Lord laid down therein ; that none have power to supersede any Law , Commandment of Christ , hath hitherto been generally owned as a truth amongst all the reform Churches . 't is true , some amongst the Papal-synagogue have blasphemously asserted , That the Pope , that man of Sin , and Son of Perdition , hath authority to dispense with the commands of Christ ; and he , and some Combinations of Men ( called Councils ) amongst them , have actually so done in many cases . But as was said amongst those , that separate from that Synagogue of Satan , none ha●e as yet doctrinally declared the lawfulness thereof . What is of that nature practically done by any of them , is not to our present purpose to inquire . This than might ( one would think ) be taken for granted ; whatever Christ hath instituted , charged , commanded upon his People in the New-testament , is the duty of the Saints in every day to be found in the practice of . Yet insomuch as the most plain , indisputable principles , commonly received maxims , are by one , or other , in this day questioned and opposed ; it may not perhaps be altogether useless , briefly to discover the basis upon which this Principle is built . 

I then , 't was long before the exhibition of the Lord Jesus prophesied , That God the Father would raise up a Prophet to his Church like unto Moses , to whom it was their duty to attend in all things , should be declared , taught them by him : under the most severe penalty was this charged upon them , Deut. 18. 18 , 19  I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren , like unto thee ; and will put my word in his mouth , and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him . And it shall come to pass , that whosoever will not harken unto my words , which he shall speak in my name , I will require it of him . The Seventy tender it , I will take vengeance on him : And the Hebrew Doctors so explain the words , He that transgresseth against his words is guilty of death by the hand of God , as it is written , Deut. 18.  I will require it of him ; Maimon . in Jesud . Hatorath , C. 9  § . 2.  And the word require , often signifies to require by punishment , Gen. 9.5 . 42.22 . the Apostle expounds this place of of Christ , and this requiring , to be destroying from amongst the people , Act. 3.22 , 23.  That this Prophet is Christ , he tells us , ver . 26.  Nor is this Prophecy interpreted by any of the ancient , or modern Rabbis , except some very few , but only of the Messiah : Nor can it be interpreted of any other ; every particular being exactly fulfilled in him . A Prophet . ] Mat. 21.11 . This is Jesus the Prophet . From among your brethren ] Christ was raised up from amongst his brethren ; and 't is particularly mentioned out of what Tribe amongst them he was taken , Heb. 7.13 , 14. viz. of Judah ; and the Family he was of in that Tribe , namely , that of David , is frequently mentioned , Luk. 1.69 . And will put my words in his Mouth ] Accordingly Christ said to God the Father , Joh. 17.8 . I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me . He shall speak unto them all that I shall command him ] This Christ did , Joh. 12. 49 , 50.  I speak not of myself , but the Father which sent me ; he gave me a commandment what I should say , and what I should speak — whatsoever I speak therefore , even as the Father said unto me , so I speak , Joh. 15.15 . All things that I have heard of my Father have I made known unto you . Joh. 17.8 . I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me , and they have received them . So that evidently Christ is the Prophet here spoken of . Two or three things are worthy our special remark . 

1.  That Christ is a Prophet , raised up , sent by the Father . 

2.  That the end of God in his Mission of Christ as a Prophet , was to instruct the Sons of Men in the whole of his Will , that he thought meet to manifest to them . 

3.  That Christ actually made such a discovery of the Fathers william John 1.17 , 18.  The Law was given by Moses , but Grace , and Truth came by Jesus Christ : no man hath seen God at any time ; the only begotten Son , which is in the bosom of the Father , he hath declared him . Heb. 1.1 , 2.  God , who at sundry times , and in diverse manners , spoke in times passed unto the Fathers by the Prophets , hath in these last days , spoken unto us by his Son.  

4.  That all persons whatsoever are obliged , bound under the severest penalties , to attend to whatever was revealed by this Prophet . This is also enforced by a voice from the excellent Glory . Mat. 17.5 . This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased , hear ye him . So then the Scriptures of the New-testament are our Directory ; whatever Christ hath enjoined therein , all Saints are to have regard to . For what he declared from the Father , is therein contained , and no where else . But , 

II there 's not the least intimation given by God the Father , or this great Prophet of the Church , of any other way , or means of instruction in his Worship , or Service , but only the Scriptures . 't is true , the Popelings talk of Traditions , ( as did , do , the Jews before them ) and much of their Worship ; many of their orders is bottomed upon , receives its Original from pretended Visions , Revelations , the personal Appearance of the Virgin Mary , yea , of Christ himself ( as they vainly pretend ) ; and perhaps Satan might appear to them as an Angel of Light , and avouch himself to be the Lord Christ . As touching the Carthusians , 't is acknowledged , that Hugo , who joined with Bruno , in laying the Foundations of that Order , had a vision of God's Building an House , with seven Stars conducting them to a place , called , La grand Chartreuse ; from whence the whole Order hath taken its name . The Order of the Carmelites was from a Vision that Simon Stock had , wherein the blessed Virgin appeared with the Habit in her Hand , which she would have them wear ; with a Promise , that whoever died in that Habit , should not perish by everlasting Flames . Innocent the third hath a Vision of St. Francis , and St. Dominic , supporting the Lateran Church ; whence the Franciscan and Dominican Orders sprang . As for the Jesuits , their Grandsire Ignatius was full of Visions . Sometimes Peter appeared to him , sometimes the Virgin Mary , with a great deal of Glory , and her Child in her lap ; whereby he was greatly strengthened , and encouraged . But above all , the strangest Vision he had , was a Vision of the Blessed Trinity plainly , under a corporeal Representation , which filled him so full of Joy , that he could not hold weeping before all the People ; and was so strangely enlightened by it , that he began to write a Book of the glory of the Blessed Trinity . In one of his Exstasies he continued eight days ; in which its probable , saith Orlandinus , he saw the frame and model of the Society of the Jesuits . Christ appeared to him once , and again ; sometimes he was lift up from the ground , the room where he was , being filled with a great Light. In a Vision he saw God the Father commending himself and his brethren , to his Son Jesus bearing his Cross ; whom he very kindly received , and with a smile , said to Ignatius , I will be favourable to you at Rome ; which greatly comforted him , and his Companions . And in the issue , it fell out accordingly ; his order being confirmed by P. Paul the third , his Bull dated Octob. 3. 1540  

As were their Orders , so their Festivals were instituted upon the bottom of pretended Visions , and Revelations : The Festival of Corpus Christi was instituted by Vrban the fourth , in honour of Transubstantiation , by the Revelation of a famous Virgin called Juliana ; which had many raptures , and so prophetic a Spirit , as to discern the thoughts , and intentions of her neighbour's hearts ; she wrestled with Devils , discoursed with the Apostles , and wrought many Miracles . Bullar . Rom. Tom. 1 p. 147.  Paul the Hermit was Canonised for a Saint , upon the Authority of a Vision , and Revelation . 

The Feast of Michael the Archangel , upon a Revelation to the Bishop of Siponto , and a few Drovers upon the Mountain Garganus . To which many more might be added . These are the ways Satan hath used to establish his Kingdom by , and to introduce his false , superstitious , idolatrous Orders , and Worship , destructive to the bodies and souls of Men. But in Christ's Doctrine , Gospel , there is a deep silence touching any such matter . He himself , and his Apostles after him , introduce nothing upon the account of such Revelations , but appeal to the Scriptures , and prove their Doctrine from thence . Not the least intimation is there of any way , or means of instruction in his Worship , but only the Scriptures . If there be , let the place be produced , and we are satisfied . If there be not , as most certain there is not , to harken , attend to Visions , Revelations , is ( to say no more ) unsafe , dangerous . Nor can it be consistent with the Love of the Father to his Church , had he intended any other way of Instruction , not to give the least notice of it to them ; nor with his Wisdom , to make that discovery of his mind and will in the Scriptures , to give it forth as our Rule , when upon this supposition 't is a most imperfect one . But , 

III God sends us to the Scripture for direction in this matter , Isa . 8.20 . To the Law , and to the Testimony ; if they speak not according to this word , ( whatever their pretensions are of the morning , or the breaking forth of a more glorious day ) it is because there is no 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 morning in them : They have not the Light of the Glorious morning they speak of . Luke 16.29 . They have Moses , and the Prophets ( i e. the writings of Moses and the Prophets ) let them hear them . John 5.39 . Search the Scriptures , for in them ye think to have eternal life ; and they are they which testify of me . 

iv. Jehovah himself , in and under each Ministration , hath commanded his People to observe whatever he hath appointed in the Scripture , without Addition , or Substraction . Deut. 4.2 . ye shall not add to the word which I command you , neither shall you diminish aught from it , that ye may keep the Commandments of the Lord your God , which I command you . & Chap. 12.32 . What thing soever I command you , observe to do it : thou shalt not add thereto , nor diminish from it . Josh . 1.7 . That thou mayest observe to do according to all the Law , which Moses my Servant commanded thee : turn not from it to the right hand , or to the left . prov. 30.5 , 6.  Every word of God is pure — Add thou not unto his words , lest he reprove thee , and thou be found a Liar . rev. 22.18 , 19  For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the Prophecy of this Book : If any man shall add unto these things , God shall add unto him the Plagues that are written in this Book : And if any man shall take away from the words of the Book of this Prophecy , God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life , and from the things which are written in this Book . Evidently , God ties up his people under Law and Gospel to a strict , and sole attendment unto what he hath given forth in the Scriptures ; And that because , 

v. These are sufficient , able , and perfect ( as he affirms of them ) to instruct and guide us , Psal . 19.7 . The Law of Jehovah is perfect — 2 Pet. 1.19 . We have also a more sure word of Prophecy ( more sure than what ? than the voice that came from the excellent Glory , when Christ was transfigured upon the Mount ) whereunto we do well to take heed , as unto a light that shines in a dark place , until the day dawn , and the Daystar arise in your Hearts . The word of Prophecy contained in the Scripture is a sure word , 't is a light ( every way sufficient as such , to direct us in the way we should take ) and is carefully to be attended to , till the morning of the day of the Son of Man , or the Revelation of Jesus . 2 Tim. 3.15 , 16 , 17. — thou hast known the Holy Scriptures , which are are able to make thee wise unto salvation , through Faith which is in Christ Jesus . All Scripture is given by inspiration of God , and is profitable for Doctrine , for Reproof , for Correction , for instruction in Righteousness , that the Man of God may be perfect , thoroughly furnished unto all good works . 

The sum of what we have been Arguing , Proving , is this , That the Holy Scriptures are our Directory with respect to Worship ; all then ( and no more ) whatsoever Christ hath commanded his people therein , Saints are bound to attend , and give up to . And if so ( as is clearly demonstrated ) than Christ having given charges therein , touching Saints walking together in the fellowship of the Gospel , Worshipping , Waiting on him in Gospel-institutions , Praying , Preaching , Baptism , breaking Bread , is unquestionably the duty of Saints in every generation : Quod erat demonstrandum . 

Object . 't is true , these things were once of the institution of Christ , but they are now ceased . 

Answ . 1.  They are the Scriptures of the Lord ( as we have proved ) we are solely to attend to , both with respect to Doctrine , and Worship ; let but then one syllable , tittle , be produced therefrom , that demonstrates the cessation of these Institutions of Christ , and the matter is at an issue . The honour of our Lord Jesus being so deeply concerned herein , no sober Christian ( except under a great power of temptation ) will be willing to part with them upon easier terms . 't is not pretensions to Visions , Revelations , Angelic Appearances , that will remove them from their steadfastness to the institutions of Christ ; those that departed from them upon such pretensions , will never answer it , in the day of Christ . But , 

2.  By the same reason , the institutions , Ordinances under the Mosaic Ministration , might long before the fullness of time , for their dissolution , have been exploded ; so all the Authority of God , with respect to Worship , been rejected . To the very time of their passing away by the exhibition of Jesus , who was greater than Moses , by whom the Law was given , John 1.17 . greater than Angels , whose Ministry was made use of in its solemn Promulgation , Act. 7.53 . The Lord charges his People to be found in the practice of them , Mal. 4.4 . And those that were so ( as corrupt as the then Church-state was ) were honoured , signally blessed by the Lord ; as Zachary , Elizabeth , Simeon . — 

3.  there 's not the least mention of the freedom , exemption of any of the Lords Children from these Institutions , till the personal Appearance of Christ ; but the contrary . 

Object . 2.  Well then , it seems 't will be granted , that when Christ doth personally appear on earth , there is to be a cessation of , and period put to this Church-state , with the Institutions , and Ordinances thereunto appertaining : what if he hath so appeared already ? 

Answ . 1.  As touching the first , we very readily grant it : upon Christ's next , visible , glorious appearance , there will certainly be a dissolution of this Fabric . But , 

2.  As to the question , whatever the pretensions of any are , or may be , of Christ's personal appearance to them , it 's evidently false , and untrue ; not to be believed , heeded , or attended to , for these Reasons ; 

1.  Christ foretells us , there shall be such pretenders , and charges us not to believe them , or go forth after them , Mat. 24.26 . Therefore if they shall say unto you , Behold he is in the desert , go not forth : Behold he is in the secret chambers , believe it not . 

2.  The Scripure mentions but one second coming of the Lord Jesus , Heb. 9.28 . And unto them that look for him , shall he appear the second time without sin , unto Salvation . Upon this pretext , there may be , must be , many come of Christ . 

3.  The Heavens must receive him till the times of the restitution of all things ; when ( and not before ) God the Father will send him , Act. 3.20 , 21.  Of these times there 's nothing appears that bears the least resemblance . 

4.  Christ gives his Church no notice of any such thing : which had he designed , and for such an end , as is pretended , viz. to put a period to the present Ministration , and to erect a new one , send forth new Apostles , etc. he would certainly have done . A total silence herein , were there any such thing intended by him , is perfectly inconsistent with the Love he bears to his Children . 

5.  't is expressly said he must sit at Jehovah's right Hand till his Enemies are made his Footstool , Psal . 110.1 which as yet we are sure they are not . 

6.  The Work of Intercession now in Heaven , where he is constantly to attend it ; will not admit him to come from thence , tell he bring the New - Jerusalem down with him : For he makes Intercession as God-man , in that Nature , Body , in which he was Crucified ; which though a glorious Body , yet is limited , circumscribed , else 't were not a Body . 

7.  The Scripture is express , that when he comes from thence , he comes visibly as he went away , so that every eye shall see him . Mat. 24.27 , 30.  For as the lightning cometh out of the East , and shines even unto the West , so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be — then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in Heaven , and then shall all the Tribes of the Earth mourn : and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven with Power , and great Glory . Act. 1.9 , 10 , 11.  And when he had spoken these things while they beheld , he ( Christ ) was taken up , and a Cloud received him out of their sight . And while they looked steadfastly towards Heaven , as he went up , behold , two men stood by them , in White Apparel , which also said , ye men of Galilee , Why stand ye gazing up into Heaven ? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven , shall SO COME , in like manner , as ye have seen him go into Heaven . rev. 1.7 . Behold , he cometh with Clouds , and every eye shall see him , and they also which pierced him . 

8.  When Christ comes , Satan shall be bound , rev. 20.1 , 2. the dead Saints raised , 1 These . 4.16 . 1 Cor. 15.23 . Antichrist perfectly destroyed , 2 These . 2.8 . The Kingdoms of this World become his , Dan. 7.13 , 14.  

Object . But Christ came personally on Earth to Stephen , Paul , John.  

Answ . Nothing more false . As to Stephen , 't is expressly said concerning him , that he saw Jesus in Heaven standing on the right hand of God , Act. 7.55 . The same line of Interpretation is to be drawn over that sight that Paul had of him . 'T was a sight of him not on Earth , but in Heaven . May be , when he was caught up into Paradise . John's was evidently visional . For , 1.  He expressly tells us , he was in the Spirit , in a Prophetic ecstasy , or rapture ( rev. 1.10 . ) taken out of himself ; when objects are not presented to the outward senses ( which are not in an ecstasy , capable of seeing , or beholding them ) but to the inward mind . 2.  He also tells us , that he whom he saw , was ( only ) like unto the Son of Man , ver . 13. was not really , substantially so . 3.  If it were a real , personal appearance , than the seven golden Candlesticks must be seven real golden Candlesticks ; the white Garment down to Christ's feet , the golden Girdle , gird about the paps — the seven Stars in his right hand ; the sharp twoedged Sword coming out of his Mouth must also be real ; which is absurd , ridiculous to imagine ; 't were to make Christ a monster . 4.  't is expressly said , that he sent , and signified the Revelation God gave him , by an Angel , rev. 1.1 . The Revelation of Jesus Christ , ( every particular , the whole , of what 's contained in this Book ) which God gave unto him — he sent and signified it by his Angel unto his Servant John. Repeated again , rev. 22.6 . The Lord God of the Holy Prophets , sent his Angel to show unto his Servants the things which must shortly be done . John , 't is true , mistakes him for Christ , ver . 8. but is quickly rectified , ver . 9  I am thy Fellow-servant , and of thy brethren the Prophets , and of them which keep the sayings of this Book . 

CHAP. IU.  The Book of the Revelaetion contains a Prophetic discovery of the State of the Church , from the time of its being given forth to the glorious personal appearance of Christ . The continuance of Gospel-churches prophesied of in this Book , to the time of Christ's coming . The seven Churches of Asia , a Type of Gospel-churches , and their continuation to that time . Four signal periods of time mentioned in the Revelation . viz. The time of the Roman-pagan Empire ; of the Prophesying of the Witnesses ; of the last Dragon-war ; of the Witnesses rise , and pouring forth of the Vials , which periods in the personal coming of Christ . The continuation of the Church-state through these several periods of time , demonstrated . The Woman's ( or Church's ) flight into the Wilderness , and the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth contemporize . Her feeding in the Wilderness , what , the manner of it . An Objection answered . The two Witnesses are not two particular persons , proved . They are before the last of the last days . Who meant by the Gentiles , rev. 11.2 . Why called Gentiles . The Court without the Temple , and the Holy City , the treading under foot of the Holy City , the Temple of God , the Altar , and Worshippers therein , Explained . The fourty-two Months , or 1260 Days , not ordinary Months , or Days , evinced . The Antichrist is long since come . The Papal Kingdom is the Antichrist . rev. 12.17 . at large explained . The Dragon , Woman , remnant of her Seed , who they are : to what period of time that Prophecy hath relation , The slaughter of the Witnesses , not a corporeal slaughter , proved . The risen Witnesses , and the Vial-angels Contemporize . None of the Vials yet poured forth , rev. 15.5 . at large opened . what 's meant by the Temple : Why called the Temple of the Testimony . What the opening of the Temple signifies . 

Demonstration . iv.  Throughout the Book of the Revelation , we have a plain , and full account , of a Church-state , or Saints Worshipping God in Gospel-churches , till the Personal appearance of Christ . 

Two things must be premised . 

1.  This Book of the Revelation is a discovery from God the Father to Jesus Christ , of things ( especially relating to his Churches ) that were shortly to come to pass , rev. 1.1 . i e. the accomplishment of some of the things there prophesied of , was immediately to take place . Yet , 

2.  It contains a prophetic discovery of the State of the Church , from that time to the personal coming of the Lord Jesus , rev. 20.1 . And I saw an Angel [ Constantine , say some ; an Archangel , so others ; Christ , the Angel of the Covenant , so rather ] come down from Heaven , having the Key of the bottomless Pit. ( Christ alone hath so , rev. 1.18 . ) chap. 21.3 . The Tabernacle of God is with men . And 22.20 . He which testifieth these things saith , Surely I come quickly , Amen ; even so come Lord Jesus . 

So then , if we demonstrate , that the Continuance of a Church-state , or Gospel-churches , is prophesied of throughout this Book , the continuation of Gospel-churches , with the Worship , Ordinances , Institutions peculiar to them , cannot be denied . 

A late learned Author ( and some others before him ) asserts , that by the seven Churches of Asia ( rev. 2.  & 3. ) the State of the Church of Christ downward , to the end of all things , is represented . And the truth is , with that strength of Arguments , that I know not how it can be refelled . The Church of Ephesus representing the State of the Church of Christ to the tenth of Nero's reign , A.D. 63.  Smyrna , the State of the Church from 63. tell A.D.  324. ( when Constantine had subdued the most potent Enemies of the Church ) and comprises the Ten Presecutions . Pergamos , the state of the Church from 324. to A.D. 1242. when the Pope's Legate Amelin , made an end of the Albigensian War , with Trancavel , Bastard of the Earl of Beziers . Thyatira , the State of the Church from 1242. till whole Nations fell off from the Papacy . Sardis , from the rise of the Witnesses to the last Vial. Philadelphia , from the time of the Last Vial , to the fourth Thunder . Laodicea , the State of the Church from the fourth and fifth Thunders , i e. from the losing of Satan , to the appearing of Christ's coming to Judgement under the sixth Thunder . Now , though I have several reasons why I cannot comply with this Learned Author , as touching the computation of time ; yet his Arguments , to prove the State of the Church , from that time to the Confummation of the World , to be represented by the seven Churches of Asia , seem unanswerable As , 1.  The title of the Revelation , ver . 1.  The Revelation of Jesus Christ — to show unto his Servants things which must shortly come to pass . The Asiatic Churches then were ; this Book contains a Revelation of things that were to be . 2. . John's present saluting of the Seven Churches upon his calling this a Book of Prophecies , with this Salutation , Grace be unto you , and Peace from him which is , and which was , and which is to come , manifests as much . 3.  The description he gives of Christ , which is , and which was , and which is to come , ver . 4.8 , 11. doth intimate that he is treating of what reaches from the beginning of the Church to the latest Ages thereof ( even to the coming of Christ , ver . 7. ) 4.  The preamble into the Vision of the seven Churches , ver . 10. and that of the seven Seals is so like , that it seems they are both of like extent and importance . 5.  Else no Reason can be given , 1.  Why , after the Spirit had given notice , that this Book is a pprophecy of things to come , he should presently start from the title , and intended subject , to write Seven Epistles that have nothing considerable of Prophecy in them ; and that he should do this , with as great pomp , and as high a preamble , as when he begins the Prophecy of the Seals , and the opened Book . 2.  Why the Epistles should be written to the Churches of Asia , rather than to the Churches of Europe , and Africa . 3.  Why he gives the precedency to this Church rather than that . 4.  Why just Seven , neither more , nor lesle . 5.  Why these seven , rather than any others , which might have the very same Virtues and Vices . 6.  Why Christ is described holding the Seven Stars in his right hand , in the Epistles to the Churches of Ephesus , and Sardis . 7.  Why the Church of Ephesus of all others , should be commended for their trying false Apostles . 8.  Why 't is said to the Church of Smyrna , more than to any other , Be thou faithful nnto Death , and I will give thee a Crown of Life . 9  Why such an Ataxy in the ranging of the Churches , that the two irreprehensible Churches , Smyrna , and Philadelphia , are not joined together ; Ephesus , Sardis , and Laodicea against whom there is no complaint of eating things offered to Idols ; and than Pergamos and Thy●tira , in which there is . 10.  Why Christ , before the Epistle to the Church in Pergamos , is set out by a twoedged Sword ; and in the Church of Thyatira , by his feet like fine Brass [ as if they burned in the Furnace ; for that supplement must be added . ] 11.  Why Antypas should be named by name ( in a Book so full of enigmatical involutions . ) 12.  Why Christ expresseth a greater disgust against the Church of Laodicea , than that of Sardis , which is said to be quite dead . 13.  Why in every Epistle , that phrase is used , I know thy works ; which is a thing of small importance in the literal sense ; but in the prophetical , it seems on purpose so repeated , to intimate an allusion in Asia , to the Hebrew word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ( as if 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , was intended to answer 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) that Asia may also be significant , as well as the names of the Seven Churches . 14.  Why a particular Woman should be taken notice of by name in the Church of Thyatira , more than others . 15.  Why the promise of ruling over the Nations , and receiving the Morningstar , should be made to the Church of Thyatira more than others . 16.  Why the temptation that was to come upon all the World , should be mentioned rather to the Church in Phyladelphia , than others . 17.  Why upon her should be written the Name of the City of God , etc. 18.  Why the Church of the Laodiceans should accounted herself so hugely rich , increased in goods , and to have no want in any thing . 19  Why that phrase , He that hath an ear to hear , let him hear — which our Saviour is found so often to add at the end of his Parables , should be used in every Epistle ; they being no Parables , but Epistles sent to each of those Churches in Asia respectively — 

The sum is , the seven Asiatic Churches were Types of the State of the Church ( or the Churches of Christ ) from that time to the end of all things . There must then all along be Churches to answer to these Types . Sometimes ( 't is true ) more Pure , Spiritual , Splendid , Visible ; sometimes lesle , as the Types of them represent ; but always such as Christ owns for his Churches , and as such walks in the midst of them . 

But further , The State of the Churches as represented in the Book of the Revelation , may be considered under a fourfold period of time . 

I The time of the Roman-pagan Empire : That then there were true Churches of Christ , will not be denied . Against them , Satan the great red Dragon , in that Pagan-state , set himself with all the cruelty imaginable , pouring out the blood of Myriad of the Lords faithful ones . These Churches wrestle with God night and day , in Faith , Prayer , Supplication ; and at last the whole State ( as a just Judgement of God upon them , for their cruelties exercised upon his Children ) passes away , rev. 6.  These Churches , are the Woman clothed with the Sun , having the Moon under her feet , and upon her head a Crown of Twelve Stars , rev. 12.1 . 

II The time of the prophesying of the Witnesses , which Synchronizes' with the time of the Wildbeast , or Antichrist . That during this time , which is one thousand two hundred and sixty Days , or fourty-two Months ( which according to the Graecian account , thirty days to a Month is the same . ) There were Gospel-churches , is evident . For , 

1.  The Witnesses themselves are such ; therefore called Two Candlesticks , rev. 11.4 . These are the two Olive-trees , and the two Candlesticks standing before the Lord of the Earth . Candlesticks ! Who , or what are they ? The Palmoni , wonderful numberer , the interpreter , one of a thousand , shall answer for us ( and one would think the interpretation he gives , should pass without question among those who call themselves by his name ) rev. 1.20 . The seven Candlesticks which thou sawest , are seven Churches . Object . But why here but two Candlesticks ? Answ . The Antichristian apostasy had now so far prevailed , that Christ could own but a few as standing in such a relation unto himself . 

2.  During this period , there is a Temple of God , an Altar , and such as Worship therein : which can denote nothing lesle than a Gospel-church-state , and Gospel-worshippers therein ; in opposition to the Court without , and Holy City which is given to the Gentiles , ( or Antichristians ) to tread under foot , rev. 11.1 , 2.  And this Temple , etc. is to be measured with a Rod , ver . 1.  'T will not be altogether impertinent to inquire ; what 's held forth by the Measuring of the Temple , etc.  Five things I humbly conceive the Spirit of the Lord intends by it . 

1.  The Churches of Christ that were in a Witness for him , being reduced to more Purity , and Scripture-simplicity than was with them a little before . Through the cunning working of the man of Sin ( though then in a Mystery ) professors had not a little swerved from Scripture-rule . The body , generality of these are swallowed up in the Antichristian Apostasy ; a little remnant are awakened to stand up , as Witnesses for Christ ; and they perceiving disorders amongst themselves , reduce all to the Scripture-standard ; The only way to heal all the differences amongst Christians , touching Worship at this day . 

2.  The paucity of true , sincere Worshippers , so few , that they might easily be Measured . 

3.  The difference God makes betwixt Professors ; some he curiously Measures , others he deals not so with , as not worth minding , being Virgins , Nullius Pretii , of no reckoning , value . 

4.  That the building of the Church is God's work ; his measuring-line , not Man's must be stretched over it . 

5.  His care to preserve this remnant in that purity , simplicity of Worship , that was according to his Will , and they had attained to , during the whole time of the Antichristian Apostasy , and Prophesying of the Witnesses against it . Measuring in Scripture ( sometimes at least ) denotes the care , concern of Jehovah for the thing measured . 

III All the time of Antichrist's rampancy , there are two Witnesses that have Power given them from the Lord ( at least till the time of their slaughter ) to prophesy against Antichrist ; i e. to stand by the Lord of the whole Earth against him , rev. 11.3 , 4. viz. to take Christ's part against Antichrist ; maintain , defend the things of Christ against the encroachments , devices , carnal inventions of Antichrist . Now this man of Sin made not only advances against the Doctrine of the Gospel , but against the oeconomy , order thereof , with respect to Worship , Christ hath his particular Churches with fixed Officers in them ( Institutions , Orders , of his own affixed to them ) all gathered by the Power of the Spirit , and voluntarily giving up themselves , to the Lord and one another : Pastors , Teachers , chosen by them from amongst themselves , He the Head of them all : Antichrist hath his ecumenical , Universal Church , Officers , Institutions , Ordinances , Foreign , contrary to Christ's : He sets up himself as Head of this Antichristian-church ; gathers into it , by force , violence ; rules , governs it , by Canons , Laws of his own . If then Christ hath his Witnesses , and their work be to Witness for him against Antichrist's innovations ; they must be found not only pleading against these , ( which would be only a negative testimony ) but witnessing for the Order , Institutions of Christ ; and so consequently be in the practice of these . For it cannot be imagined , that Christ's Witnesses should own that in Principle , and pled for it , which they are themselves out of the practice of . Nay the truth is , this last is that , wherein their witness signally lies . 

iv. That the Woman's flight into the Wilderness ▪ rev. 12.6 . and the Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth , contemporize , is not only generally granted ; but 't is from hence evident , because the time of the Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth , and the Woman's continuing in the Wilderness , is the same . rev. 11.3 . They shall Prophesy a thousand two hundred and sixty days clothed in sackcloth . rev. 12.6 . And the Woman fled into the Wilderness , where she hath a place prepared of God that they should feed her there one thousand two hundred and threescore days . That she was in the Wilderness in a Church-state waiting upon the Lord , in Institutions , Ordinances of his own appointment , is evident . 

1.  She is therefore called the Woman ; as the false Church is called the whorish Woman , because of her Antichristian Church-state , Worship , Ordinances . 

2.  't is said , They should feed her there . Quest . Who shall feed her there ? Answ . persons appointed by the Lord , and chosen by the Church in this her Wilderness-state shall do it . Quest . How should they feed her ? Answ . there 's no extraordinary way of feeding pointed at by the Spirit of the Lord ; therefore she 's to be fed in God's Ordinary way ; in her attendment on Institutions of his own appointment for that end . 

So that evidently there were Churches , Church-institutions , Worship , all the time of the Witnesses prophesying . 

Object . All this may be granted , and yet the continuance of Gospel-churches not proved ; for the Witnesses began not to Prophesy till a few years ago . 

Answ . Though this Objection be very weak , frivolous , the basis upon which it is built , generally exploded by all Reform Christians , and therefore may seem not worthy our notice : yet resolving not willingly to pass by any thing , that may seem to have the least shadow of Argument in it , against what we are pleading for ; and for the sake of some that are ( or may be ) in danger to be led aside , by such pretensions as these , we shall particularly examine it . Several things are supposed , as the basis upon which this Objection is built , that are evidently false ; which being demonstrated to be so , the Objection will presently evaporate into smoke , and vanity . As , 

1.  That the two Witnesses spoken of , are two particular persons . 

2.  That they are to come in the last of the last days . 

3.  That the time of their Prophecy is but One thousand two hundred , and threescore natural days . Now the Heterodoxy of all this , will presently appear . 

I As touching the first , 't is true , Bellarmine the Jesuit , and others , tell us , not only that they are two particular persons , ( whom some of late follow ) but also who they are , viz. Enoch and Elias ( who they say shall come , and fight against Antichrist in Jerusalem , and there be put to death by him , Bellar. de Rom. Pontif. l. 3. c. 13. ) : But that they are not , cannot be two particular persons , is evident . 

1.  The Two Witnesses are called , two Candlesticks ; which Christ interprets to be Churches ( as was said before . ) 

2.  The Two Witnesses Prophesy , all the Wild Beast's ( Antichrist's ) Reign , viz. Fourty-two Months , or One thousand two hundred sixty days , viz. prophetic days , i e. Years , as shall by and by be demonstrated . 't is not to be imagined , that any two particular persons should ever live so long . 

3.  During the time of their Prophecy , They torment them that dwell upon the Earth , rev. 11.10 . i e. the Antichristian Kingdom : which 't is not probable , two particular persons ( especially considering that those which hold this notion , assert also , that the 1260. days , are natural days , or three Years and an half ) should do in so short a time . 

4.  When they are slain , and lie dead in the street of the great City three days and an half , ( natural days as they 'll have it ) they of the People , and Kindred's , and Tongues , and Nations ( viz. the multitude over which Antichrist presides ) see their dead bodies , and rejoice over them — Which that they should do , if but two particular persons , and they lie dead for so short a time , is the firstborn of absurdities . 't is impossible , within that limit , the persons mentioned should all hear of it , much more come to see it . 

II That the two Witnesses are to come in the last of the last days , is also an unscriptural-vanity , as is evident . 

1.  The two Witnesses Prophesying , and the Gentiles treading under foot the Holy City , contemporize , rev. 11.2 , 3.  But the Court which is without the Temple leave out , and measure it not : for it 's given unto the Gentiles , and the holy City shall they tread under foot forty and two Months . And I will give Power unto my two Witnesses , and they shall Prophesy 1260 Days clothed in Sackcloth . The forty two Months , according to the Graecian account , are exactly 1260.  Days : so long then as the Gentiles tread down the Holy City , so long are the Witnesses to Prophesy . A few things must further be enquired into . 1.  Who we are to understand by the Gentiles . 2.  What by the Holy City . 3.  What their treading under foot the Holy City , means . 4.  What space of time the fourty-two Months take up , in which 't is said , the Gentiles shall tread down the Holy City . 

1.  By the Gentiles , we are to understand the Antichristians ; particularly the bloody Papists , headed by the Pope [ That 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Man of Sin , that Son of Perdition , that Lawless One , 2.  These . 2.3 , 8. ] These are called Gentiles , because , 1.  Of their Introduction of Idolatrous Worship practised amongst the Gentiles . I mean not only the Worship of Statues , Idols of Wood , Stone , Brass , Silver , Gold ; but the Worship of Heroes , ( or Saints ) in imitation of the Gentile-heroes , whom they Worshipped . 2.  Of their being actuated by the same Spirit of bloody cruelty , against the Worshippers within the Temple and Altar ( or the true Spiritual Worshippers ) , with which the Gentiles before them were actuated against the Primitive Believers ; and actually murdering the true Servants of the Lord , as they did . 

2.  The Court without the Temple , and the Holy City ( which Type out the same thing ) is the Antichristian Church-state , Worship , Worshippers , Orders , Ordinances . The Temple of God , the Altar , and the Worshippers therein , v. 1. are the Gospel-church-state , with the Worship , and Worshippers thereunto belonging ( as hath been proved . ) The Court then without the Temple , and the Holy City , to be left out ( as a matter of no worth ) is the false Church-state , with its Worship and Worshippers . 

3.  Their treading under foot the Holy City , denotes . 

1.  The numerousness of the Antichristian Worshippers . 

2.  Their frequency in their Antichristian Service , as the Phrase is taken , Isa . 1.12 . Psal . 121.2 . q. d. Measure not the Court — . The false Worship , Worshippers , are so contemptible , vile , they deserve not to be taken notice of : are so numerous , that they cannot well be measured — They throng the City , as if they would tread it under foot at once . 

4.  The fourty-two Months cannot possibly denote fourty-two ordinary Months , or One thousand two hundred and sixty natural Days , or three years and an half , for these Reasons . 

1.  The Papacy ( represented under the notion of the Gentiles — ) have been already rampant hundred of Years ; persecuted , murdered , destroyed million of Saints , for not treading together with them , the Holy City . 

2.  As was said , The fortytwo Months , and the One thousand two hundred sixty days are the same : Now , a day for a year is the prophetic reckoning . See Num. 14.34 . Ezek. 4.6 . So in the pprophecy of Daniel , Chap. 8.21 , 23. and 9.24 . and 12.11 , 12 ▪ And for aught I find in all Prophetic Books , where any signal time is spoken of . 

3.  That the Gentiles treading down the Holy City , and the wild Beast , rev. 13.2 , 3. are the same , hath hitherto been taken for granted ; and 't is evident they are so ; as from other considerations , so from this , that the same term is given to them both , ver . 5.  And Power was given to him fortytwo Months ( or One thousand two hundred and sixty Days , as was before intimated . ) Now , 't is impossible , that what is said to be done by , and ascribed to , this wild Beast , should be shut up in so short a period , as three years and an half . For , 

1.  He brings the whole world under his subjection , is a dread and terror to them ; grows so considerable , that none is able to make War with him , ver . 4 , 7.  And they Worshipped the Beast , saying , Who is like unto the Beast ? Who is able to make War with him . 

2.  All the World wonders after the Beast . ver . 3.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 — . The Word is very emphatic , denoting honour , reverence , fear of any one , upon the account of some wonderful strange thing done by him . 't is translated Judas . 16.  The having ( men's persons ) in admiration . It comes from the Hebrew 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 greatly to observe , reverence , worship , to magnify , have in great esteem . Some read it , He was admired in the whole Earth . The Arabic translates it , The whole Earth wondering , followed the Beast . Which is indeed the sense of the place . q. d. such wonderful things shall be done by the Beast in the sight of the World , that with the greatest admiration , highest approbation and consent , they shall take the Beasts part , list themselves under his standard . The Aethiopic reads , And the whole Earth wondered , and followed this Beast ; to the same purpose . 

3.  He makes War with the Saints , and overcomes them , v. 7.  Acts that must certainly take up more time than three Years and an half for their production . 

III Antichrist , who is the same with the Wild Beast , but now mentioned ( as is granted by all ) was in the womb in the Apostles days ; wrought then under ground in a mystery , labouring to come forth ; which he at last did , Exalting himself above all that is called God , or worshipped , showing himself that he is God , 2 These . 2.4 , 7.  He more openly showed himself , whilst the Apostle John was yet alive , than he did in Paul's days , John 2.22 , 23. and 4.2 , 3.  So that it 's evident , that the Antichrist was in the womb in the Apostles days ; and openly discovered himself not long after the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ( that which letted ) called the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ( the Letter , or he which letteth ) 2 These . 2.6 , 7. was taken out of the way . Various are the sentiments of the Learned touching this Letter . The Learned Brightman makes him to be the sixth head of the Roman Empire : others think him to be the Holy Spirit , who by his signal presence , power with the Primitive believers , kept Antichrist from ascending to that height of dignity , supremacy , he aimed at . Some adjudge it to be the apostasy spoken of , ver . 3.  Except there come a falling away first , and that man of Sin be revealed , the Son of Perdition . q. d. The general Apostasy must first be , ere the man of Sin ( or Antichrist ) openly manifest himself ; when that is , he will quickly appear to head it . it 's not yet coming , is that which let's his Revelation . The generality take it for the Roman-pagan-empire , or Emperor , in his full Power , and Majesty , flourishing , and living at his seat in Rome . Which I humbly conceive is Paul's intendment . For , 1.  no reason can be given , why Paul expresses himself in so dark terms ; that which letteth this Letter , if the Roman-pagan-empire be not intended ; but if so , the reason is obvious : They had an opinion , that this Empire was everlasting ; to have talked of its removal , would have stirred them up to have persecuted the Saints , as the Enemies of it . Lesle occasions they many times took so to do . 2.  Antichrist's seat was to be Rome , rev. 17.9 . The seven heads are seven Mountains on which the Woman sitteth , i e. The City built on seven Hills , is Antichrists Seat , viz. Rome , alone famous amongst Historians upon that account . Septem urbs alta jugis , toti quae praesidet orbi . 



The Seven-hilled City that governs the World , saith Propertius . 

But take the Letter , or that which letteth , in either of the forementioned senses , and he hath been actually taken away for above this thousand Years . Immediately upon which Antichrist was revealed ; whose time , and the Beast's , are the same ; for they themselves are the same . Therefore the fourty-two Months cannot possibly denote fourty-two Ordinary Months , or One thousand two hundred and sixty natural days , viz. Three Years , and a half ; but a much longer tract of time . 

By what hath hitherto in this matter been offered , the Judicious Reader will find a plain probation of the main Thesis , we are now in the confirmation of , viz. that the two Witnesses come before the last of the last days . For , 

2.  The two Witnesses are expressly said to prophesy One thousand two hundred and sixty Days , i e. Years , according to the Prophetic reckoning , as we have proved . 

3.  The Witnesses Prophesying ▪ and the rampancy of the Wildbeast , rev. 13.2 , 3. — take up the same time of forty two Months , or , One thousand two hundred and sixty Days ; but it hath been demonstrated , that the term of the Wild Beast is not so short as three Years and an half ; therefore the Witnesses Prophesying cannot be thrust into so narrow a compass . 

4.  The time of the Witnesses Prophesying , and Antichrists day ( after his Revelation ) are the same : For Antichrist , and the Wild Beast , rev. 13. are the same . And the Witnesses Prophesying , and the rampancy of the Wild Beast take up the same time , as hath been proved . That Antichrist hath been revealed in the World for hundred of Years past , hath also been demonstrated . Therefore the Witnesses Prophesying hath been also thus long , so must have their existence as Prophesying Witnesses before the last of the last Days ; Quod erat demonstrandum . 

As touching the third supposition upon which the Objection is built , viz.  

III That the time of the Witnesses Prophesy ; is but for One thousand two hundred and sixty natural days : the contrary hath been , from what hath been said touching the second particular , abundantly evinced ; to which add , The Witnesses are to Prophesy all the time of Antichrist ( as hath been proved : ) The truth is , they are raised up , Spirited by the Lord as witnesses to prophesy against him , and his encroachments upon the Sovereign Authority of Christ . 't is true , the Papists , that they may clear the Pope of the charge hath been by the protestants laid against him as the Antichrist , assert , That Antichrist is not yet come ; that he is not to come till towards the period of time ; to continue , when he comes , but three years , and an half . Thus Bellarmin l. 3 . De Pontif. Antichristus debet regnare non nisi tres annos cum medio praecise . Antichristi adventus erit paulo ante finem mundi : continuo post mortem ejus mundus finetur . i e. Antichrist ought to reign but three years , and an half precisely . The coming of Antichrist , shall be a little before the end of the World : By and by , after his death , the World shall terminate . 

Two things in this matter are easily demonstrated . 

1.  That Antichrist is long since come . 

I That the Papal Kingdom is the Antichrist spoken of : which , if plainly from Scripture demonstrated , it undeniably follows , that the time of the witnesses pprophecy cannot be shut up within the limits of one Thousand two Hundred and Sixty natural days . 

1.  That Antichrist is long since come , is evident ; for , 

1.  He is Prophesied of , as to come when the Apostasy should break forth , 2.  These . 2.3 . Except there come a falling away first , and that man of sin be revealed : So that evidently upon the coming in of the Apostasy , the man of sin , or Antichrist , is to be revealed . But the Apostack hath been already for several hundred of years : witness the corruption in doctrine , viz. Justification by Works , Transubstantiation , etc. in Worship , viz. the veneration of Relics , the invocation of Saints , the Worship of the breaden God , Images , etc.  

2.  The Mystery of Iniquity wrought ( viz. in Order to the bringing forth of the man of Sin ) in the Apostles Days , 2 These . 2.7 . It cannot then be imagined , but his birth was near . What ? in the Womb then , and not to be brought forth for hundred of years after ? credat Appella ! 't is a figment , that the repetition of , is refutation sufficient . 

3.  The 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , or that which letted his Revelation , 2 These . 2.6 . was long since removed out of the way , as hath been demonstrated . Immediately upon which , he was to be revealed , ver . 8.  The truth of this , will more evidently appear in our discussions of the second particular , viz.  

2.  That the Papal Kingdom , is THE ANTICHRIST spoken of in the Scripture : Which we shall in a distinct Treatise 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 fully demonstrate . 

The third Period of time mentioned in the Revelation is , 

III The time of the last Dragon-war : When we have an account also of a Gospel-church-state ; Churches Worshipping God , according to the appointment of Christ . Of this War we have an account , rev. 12.17 . And the Dragon was Wroth with the Woman , and went about to make War with the remnant of her Seed . V.L. And the Dragon was Wroth against the Woman , and went to make War with the rest of her seed . Ar. Therefore that Serpent was wroth against the Woman ; and went to wage War with the Seed of the Woman , that was left . Sir And that Dragon was wroth against the Woman , and went to make War with them , who are the residue of her Seed . Aeth . And this Beast was wroth against this Woman , and went that he might oppugn the rest of her Sons . Much to the same purpose . 

A few things must be considered . 

1.  Who is meant by the Dragon . 2.  Who by the Woman . 3.  Who are the Remnant of her Seed . 4.  What this War is . 5.  To what Period of time it hath Relation . 6.  That in the time of this War , there is a Gospel-church-state of the appointment of Christ , to which Saints are found in Conformity . 

I As touching the first , by the Dragon we are to understand the Devil . So the Spirit interprets , ver . 9  And the great Dragon was cast out , that Old Serpent called the Devil , and Satan . So also , rev. 20.2 . So called upon the account of his , 1.  Sublety . 2.  Malice , Enmity against mankind , especially the Saints . 3.  Cruelty , in devouring , swallowing them up . 4.  Strength , Power to put in Execution ( by Divine sufferance ) his enmity against them . But yet the Devil as acting not in the Roman-pagan-state , but in the Antichristian ; wherein he most evidently displays his enmity , bloody cruelty , subtlety , and Power . Now this seems to be very evident . For this Dragon is said to have Seven Heads , and Ten Horns , and Ten Crowns upon his Heads . The Seven Heads are interpreted , rev. 17.9 , 10. not only to be Seven Mountains , but also Seven Kings , or seven sorts of Government ; whereof five were fallen , when John written , viz. Kings , Consuls , Tribunes , Decemvirs , Dictator's ; and one than was , viz. Pagan-emperours ; and the Seventh was not yet come , viz. Christian Emperors ; amongst whom spring's Antichrist , who is said to be the Eighth and yet of the Seventh , ver . 11.  So then during the time of the Roman-pagan-emperors , the Dragon had but Six Heads ; therefore by the Dragon we are not to understanding the Devil as acting in that state , but in the Antichristian , when he had his Seven Heads complete . The Ten Horns are also interpreted , rev. 17.12 . to be Ten Kings which had at that time of John's writing , received no Kingdom : They respect a time when the Roman-empire should be divided into Ten Kingdoms , which was not while the Empire was Pagan , but under the Seventh Head , about the Year Four Hundred fifty six . To which add that John doth painly enough intimate , that these Ten Horns did not appertain to the Sixth Head that then was , or the Roman-pagan-empire , but to the Seventh , which was to come ; for though he tells us , they were Ten Kings , yet he adds , that they had received no Kingdom at that time ; i e. they were Kings not actually , but only in the purpose of God , to be produced as such under the Seventh Head , or Roman-christian-empire . Besides , the Beast with Seven Heads , and Ten Horns , is expressly said to carry the Whore , or Antichristian-church , rev. 17.3 . From all which its most clear , that the Dragon with Seven Heads , and Ten Horns , is to be understood the Devil , as acting not in the Roman-pagan , but Christian ( or rather Antichristian ) State.  

2.  By the Woman , we are to understand the Churches of Christ : So called upon the account of their visible espousal to him , or giving up themselves to him as their Lord , and Husband ; owning his despotic Authority , in their professed Subjection to all his Institutions . This seems evident . Because , 

1.  By Woman in the first verse , is meant the Churches of Christ ( as is generally granted ) the Primitive Churches , say most ; the Churches of Christ , as appearing in a latter-day-glory , say others : And as the Woman was at first called of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Is the Man , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Isha Woman , because she was of him : So are the Churches of Christ called , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Hashulammith , Shulamitesse , or Salomona , or she that is peaceable , of him who is the true 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Sheloma , Cant. 6.12 . 

2.  These are frequently , as is already proved , called the Bride , the Wife of Christ , said to be betrothed , espoused to him : He is called their 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Ish , Lord , Husband . 

3.  The Woman ( as related to Christ ) is in the Book of the Revelation , set in opposition to the Whore , or Mother of Harlots , rev. 17.  Now she types out the false Churches : therefore by the Woman we are to understand the true Churches of Christ . 

3.  By the remnant of the Woman's Seed , some understand such as were brought forth by her in the Wilderness , or particular members of the Church ( as others ) who by reason of the iniquity of the times , cannot come together to Worship God in the Solemn Assemblies openly , as formerly , yet seperately and apart , they do worship him . Now there are several things that I humbly conceive lie in the way of these interpretations . 

I This War is not in , but out of the Wilderness : For into the Wilderness the Dragon could not , it seems , pursue her . Therefore he casts a Flood of Water out of his mouth , to swallow her up , but with little Success , for the Earth helps her , opens her mouth and swallows up the Flood , rev. 12.15 , 16.  Besides , he would ( if he could ) have attaqued the Mother in the Wilderness , as well as the Children brought forth by her there ; whereas this is a particular War against the remnant of her seed . Nor , 

2.  Can I see , how their Worshipping severally , and a part , is consistent with the Characters given of the remnant of the Woman's seed , ver . 17. who are expressly said to Keep the Commandments of God , and to have the Testimony of Jesus Christ . Nor , 

3.  Would Satan have looked upon them in their divided State , to be so considerable , as to go about to make so formal a War against them , as is intimated : could he disunite , break , dissipate , scatter the Disciples of Christ , he would think he had done his work ; at least so far , that he might pick them up by degrees , as he saw meet ; and not put himself to the cost and trouble [ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ] of raising a War against them . Little do some think , how much they serve Satan , by driving on a design of scattering the Saints , and calling them off their Church-assemblies : A work he hath been attempting by various artifices , and methods , ever since Christ had his Churches in the World ; but hitherto without success . 

This matter than must farther be considered . By the seed of the Woman ( in the first Scripture-notion of that expression ) we are to understand the Messiah , Christ , Gen. 3.15 . Here it hath respect to the Saints , begotten by the Word , and Spirit of Jesus : called the seed of the Woman , because born in the midst of the Churches of Christ , before that their flight into the Wilderness , mentioned , v. 14.  As also because like her , of the same nature , spirit , temper , walking in the same footsteps , owning the same Principles , Doctrine , practising the same Worship , found in the observation of the same Institutions , Ordinances , with her . By the remnant then of her seed , we are to understand , such as remain behind her , when she fly's into the Wilderness , go not with her thither . The Wilderness points out a state of secrecy , retirement , and so safety : The Woman ( i e. the body of the Churches ) Fly's into the Wilderness from the face of the Serpent , Worships in holes , corners ; whilst this remnant keep on in their visible owning the Ways , Ordinances , Institutions of Christ as formerly . Who ( with submission I speak it ) I conceive to be most strictly the Witnesses in their last testimony to Jesus . 

4.  As touching the fourth and fifth particular , what this War is , and to what period of time it hath relation ; It seems ( at least to me ) evident from what hath been already offered , that 't is the last advance of the Dragon , or Devil , acting in the Papal-antichristian-wilde-beast , ascending out of the bottomless Pit ( or coming forth in more than ordinary malice , fury ) against the two Witnesses , or such of the Woman's seed , who shall at this time most strictly have the Spirit of Prophecy with them ; and so bear up for a season , in a testimony for Christ against him ; the issue whereof , shall be their slaughter , or the driving them off that public testimony they are bearing , into the Wilderness , whether the Woman , or the body of the Churches was before fled . And this seems more than Probable . Because , 

1.  Though here 's mention of the Dragons going about to make War with the remnant of the Woman's seed ; yet there 's no intimation of the least execution , as to any corporeal slaughter he makes upon them : but they seem rather ( with respect to that ) in as great safety as the Woman that before was fled into the Wilderness : In answer to which , the slaughter of the Witnesses is not , cannot be a corporeal slaughter , as amongst others is most evident from this single consideration : viz. Such as their slaughter is , such will their Resurrection be ; if their slaughter be corporeal , their Resurrection must be so : But their Resurrection is not , cannot be a corporeal Resurrection ; because it crosses the Scripture , 1 Cor. 15.23 . Every one in his own order , Christ the first-fruits , afterwards those that are Christ's at his coming : clearly asserting , that the Saints rise not till the personal coming of Christ : But now the Witnesses rise before ; as is granted by all . 

2.  After this advance of the Dragon , you hear no more of this remnant of the Woman's seed , till the great Randezvouz upon Mount Zion , rev. 14.1 . Where they are the risen Witnesses , represented under the notion of One Hundred forty and four Thousand , with their father's name upon their foreheads — going forth under the conduct of the Lamb , to execute the Judgements written against Antichrist , ver . 7.8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12. to the end . And no wonder , for all this while , viz. from the time of their slaughter , to the time of their rise , they lie Dead , as to any public visible witness for Christ ; which formerly they bear , till the Spirit of Life , from God , reenters into them ; and they stand upon their feet — . 

3.  This War against the remnant of the Woman's seed , is much about the same time with her second flight into the Wilderness , ver . 14.  That that flight of the Woman into the Wilderness is a second flight , is evident . For , 

1.  She is represented , ver . 10 , 12. as coming out of it with Triumph , Shouting , having greatned confidence , that she should never return thither again ; for she sings , ver . 10.  Now is come Salvation , and Strength , and the Kingdom of our God , and the Power of his Christ . 

2.  The Wilderness whether she fly's , is called HER PLACE , ver . 14. viz. with respect to what 's said , ver . 6. with relation to her first flying thither . And the Woman fled into the Wilderness , where she hath a place prepared of God. Into this place , which is now called , her place , because before prepared for her of God , doth she now fly . Now that second flight of the Woman into the Wilderness , is exactly the same with the time of the Witnesses lying dead ; She is nourished for a time , times , and half a time , from the face of the Serpent : So the Witnesses lie dead a time [ one Year ] time's [ two Years ] and half a time [ half a Year ] viz. Three Years and a half which is congruous to the Scripture-notion of time , or times , Dan. 4.23 , 25.  

VI That in the time of this War , there is a Gospel-church-state , is evident . For , 

1.  there 's the Woman , i e. the Saints in Church-communion Worshipping God in the ways of Christ's Institution ( for upon this account she 's called the Woman , Bride of Christ , as hath been proved ) fled into the Wilderness , just ( as 't were ) upon its commencement . 

2.  The Remnant of the Woman's seed which keep the Commandments of God , ver . 17.  If by the Commandments of God , we understand the Commandments of God the Father , or of Jesus Christ , it comes all to one . For one great Commandment of the Father to the Sons of Men , is to hear Christ , Deut. 18.18 , 19  And on the Holy Mount , a voice is heard to the same purpose , Mat. 17.5 . And Christ tells us , that those that have heard , and learned of the Father , come to him ; viz. to be instucted by him , John 6.45 . And he that hears him , i e. obey's , subjects to him , his in-doctrinations , teaching , hears the Father . 

3.  They are also said to have the Testimony of Jesus . i e.  

1.  Negatively , they hold not to the Decrees , Canons , Laws , Institutions of Pope , Councils , Fathers , etc.  They abhor to comply with any Antichristian Superstitions , Worship , Orders , Ordinances : would they have done so , the Devil had never gone about to make War against them . The Spirit testifyes of them , that they were not defiled with Woman , rev. 14.4 . i e. with none of the Idolatries , Superstitions , Fornications of the great Whore , or any of her Daughters . 

2.  Positively , they do visibly own Jesus Christ , in all his Offices , Laws , Institutions ; nor will they be persuaded to leave them , or cease to conform to them whatever it cost them . The Lord testifies of them in their risen-state , that they are Virgins , rev. 14.4 . i e. chaste to Christ , faithful to his Institutions . 

And thus much touching the Third Period of time , in which its evident , there are Churches of the institution of Christ . That there are so , 

4.  At the Witnesses rise , and all along the pouring out of the Vials , is very evident by the same Book of the Revelation : By the way I would modestly give my Judgement touching Two things . 

I That the risen-witnesses , and the Vial-angels , contemporize . This seems evident . For , 

1.  The time of the Witnesses Prophesying , is a time of Mourning to them , being in their Sack-cloth-state , and for the most part the time of Antichrist . rampancy : but at the time of their rise , the scene begins to alter ; and the Vengeance of God falls so fearfully upon the Antichristians , that the tenth part of the City falls ; or one of the Ten Kingdoms totally draws off from Antichrist , and is brought into subjection to Christ : The time of the beginning of the pouring out of the Vials , is a time of Mourning to the Antichristians : for the Vials are Vials of the Pure Wrath of God Almighty poured forth in his Authority , and by his Appointment , upon them . 

2.  From the Witnesses rise , the destruction of the Kingdom of the Beast , or of Antichrist goes on , till he be wholly destroyed , and the Kingdoms become the Lords , rev. 11.14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18.  The same fate befalls the Antichristians under the pouring forth of the Vials : their Kingdom is gradually wasted , consumed , till it cease to be , rev. 16 from first to last . But this is not a place fully to prosecute this matter . 

II That there are none of the Vials yet poured forth : These few things ( amongst others ) which must not now be mentioned ) lead me captive to the belief of this Assertion . 

1.  The Witnesses , I humbly conceive , are not yet risen , 't is to be feared not yet slain . Now the risen-witnesses , and Vial-angels synchronizing , they not being risen , these have not poured forth one Vial.  

2.  We have not yet seen the preparatory work , to the pouring forth of the Vials mentioned , rev. 15.  

3.  The subject of the Vials are the persons , or things of Antichrist . The Vials being Vials of pure Wrath ; on whatever persons , or things , they fall , they totally consume them ; so , as that they shall never stand up , or exist more . What of the persons , things of Antichrist have been thus removed , destroyed ; Are they not all in their splendour , height , glory at this day ? 

4.  The Vial-angels , and the Stone-smiting , Dan. 2. synchronize : the effects of the one , and the other , are the same ; viz. the total destruction of Antichrist , and introduction , exaltment , of the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus . But the Stone hath yet not begun to smite ; for when it begins so to do , it shall never cease , till the Image be wholly destroyed ; and it ( the Stone ) become a great Mountain filling the whole Earth , Dan. 2.34 , 35.  Therefore none of the Vials are yet poured out . But of this matter we must not now speak at large . 

That there are particular Churches upon the rise of the Witnesses , and the pouring out of the Vials , will receive a speedy dispatch . 

1.  Now the Witnesses ( which we have proved to be particular Churches ) stand upon their feet — . Begin openly , with their wont , and perhaps , greater courage and boldness to assert , and give Witness to the Ways , and Institutions of Christ ; which all the time of their Prophesying , they were publicly , and in the time of their slaughter , they were privately found in the practice of , rev. 11.11 . 

2.  Now the Woman that had fled into the Wilderness , and was nourished there all the time of the Witnesses slaughter , comes out from thence , and shows herself as the true Loyal Spouse of Christ , in her visible subjection to him ; in all his glorious Institutions , and Appointments . To which time , that pprophecy seems to have respect , Cant. 8.5 . 

3.  Now the Temple , of the Tabernacle of the Testimony in Heaven is opened , rev. 15.5 . A few things must be enquired into . 

1.  What we are to understand by the Temple . 

2.  Why 't is called , The Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony . 

3.  In what sense it 's said , to be opened . 

1.  By the Temple , we are to understand the Gospel-church-state , the Churches , Ordinances , Institutions of CHRIST : which hath been before proved , are represented under that notion , with the Reasons thereof . 

2.  't is called , The Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony ; because the presence of God , his Laws , Statutes , Ordinances , were with them , amongst them , in a special peculiar manner . The Tabernacle of Old was a Type of his special presence with his people then , Exod. 25.8 . and 29.45 , 46.  Levit. 26.11 , 12.  Therefore God is said to dwell in the Tabernacle ; it 's called his Habitation , 2 Sam. 15.25 . There he promised to meet with , and speak to his People , Exod. 29.42 , 43.  This Tabernacle is called , the Tabernacle of Testimony , Exod. 38.21 . Acts 7.44 . because in it was the Ark , wherein was the Law , or Testimony . 'T was at last brought into the Temple at Jerusalem , 1 Chron. 8.4 . — 2 Chron. 5.5 . This here is said to be in Heaven ( or appertaining to the Gospel-ministration ) perhaps on purpose to obviate any mistake , the Jews might have of the restitution of their Temple-worship ; q. d. Though I speak of the Temple of the Tabernacle of Testimony ; don't think , that I intent that which was built , by Moses , Solomon , and that your Old-worship thereto affixed , shall be restored ; no , I am treating of another kind of Temple , under another Ministration , viz. an Heavenly , which he that speaks from Heaven hath introduced . To which appertains the Testimony , Laws , Institutions , he hath given forth ; wherein he hath promised to meet his People , bless them , fill them with his Company , Presence , Glory . 

3.  By the Opening of the Temple of the Tabernacle in Heaven , we are not to understand , the introduction of a New-gospel-ministration : The vanity , emptiness , ridicule of such an interpretation is from hence manifest ; that John saith not , that there shall be a New-temple built ; but only , that the Temple shall be opened , i e. the Old Temple of the Tabernacle that was standing all the times of the Pagan-antichristian persecutions . And this very Scripture is of itself evidence sufficient , that at least all the times of Antichrist , there was an abiding Temple , or Gospel-church-state , Worship , Worshippers therein . For at the rise of Antichrist we find a Temple , rev. 11.1 . and now at the going forth of the Vial-angels , this very Temple is opened : not the least tittle , syllable , of the constituting a new one ; but the opening the old . The word is not 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 to build ; no , nor so much 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , to restore , or repair ; but 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , to open that which was already built , and sufficiently beautified by the Lord The words are perhaps an allusion to 2 Chron. 28.24 . & 29.3 . The first Scripture tells us , that Ahaz had shut up the doors of the House of the Lord ; the latter , that good Hezekiah opened them ▪ 'T was the same House , the same doors ( not others ) that was shut up and opened . The meaning is , Gospel-churches that a little before were Worshipping more retiredly , privately , are now again brought to public view ; returned from their Wilderness , retired-state , to an open profession , owning of the Laws , Ways of JESUS . 

4.  The Vial-angels come out of this Temple thus opened , rev. 15.6 . For they are some of the most Spiritual , principal of the Temple-worshippers ( or members of these Churches ) as is evident from their Priestly-array , they are clothed in pure and White-linnen , having their breasts girded with Golden-girdles : The attire of the Priests , Exod. 28.6 , 8.  Temple-worshippers are a Royal Priesthood , 1 Pet. 2.9 . 

5.  During the whole time of the pouring out of the Vials ( at the close of which , as is generally granted , Christ comes ) we find the continuance of this Temple , ver 8.  And the Temple was filled with Smoke from the Glory of God , and from his Power , ( i e. there was a more than ordinary presence of God , with these Temple-worshippers ) and no man was able to enter into the Temple ( viz. to interrupt , disturb the Worshippers there , as formerly they had done ) till the seven Plagues of the seven-angels were fulfilled , ( i e. till they were all poured out ) Antichrist by them perfectly destroyed , the Glorious Kingdom of our LORD and SAVIOUR introduced . 

CHAP. v.  Gospel-churches part of that Ministration set on foot by Christ : The whole of that Ministration permanent , to continue to the end of the World. Mat. 28.19 , 20. 1  Cor. 11.26 . Explained . An Objection Answered . 1 Tim. 6.13 , 14.  Explained . Heb. 1.1 , 2.  Considered , opened . The Excellency of the discovery God the Father made of his Will by his Son , above all other discoveries he had before made : nothing new to be added to it . Dan. 9.24 . Explained . The 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 who . Vision , and Prophesy what it is . The sealing it up , what it imports . there 's no ground left for any New-ministration , or any alteration in that set on foot by Christ . The reasons of the alteration of the Old Testament-ministration , with the Institutions thereto belonging . The Gospel-ministration , Ordinances , must continue , except a greater than Christ come . 

Demonstration . v.  The Gospel-church-state , with the Church's Institutions , Ordinances thereunto belonging , is part of that Ministration , that was set on foot by the Lord Jesus , when he Tabernacled amongst men ; as hath already been demonstrated . Now the whole of that Ministration that was then set on foot by him , is permanent , and inviolably to be observed to the end of the World. To the proof of which , we now address ourselves . 

I Christ himself seems to intimate as much , when he gives commission to the Apostles , to go forth to preach the Gospel , teaching them who shall be converted by their Ministry to observe his whole charge , Mat. 28.19 , 20.  Go ye therefore , and teach all Nations , Baptising them in the Name of the Father , and of the Son , and of the Holy Spirit : Teaching them to observe all things whatever I have commanded you ; and lo , I am with you always , even unto the end of the World. Two things are plainly asserted . 1.  That whatever Christ gave them in charge to communicate to others , was to be observed and kept by them to the end of the World. 2.  That the Lord Jesus Christ would all along communicate his presence , to such as should , to that great period of time , be found in the observance of what he commanded . 

II The great Apostle of the Gentiles , who also had seen the Lord , and conversed with him , when he was caught up into the third Heavens , expressly asserts concerning one part of this Gospel-ministration , or one great Ordinance appertaining thereunto , ( and such an one as none can regularly be found in the practice of , but such as are in a Church-state , Act. 2.42 . ) viz. The Ordinance of Breaking Bread , that it was to continue to the coming of our Lord , 1 Cor. 11.26 . For as often as ye eat this Bread , and drink this Cup , ye do show forth the Lords death until he come . Christ commanded his Disciples a little before he was offered up a Sacrifice for them , to be found in this practice , Luke 22.19 , 20. — This do in remembrance of me . And afterwards charges them as they love him , to be found in the observance of it ( as of other his Commandments ) John 14.15 . If ye love me , keep my Commandments . Tells them it 's an argument of their love , and true friendship to him so to do , John 14.21 , 23. and 15.14 . ye are my Friends , if ye do whatsoever I command you . Which saith our Apostle , we are to do till our Lord comes . 

Object . 1.  But we witness the Lord already come to us : therefore we are no longer to be under the observation of it . 

Answ . And thus some in the Apostles days , were wont to talk , that they had experienced the Resurrection , 't was to them past already ; so endeavouring to evert the great Doctrine of the Gospel , the Resurrection from the Dead . Against whom he smartly disputes , 1 Cor. 15.  

But in what sense it is , that any pretend , that Christ is already come , must be a little considered . 

1.  He is come in Spirit , Power , say some . Answ . And so he was before the writing of this Epistle : yea , before any one particular Church was gathered by the Apostles . Never such a coming of Christ in Spirit and Power , as was that in the day of Pentecost , Act. 2.  Every believer , 't is true , witnesses his coming to him in Spirit , Power , Quickening ; Raising him from the death of Sin , to the life of Righteousness , Sanctifying , Cleansing him ; which , whoever doth not , whatever his profession is , or by what name soever he is called , he is not a Believer : but in this sense , he was already come to these Corinthians , before Paul written this Epistle to them . He owns them for a Church of God , affirms that they were Sanctified in Christ Jesus , called to be Saints , that the grace of God was given them by Christ Jesus ; that in every thing they were enriched by him , in all utterance , and in all knowledge , that the testimony of Christ was confirmed in them ; so that they came behind in no Spiritural gift ; that they were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ , 1 Cor. 2.4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 9 with much more that might be mentioned , evidently declaring , that Christ was in Spirit , Power , already come to them ; yet the Apostle speaks of another coming , till which , the Saints are to be found in the practice of this institution ; which coming also , these Corinthians waited for , 1 Cor. 1.7 . Waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ . 

Object . 2.  He is come already to some in person ; say others , there 's therefore an end of this Institution , the whole Ministration . 

Answ . But the coming of Christ in a corner , is not the coming the Apostle here speaks of — . 't is an unscriptural , anti-scriptural notion ( as hath been demonstrated ) ; but that coming which the Corinthians , with all the Saints ever since his departure , have been waiting for , viz. his Glorious , Visible coming in the Clouds of Heaven , when every eye shall see him . 

III The same Apostle most solemnly charges his beloved Son Timothy , to keep the Commandment without spot , to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ . 1 Tim. 6.13 , 14.  I give thee charge in the sight of God , who quickeneth all things , and before Christ Jesus , who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession , that thou keep this Commandment without spot — till the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ . what 's meant by Commandment ? Answer , The words in the Greek are 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , That you keep the Commandment . So the Ar. Sir V.L. tender it ; His Commandment , so the Aeth . reads it : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , is put for 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the Commandment , for the Commandments ; so Piscator renders it , Vt serves haec mandata , that thou keep these Commandments , viz. the Commandments he had , as the Apostle of Jesus Christ , communicated to Timothy from Christ . These Believers were to observe , keep , till the appearing of Christ Jesus . If the words be strictly adhered to , and there be no enallage of the number allowed , it comes to the same purpose . For 't will not I presume , be denied , that by Commandment we are not to understand any Commandment given forth by Paul's private Spirit ; but the Commandment of Christ through him . Now of all Christ's Commandments , there 's the same reason , our reception , owning of , obedience to any one , is grounded upon his Sovereign Authority : If I may reject one , I may reject all ; and if I am bound to attend to , obey one , I am bound to attend to , obey all . For 't is the same Lawgiver , that hath given them all forth . Besides , the Apostle in this Epistle , Chap. 5.21 . charges him before God , and the Lord Jesus Christ , and the Elect Angels , that he observe the things delivered to him , without preferring one before another : which seems to be the Commandment , he thus solemnly charges him in the words under consideration , to keep without spot , and unblameable to the coming of Christ . The plain meaning is , the Apostle writes this Epstle to Timothy , on purpose to instruct him how to behave himself in the Church of God , Chap. 3.15 . He had given him sundry directions touching the Officers to be chosen in the Church , Chap. 3.  Speaks of the Apostasy from the Doctrine , and Worship of the Gospel that should be in an after-day , Chap. 4. ( of which also he had treated in his second Epistle to the Thessalonians , Chap. 2. ) would have him put the brethren in remembrance of these things , Chap. 4.6 . charges him to give attendance to the work of the Ministry , to which he was called ; to take heed to the Doctrine , relating to Faith , and Church-order , which was delivered to him , Chap. 4.14 , 16. which he calls that which was committed to his trust , which he commands him to keep , Chap. 6.20 . yea , to command and teach to others , Chap. 4.10 . And having charged him to observe all these things without partiality , Chap. 5.21 . he in this place most solemnly commands him to keep that Commandment of his . The sum is , 1.  Whatever the Apostle had charged upon Timothy , relating to the Doctrine and Worship of the Gospel ; to the Church , and the Institutions thereof ; he was not only to observe himself , but to command others also to do so . 2.  That these Orders , Institutions , Ordinances , were to continue to the next Glorious Personal coming of our Lord Jesus , and the Saints in their several Generations , are till then , to be found in the conscientious observance , and practice of them ; whence it necessarily follows , that the Ministration introduced by Christ ( which for the most part consists in what we have but now instanced in ) must continue till that day . 

iv. Our Apostle give us a farther , and most ample demonstration of the Truth pleaded for , Heb. 1.1 , 2.  God who at sundry times , and in diverse manners spoke in times passed to the Fathers , hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son. The last days , are the last days of the Judaic Church-state , the whole oeconomy ; all the Laws , Statutes , Orders , Institutions thereunto appertaining . God hath spoken — i e. God the Father hath done so by his Son , in his personal Ministry , when he tabernacled amongst men . The design of the Apostle in the words under consideration it 's obvious , is to give the Gospel-ministration a preferrence above all that went before it . And this he doth especially two ways . 

1.  The discoveries God made of his Will to the Fathers in times past , he made by the Prophets : but the discovery of his Will in the Gospel-ministration , is by his Son. Now though 't is true , the Prophets were worthy , excellent , glorious ones ; yet they were but 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , mere men ; but 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the Sons of Adam : The Son of God , the Mediator of the New-covenant ( by whom the Father spoke , when he dwelled amongst us ) is fair , fair above them all , Psal . 45.  Transcends them all in Beauty , Excellency , Authority , Glory , as being 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , that Son , that wellbeloved Son of the Father in whom he was well pleased . 

2.  All the discoveries that were before , were but partial , gradual . He gave a hint to Adam , to Noah ; spoke more plainly to Abraham , Isaac , Jacob , Gen. 12.1 , 2 , 3 , 4.  Chap. 15.11 , 12. and 17.1 , 2. and 26.24 . Chap. 49.  afterward to Moses in giving the Law , and erection of the Judaick-church ; when there was such a discovery of the mind of God , that looked like so perfect a model , that nothing further was to be expected ; yet he afterwards spoke by David , the Prophets , Ezra , etc. but now by his Son , he hath made a perfect , and full discovery of his Mind , and Will ; so as nothing more , nothing new , nothing beyond it is to be expected . That such a discovery should be made by him , was before Prophesied of him , Dan. 9.24 . Seventy Weeks are determined upon the People — to finish the transgression — to seal up the Vision , and Prophesy , and to anoint the most Holy. That 't is a Prophecy of Christ , is generally acknowledged by both Christians , and Jews . Nachmanides tells us 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , this Holy of Holies ( or the most Holy , as we translate ) is the Messiah , who is sanctified from amongst the Sons of David . The work he was to do when he came in the World , is amply deciphered , viz. to Finish transgression , to make an end of Sins , to make reconciliation for iniquities , and to bring in everlasting Righteousness , and to seal up the Vision , and Prophesy . This last is , what we are at present concerned to take notice of . Two things must be enquired into . 

1.  what 's meant by Vision , and Prophesy . 

2.  In what sense the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the Holy of Holyes , or the Holiness of Holinesses , the Messiah , CHRIST , sealed up the Vision , and Prophesy . 

1.  Touching the first , by Vision and Prophecy , we are to understand , all the ways of discovery of the mind and Will of God , he was pleased to make use of for the instruction of the Judaick-church therein . 

2.  As to the second , Christ sealed the Vision and Prophecy , by finishing , perfecting it , so as no more was , or needed to be added thereunto , as to the making the discovery of the Fathers will complete . So the Word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Chatham ( translated seal ) signifies , Ezek. 28 , 12.  thou sealest up the Sum : Vatablus , and the Tigurine tender it , Tues omnibus numeris absolutum exemplar ; thou art in all respects a perfect example . And to the same purpose , Castalion . The Syriack renders it , by a word that signifies as to Seal , so to complete , make perfect ; and the Arabic , by a word , that signifies to make an end of speaking . When a man hath written the whole of his mind he intends to communicate in his letter , he seals it up . The meaning is , God had diverse ways , and manners , in days past , revealed his Will to the Church ; at last he sent his Son , as the great and last Prophet , who fully , perfectly discovers his mind to her ; so that a further Instruction there needs not , nor is there to be expected . But , 

v. there 's no ground left for any New-ministration , or any Alteration in that set on foot by Christ . The reasons of the alteration of the Old-testament-ministration , with the Institutions , Ordinances thereunto appertaining , may be reduced to a twofold-head . 

1.  They all pointed at , had respect to the Messiah , Christ , to come , Rom. 10.4 . Christ is the end of the Law. This the Apostle asserts to be the ground of its abolition , Heb. 10.1 , 9  

2.  Christ was to come during its continuance , as Lord over his own House , with more ample Power , and Authority than any that went before him , Heb. 1.1 , 2 , 3.  & 3.5 , 6.  He had then Power , Authority , to confirm , remove , abolish as he pleased ; and none could say unto him in this matter , What dost thou ? But neither of these can be supposed as the ground of altering , discontinuing the Ministration set on foot by Christ . He was then already come , tabernacled among men : and come he was , as the great Prophet , Lord , King , of the Church ; and as such , gives forth Laws for them to subject , conform to . 

VI The Gospel-ministration , Institutions , must continue , except a greater than Christ come . The Law was given forth by Moses , it continued thousands of Years ; and notwithstanding the degeneracy , corruption that was amongst the People , none could put a period to it ; the Church was bound to the observation of it , to the coming of Christ , Mal. 4.4 . with Deut. 34.10 . and that upon this foot of account ; because till Christ , none rose up greater than he . Therefore Paul going about to demonstrate to the Jews the abolition of the Mosaic Ministration , lays the Foundation of his discourse in the supereminent Authority of the Lord Jesus . 't is true , the Law was most solemnly given forth by the Ministration of Angels in the hands of Moses , but Christ is above Angels , Heb. 1.4 . and 2.2 . above Moses , chap. 3.3 . Is there any greater , superior to Christ ? If not ( as most certain it is there is not ; to assert it , is the height of Antichristianism , 't is blasphemy against the Son ) than the Ministration instituted by him , must of necessity continue till he come to put a period to it . For it must be a greater , and superior , that can abolish or alter what is established . 

CHAP. VI  The end for which Christ Instituted the Gospel-church-state , Churches , Ordinances , the same ; and will continue so to the time of the consummation of all things . The particular ends instanced in . Sanctifying the Name of the Lord in Worship , what it is . A solemn , public , avowed , owning , subjection to Christ , setting forth the Lords honour , publishing his praises . Eph. 3.21 . Explained . Saints mutual edification , growth . The confirmation of their mutual Love to each other . Are some of the ends for which Christ instituted Gospel-churches , Ordinances , demonstrated . 

Demonstration . VI  THE end for which , the Lord Jesus established the Gospel-church-state , Gospel-churches , Institutions , Ordinances , is the same that ever 't was , and will continue so to be till the time of the consummation of all things . Whence its continuation necessarily follows . Let 's a little consider what were the ends for which God from the beginning , instituted a Church-state in the World. amongst others that perhaps might be mentioned , these are the chief . 

I The Sanctification of his name therein , Leu. 10.3 . This is that which the Lord hath said , I will be Sanctified in all those that draw nigh to me — . 't is of the solemn Worship of God in that Church-state he is there speaking : In particular , touching that Institution of sacrificeing to the Lord The sanctification of his name therein , is asserted to be one great end of the Lord in that institution : a failure wherein cost Nadab , and Abihu dear ; they thereby provoked the Lord , and he broke forth in his fury against them , and slew them before the People . This also is asserted to be the end of the Gospel-church-state , Gospel-institutions , Heb. 12.28 , 29.  wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be shaken , let us have grace whereby we may serve God , acceptably with REVERENCE , and GODLY FEAR , for our God is a consuming Fire . By the Kingdom which cannot be shaken , we have already demonstrated , is meant the Gospel-church-state , therein they were to serve God acceptably , with reverence , and Godly fear , i e. they were to sanctify his name in their attendment on him in the Institutions appertaining thereunto ; which if they neglect to do , they may expect to find the Lord , as Nadab , and Abihu did , a consuming fire to them . Before we come to a full Conclusion of this matter , 't will not be altogether impertinent or unprofitable to remark what it is to sanctify the Name of the Lord in Solemn-gospel-worship . In order whereunto there must be , 

1.  A single respect to , a Holy reverence of God's Sovereign Authority in its appointment . The Laws , Edicts of men , have no place here . Should we be found in the practice of what God commands , and therein have no regard to his Commandment , Authority ; but the Commandments , Injunctions of men , we sanctify not his name therein . The Authority of God instituting it , is laid as the Foundation of , and motive to all our Worship , Deut. 6.4 , 5 , 6 , 7. and 28.58 . Mat. 28.18 , 19 , 20.  Heb. 3.4 , 5 , 6.  what 's bottomed merely upon the wills , laws of men , is not the Worship of God ; 't is Superstitious , Idolatrous , Vain , Empty , good for nothing ; that which the Soul of the Lord loathes , abhors ; it provokes him to Jealousy , whatever outward splendour , beauty , show of Devotion it may seem to have in it . How great a part of the Worship of the Papacy is hereby discarded , is known : It being solely built upon the Authority of Popes , Councils , Fathers , Traditions , Laws , Edicts of Men ; totally foreign , contrary to Jehovah's Law.  

2.  There must be also Faith in the Promises of God annexed to the observance of these Institutions . That there are special promises of Favour , Grace , Kindness to such as Conscientiously attend upon him herein , shall afterwards be demonstrated . Faith is required with respect to these Promises : He that comes unto God ( draws nigh to him in Gospel-institutions ) must believe that he is , and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him . Heb. 11.6 . 

3.  There must be a Holy , Awful regard unto his special Presence in them . He walks in the midst of his Golden Candlesticks , rev. 1.13 . dwells in his Churches , 2 Cor. 6.16 . 't is true , he fills Heaven , and Earth , with his presence , is indistant to no creature , the vilest of Men , or Devils ; but he hath promised a more special Presence with his Children , as they are attending him in his own appointments , for their further enlightening , quickening , comfort , strengthening , growth , increasment in the Grace of God , Mat. 18.20 . If persons attend on Divine Institutions , and realize not the special presence of the Lord there ; no wonder if they are carnal , formal , dead , lifeless in them , meet with no feeling of his Power , sights of his Glory — . 

4.  There must be an attendment to the due order , in which the Lord will have all managed . A failure herein , caused the Lord of old to make a breach upon Vzzah ( he smote him , slew him , when they were about to bring the Ark from Kirjath-jearim , 1 Chron. 13.11 . ) 1 Chron. 15.13 . The Lord our God made a breach upon us for that we sought him not after the due Order . All must be managed in the Spirit , Power , of Jehovah : he 's put into office by the Father , and the Son , to enable in the managery of Divine Service , Rom. 8.26 . Alas ! sorry weak man , is altogether unable for the dispatch of such sublime , Heavenly Work. Let men at their utmost peril , contemn , deride the assistance of the Spirit herein ; they never worship God aright , who are strangers to it , nor without it will ever be able to please him in what they do . 

5.  There must be also a holy delight in God : the lively stirring up , exerting , putting forth of the grace of God in us . 't is not so easy a matter for persons to sanctify the Name of God in Worship , as many suppose it to be . We cannot of ourselves , in our own creaturely power , serve him who is a jealous God.  

6.  There must be a perseverance , continuance , unto the end , in obedience to him , in a due observation of , and subjection to him , in Gospel-institutions : otherwise we deny his name , profane it ( as much as in us lies , make Religion , Christianity , a ridicule , contempt in the World ) instead of Sanctifying it . Are any of these things vacated , not to be heeded , attended to ? Who that pretends in sobriety to Christianity , hath the forehead to avouch , affirm it ? 

II Another end of Gospel-institutions is , Our solemn , public , avowed , owning of , subjection to the Lord Jesus . 'T was from the beginning , one end of God , in his erecting of Worship , that his People might therein , solemnly own , avouch , him to be their God , Lord , Sovereign ; and they his Loyal Subjects , faithful Servants , Deut. 26.16 , 17 , 18.  This day the Lord thy God hath commanded thee to do these Statutes , and Judgements : thou shalt therefore keep , and do them , with all thy heart , and all thy soul . thou hast avouched the Lord this day to be thy God , and to walk in his Ways , and to keep his Statutes , and his Commandments , and his Judgements , and to hearken unto his Voice . And the Lord hath avouched thee this day , to be his peculiar People as he hath promised thee , and that thou shouldst keep all his Commandments . If we will have God for our God , visibly own him as such , we must conform to his Institutions ; our public acknowledgement of him , as such , lies therein . The World know nothing of the Saints acts of Faith , Love , the secret communion they have with GOD : nor do they , can they take much notice of them as to their Closet , Family-service : but when found in the practice of the Institutions of the Lord , then are they in the view of men , publicly declaring that God's their God , and they his People , Josh . 24.18 , 21 , 22. is to the same purpose , 2 Cor. 8.5 . First gave their own selves to the Lord , i e. choose him for their God , resigned up themselves , all that they were , and had , wholly to the Lord to be at his dispose : And unto us by the Will of God ; i e. they solemnly avouched , publicly owned , declared this God to be theirs , by their entering into the fellowship of the Gospel , walking in the ways of his appointment , owning , subjecting to , the Ordinances of Jesus declared to them by us . Nor can there be a full owning of the Lord ( to speak modestly ) without a conscientious walking herein : neither will the Lord look upon aught we do , whilst in the wilful neglect of his Institutions to be such an owning of him . He will be acknowledged to be our God , not in the way of our own wills , but in the ways he hath appointed us so to do . The sole question is ( and yet one would wonder it should be a question amongst any that profess the fear of the Lord ) Whether it be the duty of Saints publicly to own , acknowledge him to be their GOD ? Which if granted , it cannot be denied , but the Gospel-church-state , with the Institutions thereunto belonging , is yet in being ; and must be so , whilst there are any Saints in this World , whose duty 't is so to own him : for one end aimed at by the Lord Jesus in the establishment of these Institutions , was , ( as hath been proved ) that Saints should solemnly own , acknowledge him therein . 

III A third end of this Gospel-church-state , is to set forth the Lords honour , publish his praises , Eph. 3.21 . Unto him be glory in the Churches by Christ Jesus , throughout all Ages , World without end , Amen . 

Two things are here plainly asserted by the Apostle . 

1.  That there shall be a continuation of Churches thoughout all ages , World without end : and of such Churches , both for Matter , and Form , ( at least ) as were in the Apostles days ; walking with Christ in all the ways of his appointment . One would wonder at the confidence of persons , who have the forehead to assert the cessation of Churches , Ordinances , in open opposition to what is affirmed here by the Apostle of our Lord : who speaks so fully , plainly , to their continuation , till the end of the World , that all the wit of man cannot possibly find out any evasion . Had he said only , They should continue , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , to , or throughout Generations , or Ages , 't would have been said , true ; but when the Apostles fell asleep , and a second Generation also was past , a general apostasy came in , and there was a period of the Church-state : To obviate which cavil , he industriously ( as 't were ) affirms their continuance 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 into all , or throughout all Generations , or Ages : and as if that were not full enough to express his intendment of their continuance till time should be no more ; he adds , that they should be 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , throughout all Ages of the World , of Worlds , or Age of Ages . The Apostles seems to allude to two Hebrew Phrases , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Psal . 10.6 . I shall never be in Adversity ; the word is , unto Generation , and Generation : And that Isa . 45.17 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ye shall not be ashamed , nor confounded , World without end . Their continuance till the end of this World , is evidently what 's his intendment . 

2.  That one end of the Institution of these Churches , is , that God may be praised in them , by them , is also asserted . Is this end terminated ? Is it not the duty of Saints to praise the Lord ; and to praise him in the ways he hath appointed ? If he hath instituted Churches for this end ; 't is the duty of Saints to praise him in them . If for this end he hath Appointed their continuance throughout all Ages , they must of necessity so continue , or God fails of his end , which is abominable Blasphemous to assert . See to the same purpose , Heb. 2.12 . 1 Pet. 2.9 . 

iv. Another end of the Gospel-church-state , is Saints mutual Edification , Growth , till they all come in the Unity of the Faith , and of the knowledge of the Son of GOD , unto a perfect man , unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ , 1 Cor. 14.26 . Let all things be done to edifying , Eph. 4.11 , 12 , 13 , 29. 1  These . 5.11 . Judas 20.  Have Saints no further need of edification , building up ? Are they come to a Perfect man , unto the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ ? Who dare aver it ? Can there be a more proper medium , way , or means , fixed upon , for the effecting this noble , and glorious end , than what the Lord proposed , viz. their walking together in the fellowship of the Gospel , in the practice of all the Institutions of Christ ? What ever persons may think , as none can desert the way Appointed by the Lord , for the production of this end , without a tremendous advance against the Wisdom of God , his Love to , and Care of his Children ; so they 'll find , any other fixed upon by them , will prove altogether insuccessful as to the end aimed at . 

v. The confirmation of the Saints mutual love one to another , is also frequently asserted to be one great end of this Appointment , Eph. 5.2 . 1 These . 3.12 . 1 John 3.22 . 1 Cor. 10.16 , 17.  't is certainly our duty to keep this Commandment of our Lord , yea , to abound in love more and more each to other : The means then appointed by the Lord for that end , must Conscientiously be atended to . 

CHAP. VII . The Gospel-church-state , with the Institutions , Ordinances thereunto appertaining , is annexed unto , and bottomed upon the New-covenant : Demonstrated from Scripture-prophesie , Isa . 59.21 . Ezek. 11.19 , 20. and 36.25 , 26 , 27. at large explained . From several places in the New-testament ; wherein 't is clearly asserted so to be , Luk. 22.19 , 20. 1  Cor. 11.24 , 25 , 26.  Heb. 10.16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25.  Considered . That they belong not to the Old Covenant , proved . The donation of the Spirit , Faith , Peace , Joy , etc.  From the New-covenant : these Communicated , as we are found attending on the Lord in Gospel-institutions . These are given forth to the Saints for the trial of their Love , Loyalty , as they stand related , are betrothed to him in the New-covenant , Jer. 3.14 , 15.  Explained . 

Demonstration . VII . THE Gospel-church-state , with the Institutions , Ordinances thereunto appertaining , is annexed unto , bottomed upon the New-covenant : Therefore it 's perpetual , abiding . The consequence is evident ; what is annexed to , bottomed upon , that which is permanent , cannot be itself otherwise : it must abide , continue , as that to which it 's affixed , on which it 's bottomed does . The whole Judaick-church-state , with all its Ordinances , Institutions , was built upon that Covenant God of Old , took Israel into , Heb. 9.1 . This Covenant was mutable , changeble ; a time was fixed by the Lord for its abolition : Represented at first in the breaking of the Tables of Stone , in which the Law , or Covenant was written , Exod. 32.19 . Yet so long as that abode , the Institutions thereunto appertaining were in force ; therefore the Apostle , being to prove the cessation of the Jewish-church-state , amongst other mediums , makes use of this as one , that the Covenant God took that people into , was perioded , abolished , Heb. 8.6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 13.  So then , if the Gospel-church-state , Ordinances , are annexed to the New-covenant ; they are , cannot but be , permanent : except that Covenant also be supposed , and can be proved to be otherwise . That the Gospel-church-state , and all the Ordinances thereof , are annexed to , and bottomed upon the New-covenant , is evident from 

1.  Scripture-prophesie , declaring that so it shall be , Isa . 59.21 . As for me , this is my Covenant with them , saith the Lord , My Spirit that is upon thee , and My Words which I have put in thy mouth , shall not depart out of thy mouth ; nor out of the mouth of thy Seed , nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed's Seed , saith the Lord ; from henceforth , and for ever . 't is the Covenant that God takes believers into , the Gospel-covenant that he speaks of : This is my Covenant with them ; these are called : Christ's Seed . So Chap. 53.10 . Concerning them , he saith , that the words which he puts into the mouth of Christ , i e. whatever he gave Christ ( as the great Prophet of the Church ) in charge to communicate to them ; all the Laws , Institutions given forth by Christ , were part of God's words he put into his mouth . Shall not depart out of their mouths , i e. they shall be found in the practice of , subjecting to them ; whilst there are any Saints in this World , they shall be so . And this as a branch , part of that Covenant God takes them into , Ezek. 11.19 , 20.  And I will give them one heart , and I will put a new Spirit within you , and I will take the stony-heart out of their flesh , and will give them an heart of flesh : that they may walk in my Statutes , and keep mine Ordinances , and do them ; and they shall be My People , and I will be their GOD. The former part of the words , I will give them one heart — and the latter , they shall be my People , and I will be their GOD ; are the sum , and substance of the New-covenant , Jer. 32.29 . Unto this then the Statutes , and Ordinances do evidently appertain : for the Lord takes them to be his People , gives himself to them to be their GOD ; gives them one heart , puts a new Spirit within them — that they may walk in his Statutes , keep his Ordinances , and do them . If there be any Saints under the New-covenant , if a new Spirit be put within them , then are there also Statutes and Ordinances ( Gospel-institutions ) for them to walk in ; and in their doing so , they discover themselves to be God's People , as he is their God , Ezek. 36.25 , 26 , 27. is fully to the same purpose : then will I sprinkle clean Water upon you , and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness , and from all your Idols will I cleanse you : A new Heart also will I give you , and a new Spirit will I put within you ; and I will take away the Stony-heart out of your flesh , and I will give you an Heart of Flesh . And I will put my Spirit within you , and cause you to Walk in in my Statutes , and ye shall keep my Judgements to do them . If the donation of the Spirit , Regeneration , Sanctification , be a part , branch , of the New-covenant ; the Statutes , and Judgements of the LORD are so too : and these , such a part of it , that there 's at least ground of Jealousy , whether any are really made partakers of the former , who are found ( except under the power of temptation ) in the total neglect , rejection of these : for the Spirit , etc. is given to cause them to Walk in God's Statutes , and to keep his Judgements . And it 's worthy observation , that God hath equally obliged himself to cause his People to walk in the ways of his Institution , as to give the Spirit , etc. to them . So that evidently , there must be a continuation of Churches , Ordinances ; or there are no Saints , there 's an end of the New-covenant . 

2.  And as it 's fore-prophesied of that , in the days of the New-covenant-oeconomy thus it should be ; so it 's evidently declared , that upon the Introduction of that Ministration , so it was : Gospel-institutions , and Ordinances , are plainly asserted to be annexed to the New-covenant . Christ himself intimates , as much , Luke 22.19 , 20.  And he took Bread , and gave Thanks , and break it ; and gave unto them , saying , This is my Body which was given for you : This do in remembrance of me : likewise also the Cup after Supper , saying , This Cup is the New-testament in my Blood , which is shed for you . As circumcision was called the Covenant ( as upon other acounts , so ) because , 't was a part , or branch of it : so is this institution of Christ , called the New-testament ; because a part , or branch thereof . And if it be Objected , That this is only asserted of the Cup , one part of one institution , not of the whole ; much lesle of all Gospel-institutions : The Answer is easy ; what 's asserted of any one part , is true of the whole ; and if the Cup be the New-testament , the Bread is so ; and if one institution be so , every one is so too . At the same rate the Apostle speaks after he had seen the Lord , and conversed with him , 1 Cor. 11.24 , 25 , 26.  And most evidently , fully , Heb. 10.16 , to 26. where he tells us , that our drawing nigh ( viz. to God in ways of Gospel-institutions , the profession of our Faith ( which lies eminently in our subjection to him therein ) the assembling ourselves together , to exhort one another ( which he would not have us forget ) is annexed to , bottomed upon the New-covenant , of which he is ex professo treating : And a wilful rejection of these in open despite of Christ , and contempt of his Authority , he calls , v. 29.  A treading under foot the Son of God , because it 's a high affront to his Sovereign Authority ) an accounting the Blood of the Covenant an unholy thing ( not only because these Institutions are annexed to that Covenant which was ratified by the blood of Christ ; but also because they have all their Foundation in that Blood , our approximation to God in them , our advantage by them , is the issue of its effusion ) and a doing despite unto the Spirit of Grace ; because as hath been proved , they are all the Ministration of that Spirit : should God immediately by himself speak from Heaven to us , and declare in so many words , These Gospel-institutions established by My Son , are all of them bottomed upon , annexed to the New-covenant ; we could not have a greater certainty that they are so , than what is in that Scripture-evidence we have hitherto been discoursing of . But , 

3.  They belong to the Old-covenant , or the New. there 's no medium . To the Old-covenant , it 's most ▪ certain they appertain not . Other manner of Ordinances , which were only to continue to the Gospel-day , as Circumcision , Sacrifices — appertained thereunto : not the least notice under that Covenant , as any part of the oeconomy thereof , of particular Churches , Baptism , Breaking-bread — Christ came to put a Period to that Paedagogie ; and all the Laws , Institutions thereunto appertaining ; and virtually did so by his Death ; actually , by providential dispensations ; taking out of the way , destroying that Temple to which they were peculiarly affixed . And becoming a Mediator of a better Covenant , established upon better Promises , as such , he gives forth the Laws , and Institutions we are pleading for ; of which afterwards . 

4.  The Communications of Divine Life , the Royal manifestations of the Love of GOD to us ; the bestowment of the Spirit upon us ; Divine peace , comfort , support , upholdment , with whatever Grace we are made partakers of , are all conveyed in the way of the New-covenant . Now , whatever any talk , the communication of these , as 't is promised to us , as we have found attending upon the Lord in his own Institutions ( of which more anon ) ; so the Saints , in every day , at this day , through wonderful riches of Grace , are under the enjoyment of . The Spirit is received , Faith communicated , Peace , and Joy shed abroad upon the hearts of Believers , as they conscientiously attend on these appointments of Christ . Such as know not these things , or having known them ( through the power of temptation ) slight , undervalue them , are to be pitied , not attended to , or regarded in their present apprehensions touching them . 

5.  That God hath a people , that he hath in the New , and everlasting Covenant taken unto himself , for a peculiar People , will not be denied . To these God gives himself as their GOD ; he betrothes , marries them to himself ; and they give up themselves spontaneously unto him as a People , to own , subject to his Authority , Sovereignty , and to profess their so doing by a conformity to whatever commands , Injunctions , he shall lay upon them . Gospel-institutions he gives forth for the trial of their Love , Loyalty to him ; charges them to be found in the practice of them ( as hath been proved ) . Their obedience , subjection hereunto , he looks upon as a great part of their Loyalty to him in the Conjugal-covenant he hath taken them into with himself , Jer. 3.14 , 15.  Turn OH backsliding Children , saith the Lord , for I am married unto you , and I will take you one of a City , and two of a Family , and I will bring you to Zion . And I will give you Pastors according to mine Heart , which shall feed you with knowledge , and understanding . Where coming unto Zion , or our attendment on God in ways of his own Appointment , is asserted to be that wherein our Marriage-relation to him stands : Hence departing from these , is called Whoredom , Adultery ; and those that do so , The great Whore , the Mother of Harlots , and fornications of the Earth . The sum is , Gospel-churches , Institutions , are bottomed upon the New-covenant : therefore abiding . 

CHAP. VIII . The Churches that have been , are , are the Churches of Christ , or Antichrist . They are not the Churches of Antichrist , proved . The matter of Antichristian-churches ; and of the present Churches : The Form , Foundation , Doctrine , Worship , Nature , Characters , Properties , of the one , and the other , considered . 1 Tim. 4.1 . The Daemons there mentioned , what they are ; Their Original , Office , manner of Worshipping them ; the Doctrines of Daemon's the Doctrine of the Apostatick-synagogue of Rome . 

Demonstration . VIII . That there have been persons under the profession of the Name of Christ , congregated together , for the solemnisation of Ordinances , from the first-times of the Gospel hitherto , hath been before proved : That there are so still , cannot be denied . Now these Churches must be either the Churches of Christ , or the Churches of Antichrist . there 's no medium . A Church that was neither of Christ , nor Antichrist , was never yet heard of in the world , since the first-dawning of the Gospel-day . So then , if we demonstrate , that the present Churches are not Antichristian-churches , we evince them to be the Churches of Christ ; and a continuation of the Gospel-church-state , at least hitherto , is evidently discovered . That they are not Churches of Antichrist is easily demonstrated . They wholly differ from the Antichristian-church in respect of matter , form , foundation , doctrine , worship , nature , characters , properties . Touchching which , it 's needful that we particularly discourse . 

First then , the Matter of the Antichristian-church , is , whoever own 's the Christian Faith , mak es a Profession of it , though never so deboysh , vile , wicked ; to every good work , reprobate . Notwithstanding all their pompous shows of Religion , Forms of Godliness , they are really such as have pleasure in Unrighteousness , 2 These . 2.12 . Is this the matter constitutive of the present Churches ? Do they admit persons of so black a character into their Communion ? If any such spots are found amongst them , do they tolerate , indulge them ? Are not the rules of Christ prosecuted , till they ( appearing to be persons of a reprobate mind ) are rejected out of their fellowship ? Is it not the avowed principles of all the Churches , that such as these , are not fit matter for any Church of Christ ? Can they be charged with walking contrary to their principles in this matter ? Who hath the confidence , impudence , thus to charge any one of them ? 't is true , now , and then , some scandalous persons are found amongst them ( and so there were in the Primitive Churches , as in the Church of Corinth , etc. ) that crept in unawares ; but they are matter of grief , humbling to them ; and they do not , dare not , cannot suffer them in their Communion . 

2.  The Form ( if it may be so called ) of the Antichristian-church lies in a forcible compelling persons into , and violent keeping them in its communion , and fellowship . If you 'll not be one with them , than Fines , Imprisonment , Bonds attend you ; Penal Laws , and Statutes are Enacted for this end ; and by these are men brought into , and kept in the Antichristian-church : And were these weapons of ▪ its warfare taken away , 't would soon become as a garden of Cucumbers , or perish with its own weight . The attempts of the Papacy , to reduce persons into their Communion , by Fire , and Sword ; their labours to preserve the Uninity of their Church this way is known . Is there any thing like it owned by , or to be found , amongst the present Churches ? Do they not with one mouth affirm , that 't is a voluntary departure from the world's way , and a spontaneous giving up themselves to the Lord , and one another , to walk with him in a subjection to his institutions , wherein the form of the Church's lies ? Herein is a most Evident difference betwixt Them , and the Antichristian-church . They talk of no compulsions , but those of the Spirit , and Love , that make a people Volunteers in the day of the Lord's Power . Lex nova non se vindicat ultore gladio , is their Motto , as is known . 

3.  The Foundation of the Antichristian-church , is not Jesus Christ ; but the Sons of men , one , or other of them ; their Laws , Canons , Decretals , upon which it is built . Is this the case of the present Churches ? Do they not all of them , with full consent , proclaim their abhorrency of such a Foundation ? Is not CHRIST , in their account , the alone Foundation of all the True Churches in the world , and they practise accordingly . Their debates touching this matter , with the Papelins , about Mat. 16.18 . from whence these endeavour to prove Peter , and consequentially ( as they 'd have it ) the Pope to be the Rock upon which the Church is built ; is known to all that look upon themselves concerned in these matters . 

4.  The Doctrine of the Anti-christian-church , is a Doctrine of Devils , 1 Tim. 4.1 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the doctrines of Daemons , so the learned Mede renders it . Some carry it thus , doctrines which devils are the Authors of : there 's a great deal of truth in that , all the doctrines of the Anti-christian-church , that are peculiarly hers , are the doctrines of Devils . But I rather think , with that learned person , that by doctrines of Daemons , is meant those doctrines that have the Daemons for their Object . Now these Daemons ( that were worshipped by the Pagans' ) were 1.  For their nature , and degree , supposed by the Gentiles , an inferior , and middle sort of divine powers , between the sovereign and heavenly Gods , and mortal Men. 2.  For their Office , to be as mediators , and agents between these sovereign Gods , and Men. 3.  For their original , either Angels , or the Deified-souls of Worthymen after death . 4.  For the way of Worshipping them , to find and receive benefits from them ; 't was by Consecrated-images , and Pillars . 5.  Their very Relics were adored , and brought into Temples . They that desire to see more touching this matter , may at their leisure , consult the famous Medes Apostasy of the latter times . The Doctrines of Daemons then , are the Doctrines of the Apostatick Roman-antichristian-synagogue , touching the worshipping of Saints , and Angels , in imitation of the Pagan - Daemon - Worship ▪ But take the words in the largest Sense , as comprehensive of all those Doctrines that are not of Christ , have the devil for their Author : Some whereof , are mentioned by the Apostle afterwards , v. 3.  Forbidding to Mary , and commanding to abstain from Meats — the Doctrines of Justification by Works , or inherent Sanctification , of Purgatory ( or a state of Purifying after this life ) — any Principles , Opinions , contrary to sound Doctrine ; the form of wholesome words , or the Doctrine which is according to Godliness ; which of the Churches can be justly charged with holding , maintaining any such Principles ? 't is true , perhaps amongst some of them , there may be found one , or other , that speak perverse things ( as there was of old in the Church of Corinth , and some other Churches , in the Apostolic times ) but are they countenanced therein ? Can their corrupt Doctrines be charged as the Doctrines of the Churches ? What more evidently , notoriously false , can be suggested , or fixed on ? 

5.  The Worship of the Antichristian-church , is a Worship of devils , idols of gold , silver , wood , stone , the work of man's hands , rev. 9.20 . 't is an idolatrous , whorish , adulterous , superstitious Worship , rev. 17.1 , 2 , 4 , 5. whose whole substratum , foundation , is the Commandments of men ; ( Mat. 15.9 . ) Traditions , etc. 't is formal , sapless , lifeless . it 's managery in the Spirit , is not at all attended to : His Assistance is contemned , reviled , blasphemed ; as that which is fantastic , whimsical , heretical , schismatical for any to talk of , or pretend to . Is the Worship of the Churches , such a Worship ? Who hath the forehead to aver it ? They witness against all such Worship , and Worshipper's , both in Word , and Writing , as is known : Are studious to walk by Scripture-rule in their Worship , both with respect to the matter , and manner , thereof . 

6.  The nature , characters , properties of the Antichristian-church , are amply described by the Apostles of our Lord They are such as receive not the love of the Truth , that they might be saved ; upon whom God hath sent strong delusions , that they should believe a lie ; that they all might be damned , who believed not the Truth , but had pleasure in Vnrighteousness , 2 These . 2.10 , 11 , 12.  That give heed to seducing Spirits , and doctrines of Daemons , speaking lies in hypocrisy ; having their conscience seared with a hot iron ; forbidding to marry , and commanding to abstain from meats , 1 Tim. 4.1 , 2 , 3. covetous , boasters of themselves , blasphemers , disobedient to Parents ; unthankful , unholy , without natural affection ; truce-breakers , false Accusers , ( or makebates ) incontinent , fierce , despisers of those that are good : traitors , heady , highminded , lovers of pleasures ▪ more than lovers of God ; having a form of Godliness , but denying the power thereof — 2 Tim. 3.2 , 3 , 4 , 5.  Such as Worship the Dragon gave power unto the Beast , and Worship the Beast , rev. 13.4 , 5 , 8.  Receiving his mark ( in their right hand , or in their foreheads ) his Name , or the number of his Name ( which whosoever did not ) might neither buy , nor sell , v. 16 , 17.  The great Whore that sits upon many waters , with whom the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication , and the Inhabiters of the Earth have been made drunk with the wine of her Fornication ▪ A Woman sitting upon a scarlet-coloured Beast , full of Names of Blasphemy , having seven Heads , and ten Horns . The Woman arrayed in Purple , and scarlet colour , and decked with Gold , and precious Stone , and Pearls , having a golden cup in her hand , full of Abominations , and filthiness of her Fornication ; upon whose forehead is a Name written , Mystery , Babylon the Great , the Mother of Harlots , and Abominations of the Earth : The Woman drunken with the blood of the Saints , and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus , rev. 17.1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6.  In whom ( in the great Inquisition that God will make ) will be found the blood of Prophets , and of Saints , and of all that were slain upon the Earth , rev. 18.24 . In a word , the Antichristian-church is that part of the body of professors that the great Antichristian-apostasy spoken of , by these Apostles , gathers up ; who is described , charactered , by her false Doctrine , idolatrous , superstitious Worship , ( of which before ) immorality in conversation , persecution , bloody cruelty against the Royal Seed , the Saints of the most high . Who so seared , hardened in heart , and conscience , as without a blush , from a soul filled with deep consternation , can bear the sight of a thought springing up to affix the characters of this Antichristian-church , unto the present Churches ? So then , these being in respect of Matter , Form , Foundation , Doctrine , Worship , Nature , Characters , perfectly different from the Antichristian-church , must of necessity be the Churches of CHRIST ( and accounted so by all , who are not resolved against the plainest Demonstrations , to hold their persuasion with a nunquam persuadebis etiamsi persuaseris ) except some Hermaphrodyte-church , that is neither of Christ , or Antichrist , can be found out . 

CHAP. IX . The Church-state , Gospel-institutions , are bottomed upon the Mediatory Office of Christ . Their continuation from thence dedemonstrated . Of Christ's Prophetic , Priestly , Kingly-office . Christ as the great Prophet of the Church , hath revealed the Gospel-church-state , with the Institutions , and Ordinances . Christ called an Apostle , and why . Said to be sent by the Father : Such a Prophet as never was in the World before ; nor hath there , or shall there be , any like him . What of the Father he revealed . The continuation of Gospel-churches evinced from hence . Of the Priestly-office of Christ , Gospel-churches , Institutions , bottomed upon it , at large demonstrated . Of the Kingly-office of Christ . Gospel-churches bottomed thereupon . 

Demonstration . IX . The Church-state , Gospel-churches , Institutions are bottomed upon the Mediatory Office of Christ ; from whence a continuation of them till his next , second , glorious coming doth necessarily follow . To Christ , as Mediator , a threefold-office ( whereinto by Solemn Unction he was inaugurated by the Father ) doth appertain , viz. Prophetic , Priestly , Kingly : Arguments from each of these , might at large be insisted on , to demonstrate the truth we are at present contending for . 

I That Christ is the great Prophet of the Church , will not be denied , Deut. 18.18 . Act. 3.22 . and 7.37 . As a Prophet , he is fully acquainted with the Will of God , and hath perfectly Revealed it to the Church ; both in respect of Doctrine , Worship , and Discipline . The truth is , his whole work , as a Prophet , is to reveal the Will of God , and therein to Teach , and Instruct us . He is also called , The Apostle of our Profession , Heb. 3.1 . The Prophetick-office of Christ , with respect unto his immediate , Authoritative , Mission from the Father , is that which is intended by the expression . He is said frequently , to be sent by the Father , Isa . 19.20 . and 48.16 . and 61.1 . Zach. 2.8 , 9  He whom the Father sent , is the description he gives of himself , Joh. 3.34 . which is frequently repeated , John 3.17 , 18 , 28 , 34. and 5.23 , 24 , 30 , 36 , 37 , 38. and 6.29 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 44 , 57 and 7.16 , 28 , 29. and 8.16 , 18 , 29 , 42. and 9.4 . and 10.36 . and 11.42 . and 12.44 , 45 , 49. and 13.26 . and 14.24 . and 15.21 . and 16.5 . and 17.3 , 18 , 21 , 23 , 25. and 20.21 . A Prophet he is , and such a Prophet as never was in the World before ; nor any other like him , was there to be ; and as a Prophet he reveals the Father himself , John 1.18 . And his Name , Chap. 13.6 . and 17.3 . i e. the mystery of the Covenant of the Grace of GOD , his Love , Kindness to the Sons of Men ; his Worship , whole will , respecting our Obedience , and Salvation . And for this work , he was sent from the Father ; had his Authority from him , and furnitures through the Spirit ( poured out upon him without measure ) for the dispatch of it . So that , he that hears Christ , hears the Father ; and he that refuseth Christ , refuseth the Father also : because he acts in his Name , Authority , in this his Office. That from hence , the continuation of Gospel-churches , Institutions , must necessarily follow , is evident . For , 

1.  Christ , as the great Prophet of the Church , hath declared these to be one part of his Father's Will , that ( as such ) he was to Reveal ( as hath been proved ) . That at any time it should be lawful for us , to oppose the Will of the Lord , thus solemnly revealed , none will sure have the confidence , to affirm . 

2.  The Apostle to the Hebrews , chap. 1. & chap. 2. makes Christ's coming , as the great Prophet of God , one argument of the abolition of the whole Mosaic Pedagogy , and the introduction of those Gospel-institutions they were in the practice of . God that spoke in the Prophets , hath spoken in his Son , q. d. You expected a Prophet ( for so they did ) who should bring in a New-ministration , reveal the whole will of the Father to you ; this is He , he is the Apostle sent from him for this end : attend him , consider him , Heb. 3.1 . Now certainly if the Apostle looked upon this as a good argument for the same ( at least one of the same ) ends for which 't is produced by us , 't will be immodesty for any to look upon it , as impertinent , incogent . 

3.  Christ as the great Prophet , when he Tabernacled in the World , revealed this State , the Laws , Institutions relating to it : Had we lived in the time when , and been one of those to whom he had communicated them , ought we to have believed , obeyed , subjected to them ? Sure ! 'T will not be denied , but we ought . Are not the same Laws , delivered to the Apostles , recorded in the Scriptures ? This will not be opposed . What then ? Have the Laws of CHRIST , by their being written , lost their Authority ? This will not ( I am sure it cannot with any pretext of Reason ) be said . It remains therefore , that Churches , with the Worship affixed to them , being once of the discovery of CHRIST , must still continue so to be ; and our practice suitable to that discovery , necessitate precepti , necessary . 

4.  Is there any greater Prophet than Christ risen up ? Doth he come in his Fathers , or in his own Name ; what 's his message that he brings ? Is he upon a new discovery of the Father's will , pouring contempt upon what hath been Revealed by Christ ? Every spiritual believer knows what reception he ought to have with him , viz. neither he , nor his Message to be received , but rejected , as an impostor , a lie , 2 John 10.11 . 

5.  Hath Christ ceased to be a Prophet , Since he was signally inaugurated into that Office by the visible descent of the holy Spirit upon him in the form of a Dove , Mat. 3.16 , 17 ? Shall he do so till he deliver up the Mediatory-kingdom to the Father ? Neither the one , nor the other will be asserted . Doth he now any other ways discharge that Office , than by his written Word , and Spirit , opening the understanding of believers to perceive his Instructions contained therein ? Surely no. The Revelation then made by him , with respect to Institutions , Worship , is in every day to be attended to by the Saints . A Church-state is then bottomed upon the Prophetick-office of Christ , and to continue from the time of its erection by him , to the consummation of all things . 

II As 't is bottomed upon the Prophetick-office of Christ , so 't is upon his Sacerdotal , or Priestly . The Apostle argues from the change of the Levitical priesthood , to the change of the whole of that Church-polity , its Laws and Institutions , Heb. 7.12 . For the Priesthood being changed , there is made of necessity , a change also of the Law. If this be a cogent Argument , it follows strongly on the contrary ; If there be no change of the priesthood ( as the Melchizedekian Priesthood , or the priesthood of Christ after the order of Melchizedeck abides for ever , as the same Apostle tells us ) then there is no change of the Law , or institutions appertaining thereunto . That the whole of Gospel-institutions have a dependence upon the Priestly-office of Christ , is manifest . 

1.  That the legal Ministration , or Worship , was affixed to , had a dependence upon the Aaronick Priesthood , the Apostle plainly enough declares in the forecited place , Heb. 7.12 . Now if the Worship of that day had such dependence upon that Priesthood , that it lived and died ; stood , and fell with it : the Gospel-ministration , and Worship , must have the same dependence upon the real Eternal Priesthood of CHRIST ; for that was Typick of this throughout . 

2.  Christ by his Death , or the Oblation of himself , which was a principal part of his Priestly-office , virtually , put a period to the Law of Commandments contained in Mosaick-ordinances , Eph. 2.15 . And so by the removing of them , made way for the erection of the Gospel-church-state , with the Institutions appertaining thereunto . This the Apostle fully declares , v. 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22.  For through him ( as our Highpriest , for as such , he 's discoursing of him , as is Evident , from v. 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 ▪ ) we both ( viz. Jew's , and Gentiles ) have an access ( in Gospel-institutions ) by one Spirit unto the Father . Now therefore ye are no more Strangers , and Forreinners , but Fellow-citizens with the Saints , and of the household of God. And are built upon the Foundation of the Apostles , and Prophets , Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone : In whom all the building fitly joined together , groweth unto an holy Temple in the Lord In whom you are builded together for an Habitation of God through the Spirit . Nothing could be more Evident , if written with the beams of the Sun , than this ; that Gospel-churches ( called the Household , the Building of GOD ) with all the Institutions of CHRIST , through which they have access to God , are bottomed upon the Priestly-office of Christ . 't is through him , as our Priest , that we have access in Worship to the Father ; and equally , in , and through him , ( as such ) that we are of the household of God , his Habitation , Temple . 

3.  All the fitting , preparings of Souls , as fit materials for this Spiritual-temple , Building , and the management of the Ordinances thereof , are bottomed upon the Priestly-office of Christ . That men in their natural state , are altogether unfit , for such a building , or work , will be granted ; otherwise , Arguments enough lie near at hand , for its confirmation . Our Lord hath solemnly determined this Controversy ( if with any it be a Controversy ) Joh. 3.3 , 5.  That persons fitness lies in the communication of the Spirit , a divine principle of Life , the participation of the grace of the Covenant ; that therein also lies their meetness , ability for the work , and service of this Temple , will not be denied . Now whence flows all this , but from the Oblation , Intercession of Christ ; the two signal parts of his Priestly-office . Nay 

4.  The Saints coming to God with their Temple-worship ( all of it ) hath its Foundation here ; were it not for the Priesthood of Christ , they must stand off at an eternal distance ; Jehovah would be a terror , consuming fire to them . This all know , who have a sight of themselves in their lapsed , corrupt , depraved state ; and of the infinite , purity , and righteousness of God. This the Apostle treats of , Heb. 4.14 , 15 , 16. and 7.19 . Yea 

5.  All the acceptance of their persons , and all their Temple-worship , with the Father of Spirits , is bottomed here . Were not Christ our Highpriest , had he not ( as such ) made an Atonement , Reconciliation for us ; did he not make Intercession ( as such ) for us ; both we , and our most solemn performances would be loathed , rejected , by the Lord  

6.  Their encouragement to come to God with boldness , the great motive to abide in their Temple-worship , and not to forsake the Assembling themselves together ; to be diligent in the discharge of the duties they are obliged to perform to one another in their Church-relation , is fixed here , Heb. 10.20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25.  Their rejection of Gospel-communion , is accounted an undervaluing of the Priestly-office of Christ , v. 28 , 29.  To which add 

7.  That the preservation of Gospel-churches , Ordinances , is a fruit of the Priestly-office of Christ , bottomed upon his Oblation , Intercession . Why are they not dispersed , scattered ? Why have not their Adversaries ruined , destroyed them ? Whence is it that they have liberty to tread the Lords Court , and Worship before the footstool of his Throne in Peace ? yea , whence is it , That the Devil with all his power , policy , hath not been able to ruin , destroy the Churches of Christ ? it 's Christ that died , yea rather , that is risen again ; who ever life's to make Intercession , Rom. 8.34 . so that in this matter , here's full measure of Demonstration , pressed down , running over , that Gospel-churches , Institutions appertaining to them , are bottomed upon the Priestly-office of Christ . If he continue our Highpriest , if there be any virtue in his death , energy , power in his Intercession , they must continue also . And when these fail , we are content to sink , perish . Maluimus cum Christo perire , quam cum Caesare regnare . 



III Gospel-churches , Institutions , are also bottomed upon the Kingly-office of Christ ; whence their perennity , perpetuity , is Evident . That Christ is a King , hath his Subjects , Laws , by which he governs them , cannot be denied . That he hath ( yet doth ) exercised his Kingly-soveraignty over them , will be granted ; if he do not do so , he is not King , his despotic authority is at an end . Who are his Subjects ? Those that dwell in Zion , his Church , his Body , his House , his Kingdom ; which hath been demonstrated to be Saints embodied , and worshipping him in a Gospel-church-state ; to these he is a Head , Lord , King. What are the Laws he Rules them by , gives forth for the trial of their Faith , Love , Obedience ? They are Gospel-ordinances of his own institution , and appointment . And as of old , the people of the Jews , that Church of God , when they rejected his Ordinances , are said to reject him , cast off his Sovereignty , Ruledom : So because of their pertinacious adherence to the Laws of Moses , when Christ had perioded that Ministration , had left the World , and was gone to his Father ; with a rejection of him , and the Ministration introduced by him , they are said to be Citizens that hated him , and send a message after him , saying , We will not have this man Reign over us , Luk. 19.14 . 't is true , Christ as King , rules in the Saints by his Spirit , Grace : but visibly by his Word , and Gospel-institutions doth he Reign over them . These are his Chariot , or Throne of State , wherein he shows himself publicly in Majesty and Glory . They are his insignia regalia , or Kinglyarms , or Ensigns : none can offer despite , affront , to these ; but they affronted him , and are guilty of high-treason against him . We justly condemn the Papists as opposers of the Kingly-office of Christ ; because , contrary to his Precept , they have taken away one part of the Institution of Christ , viz. the Cup from the Laity : and what is to be thought of those who turn their backs upon all , and attempt the pulling down of that house of the appointment of Christ , wherein they are to be ministered . If Christ be King , he hath his Churches , over whom ( as such ) he doth preside ; and his Laws , as royal Ensigns , in the midst of them , for them to conform to . 

CHAP. X.  A Tenth Demonstration of the Continuation of Churches , Ordinances ; otherwise a great part of the Scriptures of the New-testament have been , are , of little use to the Saints . An Eleventh , A Twelfth evidence to the same thing ; Christ hath power to preserve his Churches , and 't is his will so to do . There are special promises , both under the Old oeconomy , and the New , to Saints , as they attend upon Jehovah ( as a Church ) in the Observation of Ordinances . Exod. 20.24 . Explained . And 29.42 , 43 , 44 , 45. at large . Why the Tabernacle is called 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Isa . 4.5 , 6.  Opened . Zach. 2.10 . Mat. 18.20 . 2 Cor. 6.16 . rev. 3.10 . Considered . A Thirteenth , Fourteenth , Fifteenth , Sixteenth , Demonstration of the continuation of Churches , and Ordinances . 't is the duty of Saints in every generation to confess Christ . Gal. 3.27 . Opened . Subjection to the Institutions of Christ , one signal way of confessing him . Saints are charged to hold fast whatever they have received from Christ till he comes . Much of the Glory of Christ , as Mediator of the New-covenant , lies in his Churches . Many evil and absurb consequences of the denial of the Continuation of Gospel-churches , Ordinances , remarked . 

Demonstration . X.  IF there have not been , be not , a continuation of Gospel-churches , Ordinances , a great part of the Scriptures of the New-testament , have been , are , of little use to the Saints . Now it cannot be imagined , that the Lord Jesus , out of his special love to , and care of his People , should appoint the Scriptures to be written ; and yet no small part of them to be of no concern in this World to them . Of this kind are all those Scriptures , which contain rules of direction to the Saints , touching their embodying together , in order to their becoming a Church of Christ ; discovering who are fit matter , their Power for the Election , setting apart of Officers , to minister in the name of Christ amongst them ; the qualification of such as are to be chosen by them ; their Office , Work , Duty in , and to the Church ; the Church's duty to them : the way and manner of the management of the Institutions of the Gospel amongst them : the mutual duties of Church-members each to other , as they stand in a Covenant-relation together . How great a part of the Scriptures of the New-testament , and particularly the Epistles to the Churches , is taken up in these things , is known ; to enumerate particulars , is almost endless . See , Matth. 28.19 , 20.  Act. 2.41 , 42. 1  Cor. 12.28 . Eph. 4.11 , 12.  Matth. 18.17 , 18 , 19 1  Cor. 4.17 . & 7.17 . Act. 14.23 . Tit. 1.5 . 1 Tim. 3.15 . & 2.1 . Act. 6.4 . & 13.2 , 3.  Eph. 5.19 . Col. 3.16 . 2 Tim. 4.2 . 1 Cor. 14.3 . Act. 6.2 . Heb. 13.7 . Matth. 26.26 , 27. 1  Cor. 11.23 . Rom. 12.6 , 7 , 8.  rev. 2.3 . Rom. 1.5 , 6. 1  Cor. 1.2 . & 14.15 . Heb. 3.1 . Jam. 1.18 . rev. 1.20 . 1 Pet. 2.5 . Eph. 2.21 , 22 , 23. 2  Cor. 6.16 , 17 , 18.  Act. 20.17 , 18. 1  Cor. 12.28 . Eph. 4.11 . Phil. 1. CITIZEN  Tim. 3.1 , 2.  & 5.17 . Heb. 13.7 , 17. 1  Pet. 5.1 . Eph. 4.8.13 . Tit. 1.7 , 8 , 9 2  Tim. 3.2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7. 1  Pet. 5.2 , 3.  Act. 13.2 . 1 Tim. 5.22 . & 4.14 . & 3.10 , 11 , 13.  & 4.12 . 2 Tim. 2.3 . Col. 1.24 . Phil. 2.17 . & 3.17 . Heb. 13.17 . Act. 20.28 . 2 Tim. 2.15 . & 4.2 . Rom. 12.6 , 7 , 8. 1  Tim. 6.20 . Judas 3. CITIZEN  Cor. 4.1 , 2. 1  Tim. 3.15 . & 4.14 , 15 , 16.  Act. 20.18 , 19 , 20 , 25 , 26. 1  These . 3.5 . 2 Tim. 2.24 , 25.  Rom. 12.8 . 1 Tim. 5.17 . & 3.5 . Col. 4.17 . 2 Cor. 10.4 , 8. 1  Tim. 4.11 . Tit. 2.15 . 1 Pet. 1.2 , 3 , 4 , 5. 1  These . 5.12 , 13. 1  Cor. 16.16 . Eph. 6.18 , 19  Col. 4.3 . 2 These . 3.1 . Gal. 6.6 . 1 Cor. 9.14 . & 16.10 . 2 Tim. 1.16 , 17 , 18. 2  Tim. 4.16 . Rom. 12.8 . 1 Cor. 12.28 . 1 Tim. 5.17 . Act. 6.3 , 5 , 6.  Phil. 1.1 . 1 Tim. 3.8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13.  Phil. 2.15 , 16.  & 4.8 , 9 1  These . 3.8 . 1 Pet. 4.10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14. 1  Tim. 3.15 . Heb. 10.23 . Act. 2.38 , 39 , 46.  & 16.33 . 1 Cor. 1.16 . & 11.20 , 21 , 22 , 26 , 28 , 29 , 33.  Act. 20.7 . Mat. 16.19 . Rom. 12.8 . 2 Cor. 10.4 , 5 , 6.  rev. 2.2 , 20.  Mat. 24.45 . Eph. 4.13 , 14. 1  Tim. 3.5 . & 5.17 . Heb. 13.17 . 1 Pet. 2.3 . 1 These . 5.12 . Gal. 6.1 , 2. 1  Cor. 4.14 . & 5.2 , 4 , 5. 2  Cor. 2.6 , 7 , 8. 2  Tim. 4.2 . Mat. 18.15 . 1 These . 5.14 . Tit. 1.13 . & 2.15 . 2 Tim. 4.2 . 1 Tim. 5.19 , 20.  Mat. 18.16 , 17.  Tit. 3.10 . 1 Tim. 1.20 . 1 Cor. 5.5 . Gal. 5.12 . & 6.1 . 2 Cor. 2.7 . 2 These . 3.15 . Gal. 6.2 . 1 Cor. 5.2 , 4 , 5 , 12. 1  Cor. 6.2 . 2 Cor. 2.6 , 7 , 8.  Phil. 2.10 . & 2.15 . 1 Cor. 10.32 . 1 These . 2. 11.12 . Tit. 2.10 . Joh. 6.15 . Act. 26.18 . 1 Pet. 2.9 . 2 Cor. 4.3 , 4 , 6. 1  Tim. 1.19 , 20. 2  Tim. 4.3 , 4.  Tit. 1.13 . Judas 3  Eph. 4.20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24. 2  Cor. 8.5 . Act. 8.20 , 23.  Tit. 1.10 . rev. 2.2 . Act. 18.26 . 1 These . 2.7 , 8 , 11.  Act. 9.26 , 27.  Rom. 14.1 . 1 Cor. 13. throughout . & 10.32 . Eph. 6.18 . 1 Tim. 2.1 . 2 Cor. 8.4 , 6.  Act. 11.29 , 30.  Rom. 15.26 , 27.  & 16.1 , 2. 3  Joh. 8.9 . Act. 15.2 . 1 Tim. 3.15 . Cum multis aliis . — Are all these Scriptures ( with many more ) of no use to the Saints ? Are they not at all concerned in them ? Credat Apella ! And yet this must be asserted upon the supposition , that there are no Churches of the Institution of Christ ; for as such , are the Saints alone concerned in them . 

Object . If it be Objected , that a great part of the Old-testament is of little , or no use to the Saints now ; therefore the argument is invalid , of no weight . 

Answ . The Answer is easy . 't is readily granted , that whatever is spoken in the Old-testament , touching Circumcision , Priests , Altar , Temple , Sacrifices , Vestments , etc.  We are not under the Gospel-ministration at all concerned with ; an introduction of these things , is a plain practick-denial of Christ come in the flesh : But whilst that Priesthood , oeconomy stood in force , 't was the duty of all the Saints , to attend diligently to the commands of the Lord , relating to them : not to have done so , had been Rebellion , High-treason against him . Till a Prophet greater than Moses , a Priest greater than Aaron , even Jesus the Son of God came , and put a Period to the whole of that Ministration , and erected a new one by that Authority that was given to him of the Father as Mediator of the New-covenant , every tittle of that Law contained in Ordinances they were obliged to . Whilst that Church-state continued , they were concerned in them . And so by a parity of reason are the Saints with all the Laws given by Jesus Christ in the New-testament , till either a greater than he come , ( which can never be ) or he by his own Sovereign Authority , supersede them ; by his second personal glorious coming , introducing a New State of things , without any Institutions , or Ordinances , put a Period to them . 

Demonstration . XI . IF there be not a continuation of the Church-state , with Institutions thereunto belonging , 't is either because Christ could not , or would not continue it . The first cannot be asserted . All power is given unto him in Heaven , and in Earth , Matth. 28.18 . He is King of Kings , Lord of Lords , 1 Tim. 6.15 . rev. 17.14 . & 19.16 . The Almighty , rev. 1.8 . Is above Principality , Power , Eph. 1.21 . Hath all Angels , and men at his foot ; can order , dispose of them as he pleases . Nor the second , for he hath promised its continuance ; engaged his presence with it , for that end : These are all the visible ensigns he hath in the world of his Authority , Sovereignty ; not a relation he stands in to them , his concern in point of honour , and glory , in their preservation ; the prophetic discoveries of his resolution , that they should continue , ( of which we have already treated ) amply discover , that his will is their continuation . They then that oppose , advance themselves against the Churches of CHRIST , resist his will , and are found fighters against G0D . 

Demonstration . XII . The Lord hath , both under the Old-oeconomy , and the New , made special promises to his people , as they attend him , wait upon him ( as a Church ) in the Observation of Institutions , and Ordinances . So in the Old-testament , Exod. 20.24 . An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me , thou shalt sacrifice thereon , thy Burnt-offerings , and thy Peace-offerings : thy Sheep and thine Oxen : In all places where I record my Name , I will come unto thee , and I will bless thee . The latter words are variously rendered . In every place in which shall be the memory of my Name , V.L. Where ye remember my Name , Sy. Ar. Wheresoever I shall name my Name , Seventy . Where I shall cause my Glory to dwell , Ch. Where I shall make my Name to be remembered , Pi. Where I shall make the memorial of my Name , or cause the remembrance of my Name to be , or make you to remember my Name , Ainsworth . The meaning is , in every place , in every institution of mine , where I command you to Attend me , as a Church , in public Worship , and Service , ( as at the Tabernacle , Temple , etc. ) there I 'll come to thee , meet thee , manifest my gracious presence to thee , assuredly bless thee , Exod. 29.42 , 43 , 44 , 45.  This shall be a continual burnt-offering , throughout your Generations , at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation before the Lord , where I will meet with you , to speak there unto thee . And there I will meet with the Children of Israel , and shall be sanctified by my Glory ( the Tabernacle is not in the Hebrew ; some tender it , Israel ; others , the Place , or the Tabernacle , shall be sanctified by my Glory ) And I will sanctify the Tabernacle of the Congregation — And I will dwell amongst the Children of Israel , and I will be their God. That the Tabernacle was at that day , the place that Jehovah had appointed , for the Church of Israel as a Church to Worship him , is known . As you do so , saith the Lord , I 'll meet with you ( or as the Greek translateth , will be known unto thee ) to speak there unto thee , etc.  't is the special presence of God with them , that is intended by those Expressions . And the Tabernacle , is called , the Tabernacle of the Congregation , Heb. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Tabernacle of Assembly , or Convention , because there God , and his people met together ; he to Instruct them by his Word , they to Worship Him , and to receive His Oracles . See Exod. 40.34 . Leu. 1.1 . and 9.23 , 24.  Num. 1.1 . and 7.89 . and 12.4 , 5. and 14.10 . and 16.19 , 42 , 44.  So also in the Gospel-day , Isa . 4.5 , 6.  The Lord will create upon every dwelling-place of mount Zion , and upon her Assemblies , a cloud , and smoke by day , and the shining of the flaming fire by night , for upon all the glory shall be a defence : And there shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat , and for a place of refuge , and for a covert from storm , and from rain . The word translated the dwelling-place , is not 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 an ordinary dwelling-place , or common Habitation ; but 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 a prepared place of , and for God. They are the Church-assemblies he intends by it . To these he promises his Presence , Favour , Direction , Guidance , Defence , Protection , under the notion of the Cloud , Pillar , Tabernacle ; which were the signal visible Ensigns of these to his people of old , Zach. 2.10 . sing and rejoice , OH daughter of Zion ; for lo , I come , and I will dwell in the midst of thee , saith Jehovah . And many nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day , and shall be my people . ( 't is evidently of the Conversion of the Gentiles , and their walking together in Gospel-fellowship , that he speaks ) and I will dwell in the midst of thee — Mat. 18.20 . where two , or three ( a few Saints walking together in the fellowship of the Gospel , for these two or three are called the Church , v. 17. ) are gathered together in my Name , ( or Authority ) there am I in the midst of them . 2 Cor. 6.16 . ye ( the Church of God at Corinth . v. 1 ) are the Temple of the living God ; as God hath said , I will dwell in them , and walk in them , and I will be their God , and they shall be my people . — rev. 3.10 . Because thou hast kept the word of my patience , I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation , that shall come upon all the world to try them that dwell upon the earth . The words are a promise made to the Church in Philadelphia , and so to all Gospel-churches ; especially to such as are the Antitype to the Philadelphian-church , of preservation from the temptations , snares , distresses , that are coming upon Professors : others shall fall by them , sink under them ; she shall be kept , because she kept the words of Christ's patience , i e. the Doctrine , Precepts , Institutions of CHRIST , he delivered in the day of his patience , when he Tabernacled amongst men , and endured the contradiction of Sinners . The sum is , as under the Old Law , so under the New ; there are special Promises made to Saints Worshipping God in a Community , as a Church : Whence three things necessarily follow : 

1.  That there must be Gospel-churches , to whom these Promises may be made good . 

2.  That a denial of a Gospel-church-state , Churches , Ordinances , is as much as in us lies , to make these Promises of GOD of none effect . For if their be no Churches , there are none to whom they should be performed . And besides , some of them have in them a special engagement for their preservation . As that Isa . 4.5 , 6.  Is God unfaithful ? Can any charge him with breach of Promise , without being guilty of horrid Impiety , Blasphemy against him . 

3.  That a withdrawment from Church-fellowship , Ordinances , is a practick-contempt of the presence of God promised to his People , as they are found walking according to his will herein . 

Demonstration . XIII . 't is the Duty of Saints in every Generation , to confess , make a Profession of Christ , as well as to believe in him , Rom. 10.9 . If thou shalt confess with thy mouth , the Lord Jesus , and shalt believe in thine Heart — . This will not be denied ! Now our solemn , most signal Profession of our Lord Jesus , lies in a visible subjection to him in Church-institutions . Therefore are we said , by Baptism , to put on Christ , Gal. 3.27 . ( i e. have taken upon you a most solemn profession of his name ) : And our Lord tells us , Mar. 8.38 . That to be ashamed of his words , is to be ashamed of him : that we show ourselves his Friends , if we do whatever he commands us , John 15.14 . So that evidently an owning of , visible subjection to , the Words , Institutions of Christ , is that wherein our Profession of his name doth lie . That it did so in the Primitive days , will not , cannot be denied : Well then , either there are no Saints in the World , or they are discharged from the command , to confess Christ , or there are Churches walking together in Gospel-ordinances at this day ; and must be such , to the consummation of all things . The truth is , 't is utterly impossible , for any to hold the nullity of the Church-state , Ordinances ; but they must affirm , ( as some have done ) that there are no visible Saints in the World. For the same Law of Christ , which directed the Saints , in the first-dayes of the Gospel , to make a profession of Christ by their subjection to his Institutions , abides still , as a standing rule for them to walk by . 

Demonstration . FOURTEEN . The great charge of Christ to his People , is , To hold fast that which they have received till he comes , rev. 2.25 . & 3.11 . Now 't is not only the grace , and Doctrine of the Gospel , that they received , but the Laws , Institutions thereof , relating to Gospel-fellowship , Worship . These then , in every day , they are bound to hold fast till Christ comes : and those that do so , are upon that foot of account publicly commended by him , rev. 14.12 . Here is the patience of the Saints , here are they that keep the Commandments of God , and the Faith of Jesus . 

Demonstration . xv.  Much of the Honour , Glory of the Lord Jesus , as the Mediator of the New-covenant , lies in his Churches , Zach. 6.13 . He shall build the Temple , and bear the Glory . Let these be removed , and he will have but little glory in the World.  

Demonstration . XVI . Many are the evil consequences that follow upon the denial of Gospel-churches — . we 'll instance but in a few . 

I The Ministration of the Law wherein Moses was a Servant , was more lasting , than the Ministration the Son was on purpose sent from the Father to introduce . 

II That 't is lawful to be partial in Jehovah's Law. 't is true , we are to pray by ourselves , or perhaps some very few with us ; to watch , attend the inward work ; press after a further degree of sanctification , conformity to Christ ; we are to love him , believe in him : But as to the law of Institutions , we will have nothing to do with it . And why so ? Are not these last , as much the charge , Law of Christ to his people , as the former ? 

III 't is a condemning the generation of the Righteous ( which we ought to be tender of ) and that many ways . 

1.  They are ( have been ) a generation of Will-worshippers . Their Church-state , fellowship , breaking bread — is Will-worship : Churches are gathered , Ordinances administered in the will of man  

2.  They are Self-persecutors , Self-murderers , Self-destroyers . The loss of their liberty , goods , enjoyments , lives , for their being found in these ways , they may thank themselves ; for , they bring it upon themselves : for Christ requires no such thing at their hands . 

IU. 't is a Justifying , Gratifying , the Wicked against the Righteous . As , 

1.  A Justifying them in their charge against the Lord's People . You may ( say they ) be of what religion you will , pray , preach , a few of you together ; but nothing will please you , except you have a great company together . You talk of conscience , this is nothing but your stubbornness , self-will , pride of Spirit . And the truth is , it must be somewhat of that nature ( for conscience to Christ it cannot be ) if Church-assemblies , with the administration of Ordinances in them be not of Christ's appointment . 

2.  't is a Gratifying Satan , Antichrist , in his grand design , he hath from the beginning been managing against the Lord , and his People , viz. to dissipate , scatter , drive them into corners . 

3.  't is a Justifying the wicked in all their bloody persecutions of the Saints . They persecute them not as the Worshippers of Christ ; for he requires them not so to Worship him , but as breakers of the Law , Factious , Seditious ones . 

v. 't is as much , as in us lies , a dispoyling Christ of all the visible Sovereignty he hath at this day in the World.  

VI 't is a Withdrawment of ourselves from that Yoke of Christ he commands , encourages his Disciples to take upon them . Mat. 11.29 , 30.  

VII . 't is to be ashamed of Christ's words in an Adulterous Generation , Mar. 8.38 . with much more that might be instanced in . These things might have been particularly more improved , but we have already past the bounds designed in the managery of this Controversy . And if what hath been said , will not convince Gainsayers , I am out of hopes by any thing that I can offer ( though with the brightest Scripture-evidence ) so to do : and shall pray to God , to show them the error of their way , and reduce them to his Foot. 't is time we attend to those Objections that are made ( at least as many of them as we have heard of ) against the subject matter of the present discourse : which is the design of the next Chapter . 

CHAP. XI . Objections against the continuation of the Gospel-church-state , Churches , Ordinances , particularly considered , answered . Object . 1.  Some of the Officers that were in the Churches , viz. Apostles , Prophets , Evangelists are now wanting : that hence a cessation of Churches , Ordinances doth not ensue , evinced : for then there had been a cessation of these , ever since the Apostles days ; the absurdity whereof demonstrated . That 't was never the intendment of Christ , that these Officers should be continued , proved , 1 Cor. 4.9 . explained . That the essence of a true Church of Christ depends not upon these Officers , Demonstrated . Apostles as Apostles , are neither foundation , matter , or form of the Church , proved . Object . 2.  The Apostasy Prophesied of , hath covered , swallowed , up all the Churches ; Answered . The Apostasy spoken of , not a universal Apostasy , proved . Object . 3.  That there are no Wise-master-builders ; removed out of the way . 1 Cor. 3.10 . Explained . Object . 4.  The gifts in the Primitive-church , wanting , Answered . 't is Grace , not Gifts , that constitutes a Church , proved . Object . 5.  The present Churches , have only the Form , deny the Power , removed . Object . 6.  From the pollution of the Churches , Answered . Object . 7.  The Churches were at first gathered in the will of man ; Considered , Answered . Object . 8.  From the want of a presence among the Churches , Answered . The various ways of God's being present with a people , Considered . 

Having in the precedent discourse , at large evinced , The continuation of the Gospel-church-state , Churches , Ordinances ; that which remains , is the removal of Objections out of the way , which we now address ourselves to . 

Object . 1.  We grant a Church-state , Churches , Institutions to be of Christ , but there 's now no such thing ; for you want some of the principal Officers that were in the Churches , viz. Apostles , Prophets , Evangelists , Eph. 4.11 . 

Answ . That the Officers mentioned , were of the Institution of Christ , is readily yielded : that such are not , now in any of the Churches of Christ , is also granted : but that a cessation of Churches doth not hereupon ensue , is very easily demonstrated . For , 

1.  then there hath been a cessation of Churches for above a thousand , and some hundred of years ; yea , ever since the Apostles days : for , after those particular persons invested by Christ into the Offices , and Ministry beforementioned , none such have stood up . Now 't is the firstborn of absurdities , that Christ should with such solemnity , as he did by the pouring forth of the Spirit in the day of Pentecost , set up a Ministration ( wherein also he spent forty days after his Resurrection to instruct his Disciples ) and should in a few scores of Years , suffer it to be taken down again . And it cannot be supposed , to consist with the Wisdom of Christ , so to do : it 's also perfectly inconsistent , with the Gospel-covenant , Mediatory Offices of Christ , and signal promises made to his Churches — ( of which we have already distinctly treated ) . 

2.  'T was never the intendment of Christ , that such Officers should be continued in the Churches . Which is evident , as if written with the beams of the Sun , from these few considerations : 

1.  If he had indeed intended their continuation , they should have been continued : for 't will not 't is presumed , be asserted , that Christ fails of his intendment . 

2.  There are no intimations given in the Scripture of any Succession of such Officers ; nor any rules laid down for the Churches to proceed upon in their Election . Of Pastors , Teachers , Deacons , we have an account , and directions given for their setting apart to Office ; but of Apostles , Prophets , Evangelists , ne gry quidem , not the least syllable , or jota , touching their continuation , or the way to be used in order thereunto . Nay , 

3.  When the first-churches were planted , we find by the advice of the Apostles , Teachers and Deacons chosen to Office , but no choice made of new Apostles ; nor any intimation given , that more than these were necessary , or expedient for the continuance , or preservation of the Church . 

4.  When Christ writes to the seven Churches of Asia , he blames them ( most of them ) for several things amiss amongst them ; but charges them not , with any neglect , or sin , that they had not the Officers mentioned amongst them ; which yet they had not . For Apostles , 't is certain , they had none ; of them only John was alive at that day , the rest were fallen asleep ; and he was not with them , but in the Isle of Patmos : Christ owns them as his Churches notwithstanding . 't is true , he threatens some of them to un-church them ; but not because they wanted these Officers , but for other reasons mentioned by him . 

5.  We have an almost express Declaration , that after the Apostles fell asleep , there were to be no more Apostles to succeed them , 1 Cor. 4.9 . For I think God hath set forth us the Apostles last : So we tender it , but not so fully expressive of the Greek ; which is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 — For I think , ( or I conclude , for the word doth not always signify a doubtful opinion , but a certain conclusion , 't is used in the determination of that famous Council , Act. 15.28 . ) that God hath set forth , or exhibited us , the last Apostles . So the Arabic , Syriack , V.L. God hath showed us the last Apostles . God hath designed his last Apostles , so the Aethiopic . So then evidently , no new Apostles were designed by Christ after them . 't is true , many have pretended so to be ; some such ( as it seems ) came to the Church at Ephesus , who upon trial found them Liaers , rev. 2.2 . But 

6.  The whole weight of the Objection lies upon this single basis , That the Essence of a true Church of Christ , consists in having the Officers mentioned amongst them . For if it doth not , the Churches are as really true Churches of Christ , without these Officers , as the first Apostolick-churches , that had them , were . This is that then we shall demonstrate , that Apostles — are not of the Essence of a true Church of Christ . For 

I There was a true Church of Christ of Converted Believers , before they ever saw the face of an Apostle , even in the Apostles days . Not to mention what 's probable , that the Eunuch being brought over to the Faith of Christ , Act. 8. went in to Ethiopia , Preached Christ , gathered Churches there . In which , some think that Prophecy had its accomplishment , Psa . 68.31 . nor , what some affirm , that the Gospel was Preached , Churches gathered here in England by Joseph of Arimathea . What may we think of the Church at Antioch ? Was that a true Church ? the Apostles owned it as such . And 't is evident , that 't was constituted without the Officers mentioned Act. 11.19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 26. and here the Disciples were first called Christians . 't is true , there came Apostles , and Prophets to them ; but they were , before their coming , a Church of Christ . The like may be said of Samaria , where by the Ministry of Philip , were Converts brought over to Christ , and Baptised , before ever the Apostles heard tittle of it ; who at this time kept privately at Jerusalem , Act. 8.1 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 12 , 14.  That by the same hand , Churches were planted at Azotus , Caesarea , Act. 8.40 . with 9.30 . is more than probable . At Ptolemais you have an intimation of a Church of Christ ; but no account of any Apostles going thither , till Paul in his journey salutes the brethren that were there , and tarries with them one day , Act. 21.7 . The Church at Colosse was gathered by Epaphras , Col. 1.7 . as were several Churches , before ever any Apostle came to them . So that , if because they have not Apostles , the present Churches are no Churches of Christ ; neither were the Primitive-churches , at least some of them , such : The Objection lies as directly against them , as any after-churches . But 

II The Apostles , as Apostles , are neither Foundation , matter , or Form of the Church ; so far are they from being of the Essence of the Church . 

1.  Foundation they are not ; for Christ is the alone Foundation , as hath been proved . 't is true , Saints are said to be built upon the Foundations of the Apostles , and Prophets , Eph. 2.20 . but the intendment thereof , is no more than that , they were built upon the Doctrine was Preached by the Apostles ; the substance whereof was Christ . 

2.  Not the Matter , as Apostles : as Saints 't is true , they were so , as well as others ; but no otherwise . 

3.  The Form of the Church they are not : for that lies in somewhat else , as before was Demonstrated . 

III Let 's suppose , that , which may be supposed . ( It hath been , as is known ) that by the Providence of God , the meanest Saint is cast upon any spot , where the Gospel never was . He preaches Christ to the Natives , they are Converted by the Spirit of the LORD accompanying his Ministry : may these Converts give up themselves to the Lord , and one another , to walk with him in ways of his own Institution , or not ? If the first , actum est periisti Antichristiane , there may be true Churches , without Apostles ; for herein lies the Essence of a true Church : If the Second , it 's lawful , than it seems , for believers to disobey the Commands of Christ ( which will at least sound harsh in the ears of sober Christians ) for Gospel-fellowship , Churches — we have proved to be commanded by Christ . Nay 

iv. The Apostles , quâ Apostles , never belonged to any particular Church . Authority in the name of Christ they had in , and amongst them all ; never related to any particular Church , as such . They were non-residents , ubiquitaries , and the Office whereunto they were called by the Lord Jesus , required , that they should be so , Mat. 28.18 , 19  

v. What the Apostles were to the Gospel-churches , that ( at least ) Moses and Aaron may be supposed to be in the Judaic Church . The Law came by Moses . In every difficult Case , he was their Mediator to God , and gave responses to them : from him Aaron had his Urim and Thummim , whereby he gave ( in matters proposed to him ) infallible answers from the Holy One. They had also the Ark , with the Mercy-seat , and Cherubims . The Fire from Heaven : the Majesty or divine Presence ( viz. the Oracle in the most Holy Place , where God dwelled between the Cherubims . Num. 7.89 . Psa . 80.2 . ) the Holy Spirit ( viz. the Spirit of Prophecy , not only in the Priests , but in the Prophets ) were these of the Essence of the Church ? was their Church-state dissolved because of their want of them ? What more frivolous can be asserted ? Moses , and Aaron soon fell asleep , before they came into the good land As for the last mentioned , they enjoyed them not under the second Temple ( as the Jews themselves acknowledge ) ; yet their Church-state continued till the death of Christ , as is granted by all . 't is impossible to fix upon any Argument to prove the necessity of Apostles for the continuation of a Church-state in Gospel-dayes , which will not also evince a necessity of what we have instanced in , with respect to the necessity of the existence of Moses , etc. for the continuation of the Judaic Church-state ; than which nothing is more false . Besides 

VI The Church was never Built upon the Apostles ( one or other of them ) but upon their Doctrine , which from the Lord Jesus they delivered ; or rather upon Christ the sum , and substance thereof . 't is true , the Papists tell us ( as hath been intimated ) that 't was Built upon Peter , from , Mat. 16.18 . upon which they have laboured to build their Babel , endeavouring to substitute the Pope in his room . The vanity of which attempt , hath been discovered by several , and by none more than the every-way learned , and accomplished J.O. in his Animadversions on Fiat Lux. But as was said , 't was their Doctrine , not their persons the Church was Built upon . This through the wonderful kindness of God , we have continued to us ; and therefore no need of their personal Ministry . Yet , 

VII . Suppose we had Apostles amongst us , the selfsame Apostles that were sent forth , and instructed by Christ , to indoctrinate the Saints in his will , to charge them to Observe whatever he had commanded them . They would declare to us the same things , or they would not ▪ If the same , they are upon record in the Scriptures of truth ; and are as much to be heeded by us , as if they had been delivered to us by them Viuâ voce . The latter cannot be imagined . The Apostle hath for ever shut the door against any such conceit , Gal. 1.8 , 9  Though we , or an Angel from Heaven , preach any other Gospel unto you , then that which we have preached unto you , let him be accursed — . So that evidently the want of Apostles is the most weak , frivolous argument , that ever men of the least reason , or converse with the Scripture , or knowledge of that faith that ought to be with us in these matters , ever fixed upon . 

Object . 2.  But there was an Apostasy foretold by the Apostles of our Lord , which we find actually came to pass within a few hundred of years after Christ . Therefore there are no true Churches ; for the Apostasy hath covered , swallowed up all . 

Answ . That an Apostasy was foretold , as intimated , that it was also introduced , is granted . But this proves not , the nullity of Churches , Ordinances . For , 

1.  't is expressly declared , that the Apostasy mentioned , should not be a total Apostasy , 1 Tim. 4.1 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , not 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , but 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , not all , but some shall depart , or make a revolt from the Faith. I confess had the Scripture asserted a universal Apostasy , the objection would have seemed , to have had some strength in it . I say 't would have seemed , for really it hath none . For had the Apostasy , as is falsely pretended , overspread all for a season ( as sometimes it did in the Churches of old , as was demonstrated in the preface to this discourse ) ; yet it follows not , but in persons ( by the call of God ) delivered from under that Apostasy , a true Church-state might exist . Which is notoriously true , with respect to thousands , that for some while the Papacy drank in . But , 

2.  We have already proved [ Demonstrat . 4. c. 4. ] that all along the Apostasy , the Lord had his true Churches witnessing for him against it . So that we need not say more touching this matter . There was an Apostasy foretold , that should overspread the greatest part of the Churches , prevail in most places of the Christian World. It did so to purpose at Rome — etc.  Ergo , there are no true Churches , risum teneatis amici , or rather pity ; pray for them , who by reason of prejudice , temptation , have their understanding so far blinded , as to think there 's any weight to be laid upon such Puerile Ludicrous arguments . 

Object . 3.  But you have no Wise-master-builder ; which the Apostle saith he was , 1 Cor. 3.10 . therefore you have no true Churches . 

Answ . This Objection is the same with the first . To it we will nevertheless speak a few words , which will abundantly evince the emptyness of it . 

1.  Paul asserts himself to be 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , a Chief-bulder , not with respect to Christ ; for so he was not , but an under-work-man ; but with respect to others , who afterwards built upon that Foundation [ CHRIST ] he had laid . Nor doth he 

2.  Assert himself to be the Chief-builder , with relation to all the Churches ; but with respect to that particular Church at Corinth . Were all the rest of the Churches , that had not this Master-builder , false Churches ? This will not be asserted . Yet we hear of no Wise-master-builder , with respect to any other of the Churches . The word is only used here . But , 

3.  Paul , as wise a Master-builder as he was , was sure a Workman under Christ ; who is the Builder of the House , or Churches ( as hath been proved ) and he was indispensibly bound to walk by rule ; the rule of his Lord and Master , Christ Jesus . This he tells us he did , 1 Cor. 11.23 . Now 

4.  The Saints have this Rule , and they have the Spirit of the Lord with them , in them , to open it , and explain it to them . For if they have him not , and for this end ( to lead them into all truth ) they are not Saints , Rom. 8.9 . what hinders then , but that Saints having the same Rule the Apostle walked by , and the Spirit to instruct them in it , they may conform to it , and so constitute Churches of Christ ? If they have but so much Wisdom as to understand the rule constitutive of Churches ; and so much Conscience and honesty , as to apply themselves to it ( and they are poor Saints that are devoid of the one or the other ) they cannot but do so . The very truth is , Paul , none of the Apostles were Builders , or Wise-master-builders , but with respect to the Rule of Christ : To have Built in their own Wisdom , with a neglect thereof , had been folly and madness . So that any that attend to this Rule in Church-work , may be as well said to be Builders ; and if they lay the Foundation of a Church afterwards built upon by others , as truly said with respect to such a Church to be Wise-master-builders , as Paul , etc.  'T would hardly be an effectual argument to a man under the sense of inconveniences ( almost to starving to death ) by winds , and storms , for want of an habitation to dwell in ; to tell him , 't is true , here are Materials for a House , and here is a Rule to build it by ; which if you attend to , you cannot build amiss , but the Truth is , the Wise-master-builder , who acted by the same Rule in building all the strong , and beautiful Houses in the Country , is thousands of miles off , and perhaps may not come hither again till you are dead , and rotten in your grave ; therefore you had best not attempt the work , till he come . Nay stay , will the poor man say , I have the Rule that he walked by , and I 'll up , and be doing as well as I can ; and I hope the Lord will be with me — . Christ commands ( as hath been proved ) to build an House ; gives us rules to walk by in such a work ; but hath no where said , he will send us such Wise-master-builders in every respect as Paul was ; nor told us the Work must cease till they come ; but the contrary . 

Object . 4.  But you have not the gifts of the Primitive-churches ; therefore you are no true Churches of Christ . 

Answ . 1.  't is Grace , not extraordinary Gifts , that is the qualification of Church-members , that constitute a Church . When the Apostles speak of Church-members , they decipher them as Sanctified ones , partakers of the Grace of God — . Christ requires no other qualification of a Church-member , than being born again of God , John 3.3 , 5. which persons may be without those extraordinary Gifts . Nay , the truth is , the Churches that have most excelled in these , have not been the most comely , or beautiful Churches . For instance , the Church at Corinth , who perhaps in these Gifts excelled other Churches ; but I am sure , came short of some of them in Divine graces . 

2.  't is most evident , that the Primitive-churches were constituted , converted , believers added to them , without any immediate participation of these gifts , Act. 2.40 , 41 , 42.  We have an account of Three Thousand Souls added to the Church , but not a tittle of their partaking of these extraordinary Gifts . The Church at Antioch was a true Church of Christ , before the Apostles ( any of them ) came to them , or they had received the Holy Spirit ( i e. were made partakers of the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit ) Act. 8.12 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17.  The like may be said of other Churches . 

3.  The Apostle having discoursed at large of these Gifts , 1 Cor. 12. at the close , v. 31. tells them , that he shows unto them a more excellent way , ( or the most excellent way , as the Greek reads it ) viz. the way of love : of which he discourses at large , chap. 13.  And this ( not the Gifts mentioned ) is that which Christ makes the badge of his Disciples , Joh. 13.35 . Were there more of this , there would not be so much talk of the nullity of Churches , as there is amongst some at this day ; nor that undue withdrawment from them . 

4.  These Gifts are so far from being essential to a Church ; that the Apostle tells us , persons may have them all , and yet not be fit matter for a Church : for they that have them , may nevertheless be nothing , devoid of true grace , 1 Cor. 13.1 , 2.  

Object . 5.  But the Churches have only the Form of things , and deny the Power ; and from such we are commanded to turn away , 2 Tim. 3.5 . 

Answ . 1.  I must crave leave , to say , that the framers of this Objection , are ascended not only to the height of censorious uncharitableness ; but invade the Throne of God himself , and will become Judges of the secrets of hearts . For , who told them that they deny the Power ? did any of the Churches themselves ? Do any principles owned by them , any practices found amongst them declare as much ? Let the individuals hereof [ Guilty ] pled for themselves , I 'll not be their advocate . Though I must add , I know no such Churches , and yet they are not a few I am acquainted with . 

2.  It had been severe enough for the Objectors to have , that They have the Form , but not the Power ; therefore are not true Churches . But this perhaps they thought would not have served their purpose . Inasmuch as the Lord himself saith concerning the Church of Sardis , rev. 3.1 . thou hast a Name to live , and art dead ; and of Laodicea , v. 15.  thou art neither cold , nor hot , v. 17.  Wretched , Poor , Miserable , Blind , Naked : yet even these are owned by Christ for his Churches , rev. 3.1 , 14.  

3.  That they have not the Power , is also notoriously false . 't is true , they have not so much of it , as in a former day ; but that all 's lost , there are a thousand Witnesses to confute . 

Object . 6.  The Churches are polluted ; therefore no true Churches . 

Ans . 1.  This is a most evident nonsequitur : They may be polluted , and yet true Churches . The question is , whether there be such pollutions found upon them , either with respect to Worship , or Conversation , that by any Rule of Christ declare them Vn-churched ; which we are only to attend to in this matter . We may stab , and kill each other in a distempered fit , and think we do well ; but 't will be found Murder by the righteous judge ; if what we do , be without his Rule , and Authority . 

2.  What Pollution is there to be found amongst the Churches , that was not to be found even in the Apostolic Churches ; and greater too , at least , in some of them ? 

3.  Do they justify , pled for , any Pollutions amongst them ? Is not the sight of them , matter of grief , burden to them ; at least , to many amongst them . Though there were but a few names in Sardis , that had not defiled their Garments , rev. 3.4 . yet Christ owns them for his Church . 

Object . 7.  The present Churches were at first gathered in the will of man : Therefore they are no true Churches . 

Answ . 1.  Prove This , and take the Cause . I 'd be he , after all I have written , that would cast the first stone at them . But saying so , is but a sinful Calumniation , no Argument . Let 's a little further consider this matter . 

2.  Why are they gathered in the Will of Man ? Is it , because they are gathered by the authority of man , driven together by penal Sanctions ? This cannot be asserted . What then ? Are they gathered , constituted of visibly profane persons ? Nor can this be affirmed . If the gathering together of Saints called out of the world , as Volunteers giving up themselves to JESUS CHRIST , and one another , to walk together in Gospel-fellowship , be a gathering in the will of man ; 't is true , they are so gathered . But the best on 't is , we have good company under the same Condemnation , even all the primitive-churches . 

Obj. Oh! but you were not gathered by Apostles ! 

Answ . Oh! but this hath been already spoken to , and removed out of the way : several of the first Churches we have proved , were not gathered by the Apostles ; Ergo , they also were gathered in the will of man , were not true Churches . 

Obj. 8.  But there 's no Presence among the Churches : Therefore no true Churches . 

Answ . 1.  Should it be granted , that there 's no presence , yet from thence it doth not follow that they are not true Churches . For the glory was departed from the Temple , Ezek. 3.12 the blessed glory of the Lord is gone from his place , and yet the Temple was standing . In the second Temple , there was not the Schecinah , or divine presence ; yet the Judaic Church-state , not dissolved till many years after . The house may stand , and be a true house as much as 't was before , though the master be gone out of it ; perhaps he hath a special end for the good of the House , Servant's , Children , for a season to leave it . God may have blessed designs towards his Churches in his temporary leaving them , yet true Churches . I 'd ask , doth not the Lord sometimes withdraw his presence from particular Saints ? What Child of God , but at one time , or other , finds cause to complain of his departure from him ? He seeks him , yet cannot find him . Doth this destroy his Saint-ship ? who 'll affirm it ? Well then , the with-drawment of God from Churches , is no Argument they are none of his . 

2.  It may be there may be some mistake in this matter , and God is only supposed to be a great way off , when he is near . Marry laments for the absence of her Lord , when yet he stood by her , Joh. 20.15 , 16.  it 's necessary we inquire a little touching the presence of God with a People . He is said to be present . 

1.  In respect of his Essence , and being , so he is present with All ; indistant to none . He fills Heaven and Earth ; all things with his Presence , Psa . 139.  

2.  In respect of providential dispensations , preserving , defending a People , giving them the Victory over their Enemies . In this sense , through wondrous riches of Grace , the Lord is yet present with his Churches ; the Plots , Confederacies , Advancements of the Children of Men against them , have hitherto been in-successful . 

3.  In respect of sensible manifestations of his grace and love in the way of the new-covenant to them ; quickening , causeing their graces to flourish ; renewing , strengthening , comforting them . Now though 't is true , ( and touching it , deep search of heart should be upon us , and mournings after the Lord ) that there is not in this sense , such a presence of the Lord as hath been formerly ; yet we must say , to the praise of matchless - grace , we are not wholly destitute of it ; and are crying , as we can , Let our Beloved come into his Garden , that the Spices thereof may send forth their odoriferous smell . Yet who 'll despise a day of small things ? 't is a mercy , for a rebellious beggar , to have a crumb , a drop , of the bread , waters of Life . And were we more thankful for , did we prise , improve as becomes us , that little God gives us , we might have more . 

4.  In respect of his real , actual presence in the new-covenant , though not sensible manifestations of it . Thus God is present with us , ( though we complain of his absence ) when he strengthens us to wait on , for him , in the ways of his appointment ; enables us to seek to him . For without his presence , we were not able to do that . Thus ( through grace ) he is present with his Churches , and every member of them . 

3.  Is not Prayer , Prayer , because we have not his sensible presence with us ? who 'll affirm it ? Is it lawful to omit that Duty , in our Closets , retirements ; because we enjoy not God in it ? Who dare aver it ? This were an Effectual , and expeditious way , to drive Christianity , all Religion , Devotion , out of the World. What though there be not a sensible Enjoyment of God in Churches , Institutions — ▪ There he hath promised to meet his people , and bless them ; and there it 's our duty to wait for the returnal of his Presence , and Glory . Thus far in Answer to Objections : Which are all I have met with . And in the whole , have been with PRAYER and SUPPLICATION , following the Lord for leading ; have not willingly reflected upon , or used exasperating Expressions concerning any ; nor designedly pleaded the cause of any PARTICULAR PARTY , but the general concern of all the Saints , who look upon their subjection to Christ in Gospel-institutions any part of their concern . In simplicity , and godly sincerity ( though with much weakness ) have I been managing this affair ; and because I believe , that the truth of the Lord is herein with me , therefore have I spoken . If any may be profited , let God have the Glory ; If any be otherwise minded , I pray God will manifest this also unto him in due time . 

FINIS . 

