The Protestant religion truely stated and justified by the late Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter ; prepared for the press some time before his death ; whereunto is added, by way of preface, some account of the learned author, by Mr. Danel Williams and Mr. Matthew Sylvester. / Baxter, Richard, 1615-1691. (Printed for John Salusbury ...,London :1692.)

THE PROTESTANT Religion TRULY STATED AND JUSTIFIED : By the late Reverend Mr. RICHARD BAXTER , Prepared for the Press some time before his Death . 

Whereunto is added , By way of Preface , some Account of the Learned Author : By Mr. Danel Williams , and Mr. Matthew Sylvester . 

LONDON , Printed for John Salusbury at the Rising Sun over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill , 1692.  

TO THE READER . THE Author of the following Tract is the Reverend Mr. Baxter , now enjoying that Glory he so conversed with in his mortal state . Among his many Excellencies , his Love to God , to Peace , and Truth , was not the least eminent . The last rendered him averse to Logomachies and confusion ; well knowing , How vain all eristick debates be , if the Question be not truly and plainly stated . This Book will give thee a Specimen of that peculiar accuracy in this kind , as even determineth the Controversy before an Argument be produced . 

It is not to be concealed , that some complain of the multitude of his distinctions ; but such may consider , that the Comprehensiveness of his Mind accommodated things to the most subtle , as well as the lesle intelligent Reader ▪ and provided against future Errors , as well as the mistakes he attends to in the particular points before him . 

Indeed he was a man born for more lasting service than one Age ; yea , his Name will be greatest , when impartial inquisitiveness after Truth shall render men painful ; and sad experience of the mischief of narrow and dividing Principles hath forced the confident to mutual allowances , and well studied determinations . But how unhappy was he ( or rather such as mistake him ) that he is oft charged with deserting this or that Truth , because he understood it in a consistency with itself , and such other truths wherewith it was connected . As if Ort hodoxie must be sacrificed whenever a Doctrine is made intelligible ; or the choice of terms more apt to confute the erroneous , lesle obnoxious to mistakes , and most expressive of digested thoughts , ought to alarm all such , who seem capable to know little more of Truth than the sound of oft repeated Phrases . 

Nay , as more convincing what treatment any man must expect , who sets himself to heal a blind depraved World ; The clearest representation of his mind will not silence the ignorant from charging him with those Errors which he most expressly disowns . Three of the most material are denied and confuted by Mr. Baxter in this very Treatise , viz. the moral freedom of the Will of an unregenerate man , conditional Election , and the merit of good Works as opposed to , or coordinate with the Righteousness of Christ . Neither must it be overlooked , that it was his Concern in this Book above any other , to speak as near to these points as his Judgement could admit ; and in other Treatises he more largely declares against them . 

1.  Of Freewill , p. 87. he tells us , he denies that man's Will in his unregenerate state is free from vicious inclination , or from the conduct of an erring Intellect , or from the Bias of Sensuality , etc. 2.  He denies that the Will thus vitiated , will ever deliver itself without God's Spirit and Grace , it being rather inclined to grow worse . 3 As that degree of common Grace , which is in the unregenerate , is but such as consisteth with the predominant Reign of Sin ; so the Will of every unregenerate man in that pravity , is as a Slave to its own vicious dispositions , error , and temptations . Who can say more against Freewill ? Obj. But he affirms the natural freedom of the William Answ . He doth so , and explains it , p. 84 , 85 , 86 , 91. and it is no more than that a Sinner is a man still , though he be depraved ; and he is a liberal , and not a forced Agent in what he acteth . 

Obj. But he saith , p. 88  That by common Grace a man may do more good and lesle evil than he doth . Answ . it 's true , he saith so . But , p. 85. he distinguisheth between common and special Grace , and denies that we can do that by common Grace , which is proper to special Grace : and saith , men have but just so much , and no more moral Liberty , and power , as they have of God's Grace to relieve their vitiated Wills. See p. 91.  

2.  Of Conditional Election , p. 99  He condemns the Notion called Scientia Media : p. 100 he saith , God decreeth not men's Salvation , or Sanctification , merely on Foresight of our Faith : but decreeth our Faith itself . Sin he permitteth , but Faith he effecteth , and decreeth to effect : and p. 101. he shows , how God decreeth both the means and end . And though God justly denieth his Grace to many that forfeit it by wilful resistance and contempt ; yet he takes not the Forfeiture of the Elect. Yea he adds , That he is deceived , and wrongeth God , that feigneth him to send his Son to redeem the World , and his Word to call them , and his Spirit to renew them ; and all this at random , not knowing whether it may not all be lost ; or leaving it chiefly to the Freewill of them , whose Wills are contrarily inclined and vitiated ; whether Christ and all his preparations shall be lost : p. 102. he approveth the plain Christian who holds that our destruction is of ourselves , but our help and Salvation of God ; and God is the first and chief Cause of all good , and men and Devils of all evil . 

Obj. But he will not say , that God hath by his Will and Decree ordained from Eternity that men shall sin , or will and choose evil , p. 100 , & 101.  God doth not decree that men shall sin , that they may be damned ; for sin is no work of God , etc.  

Answ . But yet he saith , p. 100 that , 

1.  God decreeth who shall the damned for sin . 

2.  That he foresaw men's sins , not as an idle Spectator , but a willing Suspender of his own Acts , so far as to leave Sinners to their self-determining Wills. Reader , if thou art a man of thought , thou seest Mr. Baxter is clear for absolute Election , though he did not think it necessary for the vindication thereof to judge , that God absolutely decreed men to sin , that he might damn them : it 's enough , that it is from God's Sovereign Will , that many are not elected ; it would be an ease to the damned , that they could justly say , God decreed us to all our sins , that he might bring us under all this punishment , a Nonelection to Efficacious Grace , and a positive Decree to damn such for sin , which themselves would choose , best suited with his Conceptions of God's Goodness , Truth , and Purity . 

3.  Of the Merit of good Works : Note , Reader , that he is not fond of the word Merit , but his Adversary leads him to the use of it , as thou mayst see p. 96.  But let us hear what his sense is of this point : p. 119.  All Saints are saved by the full sufficient Merits of Christ , and have none at all of their own , unless the amiableness of Grace freely given them , be called their Merit ; and , p. 95. we do with Paul renounce all Works of our own , that are thought to make the reward to be of Debt , and not of Grace ; and that are set in the least opposition , or competition with Christ's Merits , or in any place , save commanded subordination to him : nay , he says he firmly holds , That Works done with a conceit of obliging God by Merit in commutative Justice , or as conceited sufficient without a Saviour , and the pardon of their failing , do more further their Damnation , than Salvation . Yea , p. 97. none but Christ merited of strict distributive Justice , according to the Law of Innocency , nor by any Works that will save from the charge of sin , and desert of death . And that thou mayest know what he ascribes to our Graces , Holiness , or Works : He tells us , p. 119. we mean by Merit but the moral aptitude for the reward of a free Benefactor , who also is Rector , when the ordering of a free gift suspended on official conditions , is sapientially made a means of procuring obedience . This one Clause , if understood ( and he is a bold Traducer of so great a Man , that cannot understand words so plain ) will acquit Mr. B. and inform thee of the place of all Gospel - Conditions . 1.  All Gospel-blessings are the free gifts of Christ as Benefactor , they have their being without any regard to what we do , therefore nothing in man is a jot of the righteousness or merit for which they are bestowed . 2.  Christ is our Rector or Governor , he will rule us as well as be beneficent to us . 3.  As a means to incline us to comply with him as Rector , he suspends these blessings on terms of what he makes our Duty ; and wisely order them as Motives to our Obedience . 4.  Any Act of our Obedience is no more than a conformity to that Order of his , and doth not hinder all we receive from him to be of free gift . 

Obj. But he saith , that good Works are necessary to Salvation . 

Answ . He doth so , and how few deny it ? But , 1.  Not if a man die as soon as he be converted ; but if he have time , p. 94. 2.  Their rewardableness is by God's free Grace , and promise , for the sake of Christ's meritorious Righteousness , Sacrifice , and Intercession ; their imperfection being pardoned , and their holiness amiable through him : These are his words , p. 76. 3.  He saith ; Not without or as a supplement to the Sacrifice , Merits , and free Grace of Christ our Saviour , and Faith in him , p. 93 , 75.  And we give ourselves to Christ , as our Prophet , Priest , and King , to be saved by his Merits , p. 94.4 . He saith , our best Works will not save a man from the charge of sin , and desert of death , p. 97. 5.  He denies that external Obedience is necessary to our admission into a justified state , as he shows in the Thief on the Cross . And when he saith , we are justified by our Faith , Godliness , and Works ; Justification is not taken by him for the pardon of sin , which he ascribes wholly to the Merits of Christ ; but he takes Justification there for our acquittance against the accusation that we are Infidels , Ungodly , and Hypocrites . And saith , that against the charge , that we are Sinners , deserving Hell , we are justified by Christ believed in , p. 94.  His meaning is plainly this , Christ alone by his Merits forgives our sins , and purchased eternal Life for us . But seeing that Christ hath promised to forgive none but the penitent Believer , and declared he will destroy all impenitent , unbelieving , ungodly sinners : Now he thinks , that we must be truly acquitted , that we are not such , or we shall not be saved by Christ : Yea , he thinks , that when God justifies a man for Christ's Merits , he doth also declare a man to be a true Believer ; because he will justify no other , and will justify all such ; and when God admits a man into Glory , he doth even thereby adjudge him a believing , penitent , holy , and upright man ; and free from the charge of being an infidel , hypocritical , unholy Enemy ; against whom the Gospel denounceth Vengeance and bars relief . Let these things be weighed , and none will wonder that he should say on his sick bed , no works , I will leave out works , if he grant me the other : And truly , in health none spoke more humbly of his own Works than he used to do . But because some confident weak persons have inferred from that passage , that he changed his Principles when he came to die ; we shall inform thee , that after that passage was uttered by him , even the night before his death , Mr. Baxter was asked , whether he was of the same sentiments , as formerly , about Justification ? He answered , That he had told the World sufficiently his thoughts about it by several writings , and otherwise ; and thither he referred them . And after a little pause , with his Eyes lifted up to Heaven , he cried , Lord , pity , pity , pity the Ignorance of this poor City . And in the time of his sickness he declared to us and others , that his thoughts in these things were the same as formerly . 

Our regards to Mr. B. force the Publication of what we here insert ; though we would not be judged so happy , as to arrive at his Light , to lead us to a full Agreement with all his Sentiments . As to this Book , we wish there be not still great need of such helps against Popery ; and we are assured it will give more light than some greater Volumes on this Subject : That God may render it useful , shall be the Prayer of 

Thy Servants in the Gospel , Daniel Williams . Matthew Sylvester . 

Protestant Religion Truly Stated , and Justified , etc.  THE Deceiver calleth his Book The Touchstone of the Reform Gospel , as if he owned a Gospel distinct from that of the Reform Church . And he undertakes to name fifty two points , which the protestants affirm , but tells you not where , nor proveth his affirmation , but you must believe him as a Touchstone of Truth . 

Dec. The first Protestant affirmation feigned , is , That there is not in the Church One , and that an infallible Rule for understanding the Holy Scripture , and conserving of Unity in matters of Faith.  

Answ . A mere Lie , if he mean that this is any part of Protestant Doctrine ; but he may find as crude confused words , in some ignorant person that is called a Protestant . 

The Reform Catholics hold , that there is in the Church one , and that an infallible Rule for understanding the holy Scripture , and conserving of Unity in matters of Faith. ] And that Rule is , [ The Evidence of its own meaning as inherent in its self , discernible or intelligible by men prepared and instructed , by competent Teaching and Study , and the necessary help of God's Grace and Spirit . ] This is that Rule . 

But the Reform believe not 1.  That there is any Rule by which ignorant , prejudiced , heretical , wilfully blind , wicked , uncapable men can understand such Scripture , as they are hereby undisposed to understand , unless by a great change made on themselves . Nor that any Prince can make a Statute , which on Man can misunderstand , abuse or violate . 

2.  Nor that Men can understand it without teaching , and that sound teaching , nor by harkening to Erroneous Deceivers . 

3.  Nor that the Slothful , that will not meditate on it , can understand it , though they have the soundest teachers . 

4.  Nor that Novices can understand as much in a short time and small Study , as aged long exercised Students . 

5.  Nor that wicked proud men , that forfeit Gods help , can savingly understand it without his Grace and Spirit . 

6.  Nor that any man , how holy soever , perfectly understandeth every word in the Scriptures . 

7.  Nor that a person may not be fallible , and deceived , that yet knoweth which is the Infallible Rule : It maketh not all Infallible that know it . 

8.  Nor that any Church , or any Number of Christians on Earth have such a Unity as consisteth in perfect knowledge and agreement in all matters of Faith , that is , of Scripture-record from God.  

9  Nor that God hath tied this Infallible Regulation to the Bishop of Rome , or made him this Rule ; seeing no such word of God is extant , and General Councils have condemned Popes of Heresy , Infidelity , Ignorance , and most brutish lust and wickedness . 

10.  Nor that the Judgement of the mayor part of Christians or Bishops is the Infallible Rule ; for 1.  The Papal part are but a third part : And they will hardly believe that the other two or three parts ( Abyssines , Egyptians , Syrians , Armenians , Georgians , Circassians , Greeks , Muscovites , protestants ) are the Infallible rule . 2.  And if they met in an equal Council , they that are most out of the Council , would be the most in it . And Ephes . 2. and many others now condemned , have had the Mayor part . And Chrysostom that thought that [ few Bishops or Priests were saved , ] thought not the greater number to be the infallible Rule . 

11.  And Pope and Councils agreeing are not that Infallible rule ; for two fallibles makes not one infallible , nor two Knaves one honest Man Popes and Councils have oft condemned one another ; yea , they have oft agreed in evil , as did that at Lateran the 4th . under Innocent the 3d. that decreed the deposition of Princes , that exterminate not all that renounce not all Senses and Humanity ; for those that have led into the Churches of the West all the horrid Errors of Rome , to pretend yet that they are the Infallible rule of understanding Scripture , is Impudence quite beyond that of Satan himself . 

12.  If this Deceiver hold what is contrary to his accused Protestant Opinion , he must condemn the Church of Rome , that agreeth not of the sense of a thousand Texts of Scripture , Horseloads of Commentators , and Cartloads of School-contenders , contradicting one another : And he that will say that all revealed in Scripture is not matter of Faith , reproacheth God , as revealing that which is not to be believed . All matters of Faith are not essential to Christianity , but some are only for the perfection of it : All is matter of Faith that we are bound to believe as Divine Revelation . All the Scripture is such , tho' the ignorant must have time and help to understand it , and explicitly receive it . The Pope's themselves ( e. g. Sixtus Quintus , and Clem. 8. ) have differed in many hundred Texts about the very Latin Translation . Many hundred Volumes of Controversies among them , tell us how far they are from ending Controversies , and agreeing in all matters of Faith : But in so much as is necessary to Salvation , all serious believing protestants , or Reform Catholics , are agreed . 

Now , to trouble the Reader with the proof of any of these twelve particulars , would be but to abuse Time and him ; as to prove that no Man is perfect , and he that saith he hath no sin , is a Liar : and to prove that the grand Deceivers of the Church are not Infallible , and that God's Word is not unevident and unintelligible , and that such Villains as their own Councils and Historians say many Popes were , speaks not more intelligibly and wisely than God ; and that the Volumes of Canons and Priests writings are not of more evident meaning than God's Word ; these need proof to none but those that are uncapable of it . 

What Rule is there for the Infallible understanding the sense of all our Statute Laws ? none but what I mentioned . The intelligible evidence in the words , ( what else are words used for ) to men duly instructed and studied . The Judges govern by deciding particular causes by the Law , but are not an Infallible Rule for all Men to understand the true sense of the Law by , ( while Judges and Parliaments differ from each other , as Popes and Councils did . ) 

The Texts cited by the Deceiver , are so vilely abused , as if he purposed but to make sport by taking God's Word in vain . 

Point 2.  Accused , [ That in matters of Faith we must not rely on the Judgement of the Church , and of her Pastors , but only on the written word . 

Ans . The Deceiver would Cheat the Ignorant by Confusion ; and belying the Reform Catholics : for , 

1.  it 's false , that the Reform hold any of this undistinguishing Assertion . They distinguish between human Faith and Divine . ( And I hope , God and Man may be distinguished . ) They say that it must be a Divine Faith ( that is , The Belief of God's word for the Infallible Veracity of God ) that must save us , and not the belief of Man alone : But that a human Faith is needful in Subserviency to a Divine . God hath appointed human Teachers to the Flocks , and Oportet discentem Credere ; He will never learn , that will believe nothing on his Teacher's Credit . But he must believe Man but as Man , an imperfect , fallible Creature , yet as like to know more than he that chooseth him for his Teacher ; And that which Man is to teach us , is to see the Evidence of Gods own Word , that we may believe it for that Evidence , as our Teachers themselves must do . For if the Teachers do but believe one another , and not God , ( or God only for Man's Authority , ) this is not Religion , nor Diune Faith , but human , such as they had that believed Pythagoras , Plato , Mahomet , etc.  If Boys learn of their Schoolmaster to understand the Greek or Latin Testament , and believe them as to Sense , this is not Divine Faith , but a help towards it . The word of God is Infallible : And by the help of fallible Men , ( such as disagreeing Commentators be , ) we are furthered for understanding it . But false bloody Usurpers are not the likest to teach us the Truth , nor fittest to be trusted . 

His Citations of Scriptures , ( to mistated Controversies , ) are so putidly impertinent , that I am ashamed to detect them by words , which every Man may do . 

The Third accused Point . That the Scriptures are easy to be understood , and therefore none are to be restrained from Reading them . 

Ans . Mere Cheat to the Ignorant , by confusion and falsehood . 

1.  We and all Papists with us agree , ( the more is the Gild of the Deceivers Fraud , ) that some of the Scripture is easy to be understood , and is actually understood by all true Christians , even all that is essentsal to Christianity , and necessary to Salvation . Bellarmine , Castrus , and many others , tell us , that for all that , the Scripture is plain and sufficient : Yea , so it is , in many Thousand particular Texts : If this be not so , let this Man tell us if he can , how it cometh to pass , that Papists , Greeks , and Protestant Commentators agree of the meaning of most of the Scripture , ( perhaps of Nineteen Texts in Twenty , ) if it be not plain . 

But do protestants say , that there is nothing in the Scripture hard to be understood ? the Father of Lies will scarce affirm this of them , lest their Commentaries and Controversies shame him . 

2.  But what ? Must the people be forbidden to Read God's Word , because some passages are dark ? Why not also forbidden to Read Statutes , Canons , Fathers , Jesuits , Friars , and the Loads of Papists Controversies ? Is there nothing hard in all these Volumes ? what not in all the Canons ? In all Chrysostom , Austin , Cyril , & c ? In all Lombard , Aquinas , Bonaventure , Scotus , Ockam , Cajetane , and all the Tribe ? In all Suarez , Vasquez , Huctado , Albictine , & c ? In all Cajacius , and his Tribe ? Why are not these forbidden ? Do but rub your Foreheads , and tell me , 

1.  Whether the Law was not darker than the Gospel ? and yet God charged them , Deut. 6. and 11.  To teach the words to their Children , and that lying down , and rising up , at home and abroad ; and to write them on ▪ the posts of their Houses , and their Gates : And every blessed Man , ( Psal . 1. ) was to delight in the Law of the Lord , and meditate in it Day and Night ? Read Psal . 119.  

2.  Whether Christ did not Preach the words Recorded in the Gospel to the unlearned common people ; and Peter and Paul , and all the Apostles , to all the vulgar Jews and Gentiles ? 

3.  Whether they written not their Recorded Epistles to the Vulgar , even to all the Churches ? 

4.  Whether it is not God's Word that we must all be Ruled and Judged by , and is the Charter of our right to Heaven ? and should we be forbid to read it ? 

5.  Whether Hierom , Chrysostom , Austin , and all the Fathers , do not press Men and Women of all Ranks , to read or learn , and study the Scriptures ? 

6.  Whether he be not like Antichrist , that will forbid Men to read that , which God sent his Son from Heaven to Preach , and Christ appointed Apostles , Pastors , and Teachers , to communicate to all the World ? 

7.  Whether the Prince of Darkness and Pride himself , would not be ashamed openly to say , I have so much skill to speak Intelligibly , and God so little , that you must read my Books , and not read his ? And whether Popes and Priests Volumes are not as unskilfully written , as Gods , and as like to draw Men to Heresy and Sin ? 

8.  Whether he that thus Condemneth God and his Law , and extolleth Man's , be like to make good his accusation at God's Bar ? Alas ! must such things as these be disputed by Men that would be our Infallible Rule ? 

9  Either the knowledge of God's Word is needful , or not . If not , why did God write part of it himself ? And send his Son to Preach it ? And his Spirit in his Prophets and Apostles to write and Record it ? Are blind Worms fit to accuse God of Folly , and needless Work ? Can Men obey God's Law that know it not ? But if the knowledge of it be needful to our Obedience and Salvation , ask common Reason , whether the Difficulties should not rather oblige us to read and study it so much the more , ●till we understand it , rather than not to read it at all ? Do their ductile Followers that read it not , understand it better than those that study it Day and Night ? The lesle we know of needless things , the better and quieter we are : If God's Law and Gospel be such , what a God and Governor have we ! Can Heathens and Turks Blaspheme him more , than to take him for so foolish a Governor of the World , as to make a stir by his Son from Heaven , and by Angels and Prophets , to give them so needless , yea , pernicious a Law and Gospel , as that Men must be kept from reading it , lest it Poison them with Heresy ? 

10.  Is it not essential to him that relatively we take for our God , to be the Governor of the World , and to be our Saviour , and the Holy Ghost to deliver and Seal the Gospel as glad Tidings to all Nations ? And is it not by his Law that God Governeth , and by his Gospel that Christ Saveth , and the Holy Ghost doth illuminate and Sanctify ? And doth not that Man or Clergy then put down God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , and set up themselves in the stead , who forbid the reading of God's Law and Gospel , and Command the knowledge and observance of their own , Canons and Dictates instead of them , as more Intelligible and safe ? And is not this ( as Robert Grosthead told Innocent 4. ) next the Sin of Lucifer and Antichrist , or rather plain Antichristianism itself ? 

11.  Is the Stage manner of Massing liker to make the people understand God's Law and Gospel , ( by multitudes of Gestures , Motions , Cross , Ceremonies , that need long Expositions , that overwhelm the strongest Memories , ) than the reading and study of the plain and full words of God in Scripture ? 

12.  Did this Deceiver ever hear protestants say , that the Apocalypse , and Daniel , and Ezekiel , and the Canticles , and the Chronologies of Scripture , are all easy to be understood ? For if he have heard such a Fool , did he ever read this in the Confessions of any Church ? Do not their Commentaries tell the difficulty ? And ask this Man or his fellow Creature , whether the Infallible Pope , or Councils , have overcome all these difficulties to the Papists , and made all this easy to them ? Or do not their Valuminous disagreeing Commentaries , and Controversies , show that they are still as hard to them as to us . 

13.  And ask them whether Pope , or Council , have ever yet written an Infallible Commentary on the Bible , or all such difficult Texts ? If not , is it because they cannot , or because they will not ? And what the better than is their Church for their feigned skill and power , infallibly to decide difficult Scripture Controversies ? What can be more shameless than this pretence , in Men that will not do it , nor ever did ? 

14.  And if still they tell you ; that the people were always bound to believe and obey the Church's Rites , without dispute or Contradiction ; ask them whether it was not the Church Rulers that killed Christ , and called him a Blasphemer and Deceiver , and that Persecuted and accused the Apostles ? And whether the People were bound to believe them , ( as Jewish Papists , ) and whether all the Apostles and Christians were Rebels and Heretics , for not believing them ? And whether it was not for the Sins of Priests and Princes , and the people's complying with them , that God by his Prophets reproved the Israelites , and at last forsaken them to Captivity , 2 Chron. last . Jer. 5 last . 

15.  And if they tell you of the People's need of Teachers , tell them that that is none of the Controversy . But whether their Teachers must teach them to understand God's Book , or to throw it away ? May not the Teacher and the Book , consist together ? Must Schoolboys be forbid to Learn their Grammar , because they must have a Teacher ? Must he teach them the Book , or teach them without Book ? But all the Craft is , to get all the World to take only such Cheaters as this for their Masters , and then Bible or no Bible may serve turn . 

16.  Is it not the Office of Teachers to Translate God's Word into known Tongues , that the People may understand it ? This is the first part of Preaching it : If not , why do they use Translations in the Church of Rome , the Septuagint ▪ and the Vulgar Latin ? And why did Sixtus 5th . and Clem. 8. make such a stir to Correct the Latin ? And why do so many Comment on them ? And the Rhemists turn it into English ? But what is all this for , but to help Men to understand the Book ? 

17.  Doth not all the Word of God cry down Ignorance , and cry up Knowledge , from End to End ? And what Knowledge is it , but Divine , of the Word and Law of God ? What else is the scope of all the first Nine Chapters of Solomon's Proverbs , and of Psal . 1. 19 and 119 , etc.  God saith , Hos . 4. 6.  My People perish for lack of knowledge : And Isa . 27. 11.  It is a people of no understanding , therefore he that made them will not save them . Ignorance and Blindness are made the common cause of Error , Sin and Misery . 

But we are so far from taking all parts of Scripture to be equally necessary to be understood , that we are more than the Papists for first and most diligently teaching them the Essentials , the Creed , Lord's Prayer , and Commandments , and Baptism , and Church Communion , and the Lord's Supper , and lesser parts as they grow up ; what they must learn first their Teachers must instruct them . 

18.  If he say , as they still do , that the Ignorant will misunderstand the Scripture , and every one turn it to his own Fancy , and Heresy : I answer , The way to prevent this , is to teach it them diligently , ( what else is the Ministry for ? ) and not to forbid it them . Every Knave may pervert the Law of the Land to maintain his own ill Cause ; and must the Law therefore be forbidden them ? Reason is far more commonly abused than Scripture : There is no Heresy , or Error , no Villainy , Perjury , Cruelty , Persecution , Oppression , or Injustice , but Reason is pleaded for it : Must Reason therefore be renounced ? Heresies are for want of understanding God's word ; and must be cured by understanding it . 

19  And if all the World must take the Popes or Priests words , instead of Gods , or for their Rule , how shall those in Aethiopia , Syria , America , or here , know what the Pope's Word is ? That never see him , or any that hath seen him ? And how shall we know , when above twenty times there have been two Popes at once , which of them is the Right ? And when they contradict and Damn each other , which of them must we believe ? And when General Councils accuse them of Error , and Condemn them , which is to be trusted with our Souls ? Or if it be Councils that must be to us instead of Scripture , when they Damn each other , which must we believe ? ( And so abundance of them have done . ) When the Pope and they agreed to depose Christian Princes , and give away their Dominions , and disoblige their Subjects from all their Oaths of Allegiance , is it as true as the word of God , that all Subjects must believe and obey them ? 

But how shall all the poor People know what the Pope and Councils say and hold ? They can neither read their Volumes , nor understand them , nor know which are authentic and true ? Must they all believe their Parish Priest ? What if he be as very a Deceiver as the writer of this Touchstone , that doth but Cheat from the beginning to the end ? Yet must we take his word instead of Gods ? Or when other Priests , or Friars contradict him , which of them must we believe ? What if his Parishioners know him to be ignorant , or a common Liar ? Yet must our Salvation rest on his word ▪ and God's word be forbidden us . What if we obey him in Error , and Sin , will he undertake to be Damned for us ? Or will his undertaking or Damnation save those whom he misled , & c. ? 

As to his Citation of Scripture against Scripture , it is so palpable a perversion , that I will leave any Man that will but Read the Text , to his own ability , to answer him : rev. 5.1 . no Man in Heaven or Earth , was worthy to open the Sealed Books that John saw in his Vision : What then , must no Man therefore open the Bible ? Or because the Revelation is hard , must therefore the People be forbidden to Read it , and the rest of God's word , which was written for them , as sufficient to make them wise to Salvation , yea , to make the simple wise , Psal . 19  

And with as shameless a Face doth he cite the Fathers , against the drift of all their writings and Labours , and the Judgement of all the Churches of Christ , for many hundred years , of its purest foundest Primitive times . 

The Fourth accused Point . That Apostolical Traditions , and ancient Customs of the Church , ( not Founded in the written word , ) are not to be received , nor do oblige us . 

Ans . This is but more Deceit , by confusion and false report . 

The Reform Catholics hold , 

1.  That Memory is not so sure a way to deliver any Laws and Doctrines to Posterity , through many hundred years , as writing is . For it must lie on the Memories of so many thousands , in so many Ages , and so many parts of the World ; Of so many Languages , Kingdoms , and cross Interests and Opinions in their quarrels ; and the things to be remembered are so many , that this needs no proof , with any but Fools or Madmen : What a Religion should we have had , if instead of the Bible , it must have all been brought us down by the Memories of all the Rabble of ignorant and wicked Popes ? yea , or of the best ? and by the Memories of all the Prelates and Priests that have pretended to be the Church ? Why do they themselves write their pretended Traditions , if writing them were not needful ? And why have we all our Statutes , Records , and Law-books , if the Lawyers and People's Memories would keep and deliver them without these ? When Man's Memories , Wits , and Honesty are so weak , that we can scarce get one Story carried without falsifying through many Hands . 

2.  We hold , that God in mercy hath therefore considered Man's Weakness , and Necessity , and before the Apostles died , inspired them to Record so much of his Law , and Gospel , and Will , as was universally necessary for all his Subjects to know , in order to Divine belief ; Obedience , and Salvation : And hath left nothing of this importance and necessity unrecorded in the Law of Nature , ( God's Visible works , ) and Scripture , knowing that after Ages were not to have new universal Legislators , to make such Laws for all the World ; nor to have Men miraculously enabled to do it , and give proof that it is Divine . 

3.  We hold that God's written Word and Law , is perfect in its kind , Psal . 19 and sufficient to its proper use and end : Which Bellarmine , Cassinus , and the Council of Basil , and many Schoolmen , in their Prologues on the Sentences , confess extendeth to all things commonly necessary to Salvation , yea , and to be the Divine Rule of Faith.  

4.  Yet we deny not , that if God had seen meet to deliver any necessary part of Law or Gospel , Faith or Practice , as his will , by bare word and Memory of Man ; we had been bound to believe and obey it , when we had sound proof that it was indeed from God.  

5.  We hold , that for fullest certainty , we have possession of the Bible itself , and of the Essentials of Christianity brought us by two Means Conjunct , that is , The Scripture , and practical Custom of the Church . As the Scripture or written Word shines to us by its own Light , so Tradition tells us which be the Canonical Books , and how the Church received them as Divine , and that there are no other such : And the practice , of Baptismal Profession and Covenanting , and of the Church Assemblies , and reading Scripture , and Catechising , and of Eucharistical Communion , and Prayer , etc. tell us what in all Ages hath been taken for true Christianity . As we hold a human Belief , needful in Subserviency , as a means to Divine Belief , so we hold human Tradition needful to the conveyance of God's Word to us . But , by your leave , we will distinguish the Messenger from the Author : If the King send me a Law or Mandate by a Messenger , or by the Penny-post , I will receive and obey it , and yet not take the Post or Messenger for King , or Legislator , or Infallible . 

6.  And the Reform Catholics do own all true Tradition , but are for a far surer Tradition than the Roman Sect. Our Tradition of Scripture , and the great points of Christianity , cometh to us by Evidence Infallible , that may be called Natural , with the greatest advantage of Moral Evidence also ; and not on the boast and bare word of one proud Sect , that pretendeth to Fanatic Inspiration and Authority above all others . 

I call that Natural Evidence , which ariseth from such necessary Causes that cannot be otherwise , nor can deceive : And I call that the best Moral Evidence , which cometh from men's testimony of greatest credit for skill and honesty , and we have both these . 

Man's Soul hath some necessary acts that cannot but be , and cannot be otherwise : Such is sensation of sensible objects duly presented ; Intellectual perception of things presented according to the evidence in which they appear : The Love of ourselves and our own known welfare , and any thing that is known to be an only and necessary means thereto , and hath Omnimodam ratiomem boni : The Love of Truth as Truth , and Good as Good : The hatred of misery , etc.  These all Men have as men , and that which dependeth on these dependeth not only on men's honesty . And our evidence of Tradition is such as this . It is from the Common Consent of all capable Witnesses , of various Opinions , Passions and Interests , Friends and Foes ; whereas the Tradition of Sectarian Papists , dependeth on the Credit of one Sect , that falsely pretend a peculiar trust with both Scripture and Tradition , though against the greater part of Christians : And pretend Fanatically that even ignorant Popes and Prelates in Council , have a gift of infallible knowledge . 

For Example : If there were a doubt raised , Whether there be any such City in the World as Rome , Paris , Vienna ? or whether there was ever such persons as K. James , K. Charles , Ludovicus 14 ▪ of France , & c. ? Or whether the Statutes in our Books were really made by the Kings and Parliaments named in them , and be the same unchanged , etc.  There is Natural evidence of all this , because it ariseth from necessary acts : All sorts of men of contrary interests could never agree to lie and deceive men in such cases , no more than they could all agree to kill themselves : And if some would be falsifyers , the rest would presently detect and shame them : If any Lawyers would falsyfie or change the Statutes , others would presently manifest the deceit , they being commonly known , and the cross interests of so many depending on them ; yea , I say not only that this is Natural Infallible Evidence , but that it is more than very much other Physical Evidence of many other things ; because we have better means to know Man's Natural necessary acts , than we have to know most other Creatures of God.  

And then for Moral Evidence , we have all the Godly's attestation of all Ages , and Nations , and Sects of Christians , and among the rest the Papists also , agreeing that This Bible , and This Creed , and these Essentials of Christianity , were all certainly transmitted to us from Christ and his Spirit , in his Apostles . 

And what 's the Tradition of the Papal Sect to all this , who tell us falsely , you cannot know the Scripture to be God's Word , but by taking it on the belief of the Pope and Church of Rome , as Endowed with the Power of Judgement , and the gift of Infallibility . Alas ! what abundance of Impossibilities must be proved true , before any Man can by this method believe God's word ! 

1.  Before they can believe the Gospel , and that Jesus is the true Christ , they must believe that he hath a Vicar . 

2.  And a Church . 

3.  And the Pope is this Vicar , and his Sect this Church . And 

4.  That he hath the Office , Power and Gift , of infallible Judging , which the Mayor number of Christians or Churches have not . 

5.  And that Christ ( not yet believed in , ) gave him power and Infallibility . 

6.  And that he that now Reigneth , is the true Pope by due Election , Consecration , Qualification , etc.  With many more such Impossibilities : And what is it to give up the Cause to the Infidels , if this be not ? 

7.  But we judge that God's Law in Scripture , secured from the charge of pretended Rememberers and Usurpers , is so sufficient to its proper use , that there needeth no Supplemental Tradition , as if it were but half God's Law ; but only subservient historical Tradition . And we challenge the Papists to prove de facto , 

1.  That any such supplemental Tradition is Existent . 

2.  That they possess any other , but what the other Churches know . 

3.  That they are more than other Churches , authorised to be the Keepers and Judges of that Tradition . And 

4.  We fully prove them Innovators , and that Popery is a mere Novelty : It is copiously proved by Peter Moulin , de novitate Papismi , David Blondel de Ecclesia , Andrew Rivet Defence of Morney against Coffetean , and against Silvester , and many others . Can they without the most profligate Impudence pretend Apostolical Tradition , for denying the Laity the Cup in the Eucharist , and for their praying in an unknown Tongue , and forbidding the Scripture , and deposing Princes , and dissolving Oaths of Allegiance , and for tormenting and kill all baptised persons that obey not the Pope , with many such ? 

8.  If Tradition tell us of any Customs used in the Apostles , or Primitive times , that be not in Scripture , and so be not made matters of Necessity to all ; yea , or of any occasion all mutable Customs that are mentioned in Scripture , ( as washing the Saints Feet , the Holy Kiss , the Woman's Veil , long or short Hair , Collections each Lord's Day , Preachers Travelling on Foot , etc. ) we quarrel not with the then use of such Traditions , when they were seasonable , no more than with forbearing things strangled and blood : Nor quarrel we with the Churches after , that settled Easter Day , and made the 20th . Canon of the Nicene Council , and used diverse Ceremonies at Baptism . But Traditions of things Indifferent and Mutable , we receive but as such , to be laid aside when the occasion ceaseth : And if any will turn them into a necessary common Law , we disclaim such Usurpers ; for they cross that very Tradition . It was delivered as Indifferent , and you feign and make it a necessary Law , and so destroy it . 

9  We maintain openly , that Tradition is against the Papacy and its Corruptions . They are but a third or fourth part of Christians : The other two or three parts of the Christian World , profess that the Tradition of their Churches is against the Pope's universal Sovereignty , and against all the Corruptions of which they accuse him . None but the shameless will deny that the Abassians , Armenians , Greeks , and others , pled that this is their Tradition . And Reader , tell us , why the Tradition of two or three parts of the Church should not rather be believed against a third part , than that which the third part boast of against all the rest . 

10.  Ask them which way they know and keep their Traditions ? Whether they have any History , Records , or any other way which we may not know as well as they ? If they pretend that it is a Secret , kept by their Church , it 's a strange Secret that so many thousands know : But if it be a thing provable , let them prove it . 

11.  Is it not unmercifulness , to tell all the Christian World , that as big and hard as the Bible is , if they knew and obeyed it all , they cannot be saved , unless they believe and do more , kept by the Pope , and called Tradition ? When yet these Deceivers can dispense with the knowledge and practice of God's own word , and think the Bible a Book too big and hard , ( and the Profane say , too strict , ) to be commonly understood and kept ; And yet all the Bible is not Enough , but we must be bound to as much more as they will call Tradition , yea , Volumes also of Papal Canon Laws . 

12.  Did not Christ for this thing Condemn the Old Pharisees , Mat. 15 ? 

Prove your Traditions to be Apostolical , and about things necessary , and not your Forgeries , or about things mutable and indifferent , and we will obey all such Apostolical Traditions . But your Novelties and Usupations shall not pass with us for Divine Laws , because you can call them such . 

The Fifth accused Point . That a Man by his own understanding and private Spirit , may rightly judge and interpret Scripture . 

Ans . Can any Man unriddle what this Deceiver meaneth ? 

1.  Can a Man judge without his own understanding ? 

2.  What meaneth he by a private Spirit ? Little know I If he mean God's Spirit , it is no contemptible nor private Spirit , even in a private Man : If he mean a man 's own Spirit , Soul or Intellect , it is the same as [ his own understanding . ] If he mean any Evil Spirit , or fancy and Erroneous self-conceit , we defy such Spirits , and Deceivers that use them . 

To understand without our own understandings , is a Mystery fit for Rome ; Why may not a Dog , or a Sheep , be said so to understand the Scripture , if it may be understood without our own understandings ? What a Curse is on the ignorant Nations , that will be led by such words as these ! 

But if he will say that he meant , [ By his own understanding alone without a Teacher , ] why did he not say so , but say one thing and do another . But that had been too gross a Lie , to have been believed , by them that see that we set up Teachers in all our Congregations . 

3.  Therefore I can imagine nothing but absurdity in his words , unless he mean , that we hold that a Man may rightly Interpret Scripture by his own understanding immediately , instructed by his Teacher and God's Spirit , without taking the Sense only at the rebound , on the belief of the Pope and his Clergy . For we never thought that a man 's own natural Wit without a Teacher , and the help of God's Spirit , can savingly understand and apply the Scripture . 

And yet we would fain tell Papists a better way to Convert a Philosopher , or a Turk , than to Preach to them thus : God hath written his Law and Gospel to the World , but you cannot tell what is the meaning of it , till you take that sense on trust from our Pope and Clergy , and know that Christ authorised him to be Judge ; and that before you believe in Christ , or understand the word that so authorizeth him . Were not corrupted Nature very blind in things Spiritual , Ploughmen , and Tinkers , and Cobblers , would be able to confute such Fopperies , and much more Priests , and Popes , and Prelates . 

4.  But I pray you tell me , whether the Pope and his Prelates , do not interpret Scripture by their own understandings ? Whose understandings else do they judge by , in Conclaves or Councils ? 

5.  And tell me , whether he that judgeth that the Pope is Christ's Vice-christ and Ruler , at the Antipodes , and is infallible , though he be by Councils condemned for a Simonist , and Infidel , an Atheist , a Seducer , or an ignorant Sot ? Doth not this Man judge all this by his own understanding ? If a Man take an ignorant sottish Priest for the Mouth of the Catholic Church , though he know no more what he talks against , than this Roman Deceiver , doth he not judge this by his own understanding ? If a Sot will believe you , that your Sect is the whole Church , and all are Damned , though they love God , and believe in Christ , if they will not be ruled by the Pope and every Mass-priest , doth he not judge thus by his own understanding ? Do you Preach to Men , or Beasts , that have no understanding of God's Law and Will ? If a Man must believe all the Canons of Popes and Councils , in Baronius , Binnius , Surius , Nicolinus , Caranza , etc. doth he not do it by his own understanding ? 

6.  Oh! But the meaning is , You are all private ignorant Men , and we are the Clergy ; Kings choose some of us , and Popes choose others , and whether we are Wise or Fools , Learned or Unlearned , Infidels or Christians , you are all Damned if you will not follow us , and if we be Damned , you must be content to be Damned with us . And is it so ? Hath God made Man for no safer and better a Condition , than to be Damned when ever Sottish Drunken Priests will tell him , [ You must believe us that are the Mouth of the Pope , and the Pope , though you think that the Word of God is against it ? ] Speak out Deceiver ; would you have all Men be of their Ruler's Religion , or not ? Should the Jews have believed the Church , that Christ was a Blasphemer , Deceiver and Traitor , and the Apostles Seditious Fellows ? Must we be Mahometans under Turks , Persians , and Indians , and Papists under Papists ? And why not Lutherans under Lutherans also ? And so our King shall be our God , and our Religion human . Or must Men judge what is true or false , good or bad , by their own understandings ? Do Kings and Prelates Rule Men , or Dogs , and Brutes ? If Cromwell say , He is Supreme , and King Charles say , He is Supreme , tell us whether we must not use our own understandings , to know which of them to believe and obey ? And must we not do so , if the World , the Flesh , and the Devil , say one thing , and Christ another ? 

And I pray you tell us , whether that be Religion that is not Divine , and whether it be not our own understanding , that must distinguish between God and Man ? Did not Vulgar Folly fit slothful Fools for Hell , they would easily perceive that Popery engaging them to renounce their own understandings , maketh us all Voluntary Brutes , to gratify the ambition of Men , and puts down God from being our Governor , and Man from being a Voluntary Subject , and turns the Kingdom of Christ into the Kingdom of Beasts . 

The Sixth Point accused . That St. Peter's Faith hath failed . 

Ans . Who could more ignorantly have stated a Controversy ? 

1.  protestants are further from the Opinion that Peter's Faith failed , than the greatest Papist Doctors : Some protestants hold that no Man that hath true saving Faith , doth ever totally lose it ; much lesle Peter . Others hold , that no Elect Person that hath true Faith , doth totally lose it : And so thought Augustine : Others add , that though some , as Calvin speaks , qualecunque semen sidei perderint , having no more immutable Grace than Adam had in Innocency , yet all that have a Confirmed Radicated Habit , persevere . And as to Peter's Faith , all save those called Arminians agree , ( as far as I know , ) that his Faith was not totally lost , nor Peter relapsed into a State of Damnation : But will all the Jesuits say as much ? 

We commonly hold that the Habit of Peter's Faith , must be distinguished from the Acts , and the Act of Assent from the Act that exciteth Confession and conquereth Opposition . And that Peter's Faith did not totally fail as to the Habit , nor the Assent , that Christ was the Messiah : But that it actually failed as to the latter Act , that should conquer Fear : Christ said to him and the rest before that , Why are ye fearful , OH ye of little Faith : Little Faith , is Faith failing in Degree . This is our Victory over the World , even our Faith , saith St. John. And did not Peter's Faith fail as to part of that Victory , when he Cursed and swore that he knew not the Man ? 

But by Peter's Faith , this Deceiver meaneth the Pope's Faith : And he instanceth in the Scribes and Pharisees , that were to be heard because they Sat in Mose's Chair , and in Cajaphas the Highpriest . Reader , see what Christians these Slaves of Christ's pretended Vicar are : Doth he not plainly infer , that the people did well that believed the Priests , and the Scribes , and Pharisees , that Christ was a Deceiver and worked Miracles by the Devil ; and was a Blasphemer and a Traitor , and deserved Death ; and that cried Away with him : Crucify him ? And what wonder if they obey their High Priest , when he Commands them to Murder thousands and Hundred thousands Saints Nicknamed Heretics , when they justify them that killed Christ and the Apostles , because the Church Commanded it , ( unless they will renounce their own plain Consequence ? ) 

And must we indeed believe , that the Pope's Faith never failed , because Peter did not ? then we must believe that General Councils that are their Church , have been very false and slanderous . Reader , I will give thee but an Account of one or two , ( when their own most flattering Historians have written of many a long time , that they were rather Apostatict , than Apostolici , and named but to keep the Account of time . ) 

The great General Council at Constance , ( that Burned John Hus and Jerome of Prague , for Truth and Honesty , ) finding three Popes Heading three Churches called Roman Catholics , had no way to return to Unity , but by putting down all three : With much ado they got down two of them : But Pope John at Rome had the fastest hold , and they had more ado to get him down ; and had not the Emperor resolved to back them , they had been foiled . Hereupon he is accused in the Council , First , by Fifty Four Articles , of such Monstrous Villainies , as one would think human Nature were uncapable of . afterward many more are added , of Poisoning Pope Alexander , of Incest with his Brother's Wife , and the Holy Nuns , and Ravishing Maids , and Adultery with Man's Wives , and much more ; and of Simony , almost incredible : And amongst the rest , ( which I forbear to recite , lest I tyre the Reader , ) they say and prove , that he was a notorious Simoniack , and a portinacious Heretic ; That oft before diverse Prelates , and other Honest Men , by the Devil's persuasion he pertinaciously said , asserted , dogmatized , and maintained , that there is no Life Eternal , nor any after this : And he said and pertinaciously believed , that Man's Soul dieth with the Body , and is extinct , as are the Bruits : And he said , that the Dead rise not , contrary to the Articles of the Resurrection , etc.  

These Articles being showed to the Pope , he confessed his Sin , and consented to be Deposed , and begged Mercy , but all in Hypocrisy , while he sought to get out of their Hands and Power . 

And now Reader , dost thou think that it is the mark of a Heretic , and deserveth Burning and Damnation , for a Man to think that this Pope's Faith failed ? Were it not for tiring you , I would repeat such Articles against many others of them , as would make you think , that not only the Heathen Philosophers , but even Mahomet was a Saint in comparison of these Swinish and Diabolical Popes . 

After this , the Great Council at Basil accused Eugenius the 4th . of Heresy and multitudes of horrid Crimes , and deposed him : But he outfaced them , and standing it out to the last , got the better , and the Succession is ever since continued from this Pope , that was deposed by a grand General Council . 

Before these , Pope John the 12th . was deposed by a Council at Rome , called by Otho the Emperor , for such horrid Villainies , as no Pagans' that we read of ever matched . Read them but in Baronius , and Binnius : Drinking Healths in Wine to the Devil , and calling at dice upon Jupiter and Venus , besides Murders , Simony , Incest and all Wickedness , are all consistent with Papal Faith : And if this be no failing , I shall grant that the Pope's Faith ( nor the Devils , ) can never fail . 

The Seventh accused Point . That the Church can Err , and hath Errors . 

Ans . This is truly and honestly recited : All protestants hold it , and marvel that all the Devils in Hell can so befool any as to deny it . 

1.  no Body can tell what it is that they call the Church , till they tell us : But what ever it is , except confirmed Angels and Souls in Heaven , if they cannot Err , God and our Saviour , and the Apostles have Erred . For they tell us that , [ we know but in part , ] and if any Man say that he hath no Sin , he is a Liar , 1 Joh. 1. CITIZEN  Cor. 13.12 . And in many things we offend all , Jam. 2.2 . Psal . 19.12 . Who can understand his Errors , cleanse thou me from secret faults . It was the Church of which God complaineth , that they always Err in their Hearts , and have not known God's ways , Psal . 95.10 . Heb. 3.10 . unless Caleb and Joshua were all the Church , Isa . 53.6 . All we like Sheep have gone astray , etc.  

If by the Church they mean the Priests , how full of Complaints against their Errors are all the Prophets , and History of the Kings and Chronicles ? Isa . 3.12 . OH my people , they that lead thee , cause thee to Err , and destroy the way of thy paths . Isa , 9.15 , 16.  For the Leaders of this people cause them to Err , and they that are led of them are destroyed . Mal. 2.  The Priest's Lips should keep knowledge , and they should seek the Law at his Mouth , for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts : But ye are departed out of the way , and ye have caused many to stumble at the Law : ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi , saith the Lord of Hosts : Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people , according as ye have not kept my ways , etc. Hos . 4.6 . My people are cut off for lack of knowledge : Because thou hast rejected knowledge , I will olso reject thee , that thou shalt be no Priest to me . Jer. 53.31 . The Prophet's prophecy falsely , and the Priests bear Rule by their means , and my people love to have it so , and what will ye do in the end hereof ? 2 Chron. 36.14 , 16 , 17.  All the chief of the Priests and the people Transgressed very much after the abominations of the Heathen : But they mocked the Messengers of the Lord , and despised his words , and misused his Prophets , till the wrath of the Lord arose against his people , and there was no healing ▪ so Isa . 1.2 , 3 , 4.  

Reader , is it not worse than Infidelity that these Men teach , if they say that the Church hath not Erred ? Was it no Error when Aaron set them up the Golden-calf ? nor when they went after the Idols of the Heathen , and worshipped in the High places ? Was it no Error to take Christ for a Deceiver and Blasphemer , worthy to be Crucified ? Was it no Error to reject the Gospel , and persecute the Apostles ? 

And had the Apostles no Error , when they believed not that Christ must Die for our Sins , and rise again , and ascend to Heaven , but thought he must then set up an Earthly Kingdom ? Was it no Error of Peter , Math. 16. to dissuade Christ from Suffering , for which Christ said , Get thee behind me Satan , thou savourest not the things that be of God , but those that be of Men ? And I think he Erred , when Paul openly rebuked his Separation , Gal. 2.  

If all the Church on Earth consist only of persons that have many Errors , than the whole Church hath many Errors : But the Antecedent is so true , that I take him that denyeth it , to be so far from knowing what the Church is , or what a Christian is , that he knoweth not what a Man is , and a Church of such are so unfit to be trusted as infallible , with all men's Salvation , that they have not the Wit of common illiterate Men , or Children : And if in all things else they were as mad as in these two Opinions . 1.  That the Church never did nor can Err.  

2.  And that all men's Senses must be denied for Transubstantiation ; doubtless they should be kept in Bedlam from human Converse . 

But for my part , I do not think that any Man of them not stark mad , doth believe himself that there are any men in the World that have no Error , ( that have any use of Understanding . ) He is far from knowing what Man is , that knoweth not that he swarmeth with Errors : I oftener doubt whether the greater number of most men's thoughts , are true or false . 

But if by the Church they mean only the Pope , if he cannot Err , than it is no Error to believe that there is no Life but this , and that Man's Soul dieth as the Beasts , and that it is lawful to Murder God's Servants by thousands , or hundred thousands ; if all the foresaid Popes in the ages 800 , 900 , 1000 , 1100 , Erred not , sure there is no such thing as Error in the World.  

But perhaps by the Church is meant General Councils . 

But 1.  If they Erred not in their Decrees , doth it follow that therefore they had no Error ? 

2.  But did not the second Council at Ephesus Err ? Where they tell us that Sola Petri Navicula , only the Pope's Messengers escaped the Heresy ? Did not the Council of Chalcedon Err in their Opinion , when it determined that the Reason of Rome's Primacy was because it was the Imperial Seat , & c. ? Were all the Councils free from Error that were for the Arrians ? And those that were against them ? And all that were for the Monothelites ? And those that were against them ? And all that were for Images , and those that were against them , & c. ? 

But at last they come to this , that the Pope may Err , and Councils may Err , but when they agree , they cannot Err : A happy meeting of Erring persons , if they are both cured by it . But sure it is not the meeting : For the Pope is at Rome , when the Council is at Trent , Ephesus , Constantinople , etc.  If a Council may Err , and the Pope Err , what proveth it impossible for them to agree in Error ? The Pope and Council at Lateran 4th . agreed for the Pope's deposing Princes that Exterminate not all out of their Dominions that deny Transubstantiation , etc.  Was this no Error ? 

Obj. But this was not a matter of Faith.  

Ans . Is it no matter of Faith with them , Whether it be Lawful or not , according to God's Law , to kill men that believe their Senses , and to depose Princes ? And whether Subjects may break their Oaths of Allegiance , and forsake their Prince if the Pope Command them , and all because their Prince will not be a Murderer or Persecutor ? These are no matters of Faith with them ? But sure they have made them Articles of their Religion . And either the Rebels , and Murderers ▪ and Pope and Council Err , or else God's Law and Gospel Err.  

The Judgement of the Reform Catholics is this , 

1.  That there is no man living without Error . 

2.  That the Apostles of Christ were Commissioned to deliver his Gospel to the World , by Word and Record , and had his promise of his Spirit to lead them into all Truth , and keep them from doing that Work Erroneously which they were commissioned to do : ( Thou not to make them absolutely free from Sin or Error in all other things . ) And therefore the Scripture written by them is free from Error , by Virtue of the special promise and Spirit . 

3.  That all true Christians , ( really regenerate , ) are free from all Error , inconsistent with true saving Faith , and Title to Salvation . 

4.  That therefore the Church as it signifieth only the said regenerate true Christians , hath no Damning Error , or none but what is pardoned , as consistent with saving Faith and Holiness . 

5.  That the Universal Visible Church , is the whole Company of men on Earth , that profess true saving Faith , and are by Covenant Vow Baptised into this Profession : And that all this true Visible Church , professeth no Error , inconsistent with their Profession of the foresaid saving Faith : Because the profession of saving Faith is essential to visible Christianity , and to the visible Church . 

For mark , that I say not that they profess no Error inconsistent with sincere Faith in themselves subjectively , nor yet that as to objective Faith , may not by unseen consequence overthrew it : For there is such a concatenation of Divine revealed Truths , that it is a doubtful case , whether any one Error ( which all men have , ) do not by remote Consequence subvert the very Foundations . But no true Visible Church or Christian , so professeth any one Error , as not to profess the essential points of Faith and Godliness , though they may think falsely that both are true . Therefore protestants teach , that unseen Consequences are not to be so charged on those that see them not , and hold fast the ( injured ) Truth , as if it were a known or direct denial of the Truth . 

6.  But every Church , and every man , being imperfect both in knowledge , Faith and Holiness , have all some Error : For to be objectively de fide , is to be of Divine Revelation : And all the Scripture is Divine Revelation . And if the question be , Whether any Pope , Council or Church , understand all the Scripture without any Error ? judge by Commentators , and common Experience . 

And now what saith the Deceiver against all this ? 

1.  He citeth Isa . 59.21 . God hath promised to preserve his Word in the Church : Ergo , the Church cannot Err ? A forged Consequence , no more followeth , but that the true Church shall not lose or forsake God's Word : For than it would cease to be the Church : 

But 1.  Not that the best Churches understand all that Word without any Error . 

2.  Nor that any particular Church visible may not apostatise , or turn Heretics , or corrupt God's Word , and forbid men to use it in a known Tongue , as the Papists do . 

Next he citeth Joh. 14.16 . As if all the Church had the same promise of the Spirit of Infallibility , as the Apostles had : If so , then , 

1.  Papists are none of the true Church , because they have many Errors . 

2.  And if the mayor part be the Church , rather than a minor Sect , than all other Christians that are against Popery are free from Error , for they are twice or thrice as many as the Papists . 

3.  And when the far greater part were Arrians , they were free from Error : Yea , the Council of Sirmium , to which Pope Liberius professed full consent . Or did Christ break his promise to all these ? 

4.  If the Pope or all his Prelates , have as full a promise of the Spirit as the Apostles , than they may write us a new Bible , and Word of God , as they did : no wonder then if the Canons and Decretals be as much God's Word as the Bible ? But why then do they not confirm their Canons by Miracles as the Apostles did ? And why did so many Popes contradict each other ? Had both Stephanus , Formosus , Nicholas , and the foresaid Johns that denied the Life to come , etc. the same Gift as the Apostles ? Surely we may well say to them as St. James , Show me thy Faith by thy Works ? They did show it by most odious Simony , Gluttony , Drunkenness , Lying with Maids and Wives , even at the Apostolic Doors , Murdering Christ's Members by thousands , Silencing faithful Preachers , Deposing Emperors , Commanding Perjury and Rebellion , even to Sons against their own Fathers : Forbidding all Church Worship of God to whole Kingdoms for many years , when a King will not obey the Pope : By such Works they show their Faith ! OH the power of Satan , and the horrid pravity of man , when such things are not only Justified , but trusted to for Justification , and made consistent with a Church that never Erred . 

Indeed these Errors crept in by Degrees , which maketh it difficult to Expositors of Scripture Prophecy , to know just the year when the mischief became so ripe as to prove Rome to be Babylon Apostate to Pagano-christianity , and the Pope to be Antichrist . But if I see a man Raging mad in Bedlam , I will not make it an Article of my Faith , that he is Sanae mentis , because I know not just when his amentia & deliratio , or Melancholy became a Mania , or Furor . 

The Deceiver also citeth , Mat. 18.17 . viz. Because men must hear the Church , where a Sinner dwelleth , that calleth him to Repentance after due Proof and Admonition , therefore the Pope and his Prelates cannot Err. An Argument liker a Derision , than a serious Proof : Did not the Pope then Err , when Bishops and Councils have in vain called him to Repent ? Doth not the Church Err then most damnably , that commands Murder , Treason , and most heinous Sin , and is the Leader of the Impenitent ? Must we take such then as Heathens and Publicans ? But as the man thinketh , so the Bell tinketh . Do but Fancy that by the [ Church , ] is meant only the Pope and his Clergy ; and that all is such Sin which the Pope calleth so , though God command us , and then all such Texts will seem to them to say what they would have them say . 

The man also citeth , Eph. 5.27 . viz. Christ will present his Regenerate Church , perfect and spotless in Judgement . What then ? Ergo , the Visible Church on Earth hath no Error or Spot : And Ergo , the Pope and his Clergy are this Visible perfect Church . And why not as well Constantinople , Alexandria , Antioch , or Jerusalem , the Mother Church ? Which part is it that is the whole , or indefectible ? What is profaining God's Word , if this be not ? If any should be forbidden the Scripture , it is these profaning Priests . 

The Eighth accused Point . That the Church hath been hidden and Invisible . 

Ans . We do not think that the Pope and his Clergy-church have been hidden and invisible . Their Wars , even in Italy and Rome , for many Ages made them Visible : Yea , and palpable too : The Kings and Emperors that they Fought against or Deposed knew them ; above 100000 Waldenses and Albigenses felt them to the Death : Quae Regio in terris talis non plena laboris . Whether this man knew not the protestants Judgement herein , or whether he would not have his Reader know it , I cannot tell ; but I shall tell you what it is . 

1.  protestants commonly hold , That as the Word [ Church ] signifieth the Company of sincere Christians , and Heart-consenters to the Baptismal Covenant , so it is invisible to Man that knoweth not the Heart . Inward Faith and Love which denominate them , are not seen by others , dare any deny this ? 

2.  But as the Word [ Church ] signifieth the Universality of men baptised professing Christianity in public Assemblies , so it was never invisible , since such public profession and Assemblies first began . 

3.  But when the Pagan Persecutors forced their meetings into Woods and Cells , and Pits , called Conventicles , and to Night-meetings , they were hidden from the Persecutors , as well as they could hide themselves : And so they were , when they hid themselves from the Arrian Persecution of Valens , Constantius , Gensericus , Hunnerichus , and from the Persians : And so were those of Tholouse , Piedmont , Bohemia , and others that hid themselves , and fled from the Crusadoes , under Simon Montford , and St. Domonick , and others that Murdered them . Christ himself fled to Egypt , and Galilee , from Persecutors . His Disciples were met secretly for fear of the Jews , when Christ appeared to them ; when Peter was in Prison , many were assembled by Night in a Conventicle , at the House of Marks Mother , to pray for him . The Papists themselves keep hidden Meetings , where they cannot have more public . 

4.  God hath not promised his Church , such constant Prosperity , as that in every Age any Nation shall have public Liberty without all Persecution ; much lesle that they shall be still uppermost , and Masters of the World , and have Kings and Emperors always for them . 

5.  But we cannot say , that yet the Church hath been so low since the days of Constantine , that all Princes have disowned the Essentials of Christianity , and we hope it never will be so . 

6.  But all Ages and parts of the Church , have not been equally pure and sound : In some Ages the Arrians were most : In the Reign of Theodosius Junior , Anastasius , etc. the Eutichians prevailed : In the days of Philippicus the Monothelites prevailed , so that at one of their Councils Binius saith , There were Innumerable Bishops : In one Emperor's time those prevailed that were against Images ; in Irene's and Theodora's times , those that were for them : Sometime the Bishop of Rome had most Power , and sometime the Bishop of Constantinople , and Alexandria : For an Hundred years , even much of Italy forsaken him , and set up a Patriarch at Aquileia as their Head : Through many Ages the Citizens of Rome themselves expelled him or Fought against him . 

Now in all these Cases , the Church , as professing Christinanity , was still Visible : But which of all the parts was the purest and soundest , was known to none but the sound parts themselves . And when and where the Errors became so great as really to nullify , or invalidate the Profession of Christianity this was known only to those near , that had opportunity to know the mind of the accused : For Noxa Caput sequitur : One man , though a Prince or Prelate , cannot make all his Subjects Heretics by his Error . 

So that nothing hath been more Visible , than that there have still been professed Christians , and so an Universal visible Church on Earth . But which parts of this Church have de facto been Sound , and which Corrupt , and what Errors have nullified their Profession , and what only blemished it , this hath never been visible to the Erroneous ; ( For no man knoweth that he Erreth ; ) but it hath been visible to the Sound . And so , that the Church of Rome yet Professeth Christianity , we know : But whether their Errors prove them Babylon , or nullify their Christianity , must be known only by trying the guilty Individuals . 

Here the Cheaters say to the Ignorant , If the Church hath been always Visible , where was your Church before Luther ? 

Ans . 1.  Wherever there were men professing Christianity and Baptised , and not Apostatising . Were there none such in the World , must we be put to prove where there were any Christians before Luther ? Were not the Hearers grossly Ignorant , the Cheaters would have no Confidence in such Fopperies as these . 

Obj. But the Church of Rome professed Christianity before Luther . 

Ans . It did so , and as Christians we are of the same Church with them , we know no Universal Church , but the Christian as such , that is , all Christians as only Headed by Christ If you cannot tell whether before Luther there were any Christians in the World , ( in Abassia , Egypt , Syria , Armenia , the Greeks , Muscovites , etc. ) it 's your gross ignorance of History . But whether Papists , Arrians , Eutychians , Nestorians , Monothelites , Phantasians , Image-worshippers , do invalidate their profession of Christianity , by their contrary Errors and Crimes , it much more concerneth themselves , than us to inquire and judge . 

But though those that nullify not their profession of Christianity , are all of the same Church Universal that we are of , yet we profess that their New human Church , which is [ only the Pope as Head , and all that adhere to him as such , ] are no Church of Christ at all . All Christians as such are parts of the Christian Church : But a Policy consisting of a Vice-christ and his Subjects , is a Rellellious Usurpation , and no Church , Forma denominat : As Christ is the Head , all are of the Church that truly cleave to him as Head : As the Pope is the pretended Head , they are all a pack of Rebels . 

And now what an ignorant Cant is it to say , The Church cannot Apostatise ; Ergo , it cannot Err ; Ergo , the Pope of Rome , and his hireling Clergy cannot Apostatise ; and Ergo , They cannot Err ! Tell me , whether Rome be all the World ? And whether the Church of Rome , and the Christian World , be Words of the same signification in any Dictionary ? And whether an Alexandrian Catholic , or a C.P. are Catholic , be not as good Sense , as a Roman Catholic ? And whether the Texts or Fathers , that you name profanely , will prove that the Church of C.P. Alexandria , Antioch , or Jerusalem , can never Err , or Apostatise , or be Invisible ? And whether your own Jesuits confess not that Rome shall do so too , in the Reign of Antichrist ? 

In the mean time take this answer . 

1.  The Church as intimately Sanctified , and sincere , was ever invisible . 

2.  The Church Universal , as professing Christianity , was ever Visible , though oft hid by Persecution . 

3.  Whether Rome , C.P. Jerusalem be a true Church or Apostate , is invisible to those that knew them not . 

4.  That the Papal Church , as informed by a Universal Vice-christ , is a false Church , is Notorious . This is our Judgement . 

The Ninth accused Point . That the Church was not always to remain Catholic or Universal : And that the Church of Rome is not such a Church . 

Ans . The first part is a mere flat Lie : We hold that the Church is always to remain Universal , till it be presented perfect in Glory : If it remain not Universal , what becomes of it ? Is it a part of something else , or annihilated ? If Christ have no Church , he is no Head of the Church , and so no Christ . What Protestant Church ever said any such thing , as you falsely charge them with ? 

That the Church of Rome is not such a Church , that is , Is not the Universal Church , indeed we not only say , but think the contrary , sitter for a man Drunk than Sober ? What ? is Rome all the World ? Is Abassia , America , Mesopotamia , Muscovy , Asia , Thrace , England , Scotland , Sweden , Denmark , no part of the World , yea , of the Christian World ? And is not the Christian World , the Church Universal ? Reader , here is a Controversy worthy the Wits , Learning and Honesty of all the Famous Fathers , and Doctors , and Jugglers of the Roman Catholic Church . The Question is , Which of the Rooms in the House is the whole House ? One saith that the Kitchen , or the Coal-house , or the House of Office , is the whole House . We protestants say , that no one Room is the whole , but Hall , Parlours , Dining-room , and all the Chambers , and Closets , and Kitchen , are the whole ; and if the Coal-house , and House of Office will needs be parts , we will not contend with them , but we will never grant that they are either the whole , or the best part : Thou by Fire and Stink , they think to force us to it . 

But the ancient Writers distinguish between the Catholic Church , and a Catholic Church : By the first is meant the whole Church : By the second is meant such a particular Church , as is not Schismatical , but a true and sound part of the whole . 

But what could these Self-condemners say more against themselves , than thus openly to confess , that their Sect claimeth to be the whole Church , and so Traitorously unchurcheth two or three parts of the Church of Christ , and Damneth most Christians , for not being Traitors to Christ , as they ? 

To confute his base abuse of Scripture , is needless and irksome . 

The Tenth point accused . That the Church's Unity , is not necessary in al● p●i●ts of Faith.  

Ans . This we verily hold , for all that God hath revealed in Scripture to be believed , are points of Faith , ( if the Word be used intelligibly by these men : ) But all the points of Genealogies , Topography , Chronology , Prophecy in Scripture , are revealed to be believed , therefore they are points of Faith ; and if Unity in all these is necessary to the Unity of the Church , than no Church on Earth hath Unity : Certainly Rome hath not , whose Commentators and Doctors disagree about many hundred Texts of Scripture , and Sixtus 5th . and Clemens 8th . Popes , about the very Translation of many hundred Texts . 

These men must now say , that we are not bound to believe all God's Word , or else they must confess that their Church hath not Unity . 

That which Reform Catholics hold is , 1.  First points of Faith , ( or revealed to be believed , ) are some of them Essential to Christianity , and of necessity to Salvation , and some but Intergrals , if not some Accidents : The first all the True Church agreeth in : The second not : As who is Antichrist ? or Babylon ? or the Ten-horned , or Two-horned Beast in the Revelations ? What is the Time , Times , and half a Time , with an Hundred such ? But in general , all believe that all God's Word is true . It might convince these men , in that it was long before all the Churches received all the Canonical Books of Scripture , and yet all received not all their Apocryphal Books . And are these out of the Church ? Or are none of these Books to be believed ? 

The Eleventh Point accused . That St. Peter was not Ordained by Christ the first Head or Chief among the Apostles ; and that among the Twelve , none was greater or lesser than other . 

Ans . Mere Falsehood , as undistinguished . The word Head is ambiguous ; this Writer hath a Head , such as it is , that other Heads much differ from . Reform Catholics hold , that Peter is called first in numbering them : That he was by Christ in many instances , preferred before others : That he was an Eminent Speaker , and worker of Miracles : That all the Apostles were not Equal in parts and worth ; but some herein greater than other . What , was Judas no lesser than the rest , that was a Thief and Traitor ? John was Eminently the Disciple whom Jesus loved . 

But we hold , 1.  That as John was not made Lord or Ruler of the rest , by being Loved more , so Peter's Pre-eminence made him no Master or Ruler of the rest : The twelve Apostles were chosen Relatively , to the twelve Tribes . Peter as Reuben was the first , and denied Christ , and was called Satan , with a Get behind me , ( Mat. 16. ) as Reuben defiled his Fathers Bed. But as Levi was the third , so was James the first Sanctified Apostle : And as Juda the fourth , is called the Lawgiver , from whom the Sceptre should not depart , etc. so John the fourth is the Disciple of Eminent Love ; and Love is the Everlasting Grace , when Faith and Prophecy cease . But Christ made no one of them Ruler of the rest . 

Proved , 1.  no Text speaketh any such thing : And the Headship of Governing Power , would have been of such grand necessity to be known , that Christ and his Apostles must needs have plainly and oft inculcated it . 

2.  Peter never Exercised any such Power ; what mention is there of any Laws or Mandates of his to the other Apostles ? 

3.  The rest never sought to him for Laws or Orders . 

4.  The Schism and Controversies of Christians were never decided by appealing to him as the Judge . 

5.  When some at Corinth would have made him their Head , and said , I am of Cephas , Paul reproveth them as carnal , saying of all , What are they but Ministers , by whom ye believed ? 

6.  Paul reproveth him , Gal. 2.  

7.  The Jewish Christians contend against him , for Eating with Gentiles , Act. 11. whom he satisfieth by proof from God , and not by pleading his Supremacy . 

8.  He never once claimed any such Power . 

9  Paul , 1 Cor. 12. tells us of none in the Church greater than Apostles . But the rest were Apostles as well as he . 

10.  no such Article was ever put into the Church's Creed . 

We grant that Christ did in instituting the Apostles Office , institute a disparity of Ministers in his Church , and this to be continued in the Ordinary continued part of their Works , but not in the Extraordinary . And we grant that in putting Peter first , Christ intimated , that among men of the same Office , there may for Order sake be a Priority ; as the Precedent of a Synod or College , or the Foreman of a Jury , or a Chief-justice , or the Speaker of a Parliament : God is not the God of Confusion , but of Order , as in all the Churches : If a Parish or an Independent Church have one grave Pastor , with diverse young Assistants , that were but his Scholars , nature will give him some awing Pre-eminence among them . We are not against such a Primacy among Bishops , or Arch-bishops : But this is nothing to a Governing Office. And if Peter had had such , what 's that to the Pope of Rome ? 

The Twelfth Point accused . That a Woman may be Head , or Supreme Governess of the Church in all Causes , as the late Queen Elizabeth was . 

Ans . A cheat by Confusion and Equivocation . 

The Church hath two sorts of Government : One by the Word of God , and the Keys called Ecclesiastical . The other by the Sword , called Princely or Magistratical : We never had King or Queen that claimed the former , and none but Enemies of Government deny the latter : Queen Elizabeth and all our Kings since have publicly disclaimed the Priest by Office of Words , Keys and Sacraments , which maketh the Clergy Tryers and Judges what to Preach , and whom to Baptise and receive to Church Communion , absolve or Excommunicate . But ask this Deceiver , Must the Church have none to Govern by the Sword ? All Christians are the Church , and so all Christian Princes are deposed , because they are Christians . Or must the Clergy have no such Government over them ? Yes , the Pope , say the Papal Canons ; he is Sword-bearer over the Clergy : So you see what Church-power is come to . But I trow , few Papist Kings will grant that they have no Sword-government over the Clergy , lest every Priest be Master of their Houses , Wives , and Lives . The King is no Physicain , or Philosopher , no Architect , Shipwright , Pilot , etc. but may he not be King and Ruler of all these ? He is no Clergyman or Priest , but the Ruler of the Clergy . 

But they say , it must not be in Causes Ecclesiastical . Ans . Causes Ecclesiastical have two sorts of Government , in order to two Ends. As if one be accused for Preaching against God or Christ , or the Life to come ; or for Perjury , Adultery , Murder , etc.  Here the Bishops are Judges , ( and the Church , ) whether this man be Guilty in order to his Communion or Excommunication , or admonition . But the King and his Judges are to Judge , whether he be Guilty , and so whether to be Imprisoned , Fined , Banished , etc. so far as Causes of Religion or Church , are to be punished by the Sword , the King is Head or Governor , and Judge : who would think that a sort of men that deny this , should have the Face to say that they are Loyal to Kings , or any forcing Government : Must Kings Burn or Kill , as many thousands at the Pope's command as the Pope will call Heretics , and yet never have power to judge whether they are such , and do deserve it ? O! how much worse than Hangmen , would such men make all Kings and Magistrates ! 

Was not all the Christian World in a sad case then , when the Pope was under the Arrian Goths , and the Subject of a Foreign Arian must Rule all Kings and Kingdoms ? 

no man of Brains can be ignorant that Popedom or Prelacy , do not always make men mortified Saints , ( that oft have been scarce Men , much lesle Christians ; ) nor that the Prince hath a great Power , both in Choosing and Ruling the Clergy that are his Subjects . It fell out happily , that Theodorick the Arian , ( and diverse Spanish Arian Kings , ) were an honest sort of men ; but sure they were very mighty Princes at Rome , when one Subject of an Arrian Goth , was Ruler of all the Kings and Souls on Earth , ( de jure , say our Deceivers . ) And if the Turk should possess Rome , as he doth C.P. all Kings and Nations must be subject to his Subject ? And what Power he hath over the four Patriarches of C.P. Alexandria , Antioch , and Jerusalem , is too well known . And when Baronius , Binnius , etc. tell us of famous Whores , ( Marozia , and Theodora , ) that made , and Ruled and unmade Popes , how was the World Governed ? As it was said by a Lord Mayor's Child , that he Ruled all London , saying , my Father Ruleth London , and my Mother Ruleth my Father , and I Rule my Mother ; so might it be said , these Whores Ruled all the Kings and Nations of Christians on Earth ; ( if the Roman claim be Currant , for they made and Ruled Popes that claimed the Rule of all the World. ) O! how much greater was a Roman Whore , ( Marozia , Theodora , etc. ) than Pallas , Venus , or the great Diana of the Ephesians ! But the mischief was , that they were mutable , and could unmake a Pope , as well as make him , and set the City and Country by the Ears : as Aequa Venus Teucris ; Pallas iviqua fuit . And if all Kings must be Subjects to the Subject , ( or Chaplains ) of him that can win Rome , let us wish that he may not be a Mahometan , Pagan , or Arian : And why said I an Arian , when an Anti-arian Pope , can Murder Christians by thousands , when a Theodorick would not have hurt them . 

The Thirteenth Point accused . That Antichrist shall not be a particular man , and the Pope is Antichrist . 

Ans . This is Popish Stating Cases ; protestants find in the Creed , the Name of Christ , but not the Name of Antichrist ; and therefore while they know and trust Christ , they think it not necessary to Salvation to know Antichrist : But they believe Christ , who said , that many should come in his Name saying , I am Christ and deceive many , even before the Destruction of the Jews ; and rhey believe St. John , that said , there are many Antichrists already : The Fathers and Papists say , there is some one Great Antichrist to come towards the end of the World : Most Protestant's think it is Antichrist that is described , in 2 These . 2. and rev. 12.13 , 17.  To confute King James , Bishop George Downame , Dr. Henry more , ( above all ) Mr. Mede , Cluverus , Grasserus , etc. will require more than this Writers Impertinencies . There are many protestants that think it a mere mistake , that there will be any one Antichrist so Eminent as to obscure all the rest : And they pretend not to judge , of Antichrist by the Apocalypse , but by the Ten Commandments , and all the Gospel : And they believe , that he is Antichrist that usurpeth Christ's Prerogative , and yet opposeth his Kingdom : And such they think the Eastern Antichrist Mahomet is the most notorious , and the Western Antichrist , the Pope is his Second ; in that he claimeth Christ's Prerogative of Governing all Nations of the Earth as Vice-christ , and yet by Lies , Malice and Blood , suppresses his true Gospel , Grace and Kingdom ; confute this if you can ; Amending would be your best defence . 

We doubt not but Antichrists past , have been Individual men , such was Barchocheba , and some say Herod , and some Dioclesian , but undoubtedly Mahomet : And if the Pope be the Western Antichrist , it is the Individual Popes that are such ; but many of those Individuals may make a Succession of Antichristian Policy . Answer Dr. more , and Cluveru● of this , if you are able . 

We lay not our opposition to Popery chiefly , on the dark Revelation , Prophecy , or on the question , Who is the Antichrist : But on the plain Word of God : If we find a Succession of men , claiming Omnipotency and Christ's Prerogative , to Govern all Kings and Nations on Earth , and this by bare and base Usurpation and Novelty ; and find these men set up their numerous , false treasonable , inhuman Canons , and forbid and revile God's Law and Word , and find them turning God's Worship into unintelligible Mummery and Stage-shows , and Ceremony , and find them living at Leeches on Blood , yea , on the Blood of thousands of the best Christians , and damning and separating from the far greater part of the Christian World , because they refuse Subjection to this usurping Vice-christ , and judging all to Fire and Ruin that renounce not all human Senses , and worship not Bread pretended to be deified by daily numerous Miracles of the basest Priests , and deposing Kings that will not be such Executioners , and justifying their Subjects in Perjury and Rebellion : We will not differ with you for the Name , whether you will call those that are such , Antichrists , or Diabolists : Whether such a State be the Babylon , or far worse , as sinning against more Light , and by more horrid abuse of the Name of Christ against himself . 

The Fourteenth accused Point . That no man , nor any but God , can forgive or retain Sins . 

Ans . False as undistinguished . We hold , 1.  That to forgive Sin , being the forgiving of the Punishment of Sin , and the obligation thereto , 1.  Parents may on just cause forgive Corrective punishment to their Children , and Masters to their Servants . 

2.  Magistrates may on just cause , forgive Corporal punishment to Subjects . 

3.  Equals may forgive Injuries to Friends and Enemies . 

4.  Pastor's may on just cause , forgive the Church penalties , of Excommunication , which they had power to inflict : And all the Flock must forgive and receive the penitent accordingly . 

5.  When a Sinner by Faith and Repentance , truly performeth the Condition of Gods pardon expressed in Scripture , the Ministers of Christ are by Office authorised to declare and pronounce him pardoned by God , and by the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper to Invest him in a pardoned State , by delivering him a Sealed pardon : But only Suppositively , If his Faith and Repentance be sincere , else he hath not God's pardon of the Divine Punishment . This is all true and plain , and enough . 

But we detest their Doctrine that say , 1.  That men can pardon the Spiritual and Eternal Punishment , any otherwise than consequently declaring and delivering God's pardon , which shall hold good , if the Priest refuse to declare or deliver it . 

2.  Or that Popes or Priests pardon , Purgatory pains , and Masses , and Money , and the Redundance of Saints Merits , and pleasing the Pope , conduce thereto . 

But if you will Speak so absurdly , as to say , that if the King send a pardon to a Traitor or Murderer , the Messenger pardoned him ; we leave you to your phrases . 

None of the Texts or Fathers cited , speak for any more than what we hold . The Pastors are to declare men pardoned , that God pardoneth : And while they so judge according to God's Word , it is pardoned in Heaven : But not if they pardon the wicked and impenitent . 

The Fifteenth accused Point . That we ought not to confess our Sins to any man but to God only . 

Ans . This is a mere impudent Lie.  

1.  We ought to confess our Sin , to the Magistrate at his Judicature , when we are justly accused of it . 

2.  And to those that we have injured , when it is needful to repair the wrong , or to procure their forgiveness . 

3.  And to those that we have tempted into Sin , or encouraged in it , when it is needful to their Repentance . 

4.  And to some faithful bosom Friend , when it is needful that such know our Faults , that they may watch over us , or advice us , or pray for our pardon and deliverance . 

5.  And when in Sickness , danger of Death , or other Affliction , we get the Pastors of the Church to pray for us ; we should confess our Sin to them , that they may know on what cause they speak to God for our forgiveness . 

6.  And in any case of Gild , Trouble , Fear , or Difficulty , in which we need the Pastor's Counsel for our safety , ease and peace of Conscience , ourselves and other Friends being insufficient hereto , we should confess our Sins to the Pastors , whose advice we seek : As a Patient must truly open his Case to his Physician , and a Client to his Councillor , if he will not be deceived , by deceiving them . Is all this no Confession ? 

But protestants believe not , 1.  That we must go to a Physician for every Flea-biting , or Scratch , or Cut-finger , or to a Lawyer to give him an account of all our Actions , Money , ot Lands ; nor to Priests in cases that ourselves or ordinary Friends can safely and satisfactorily resolve . 

2.  Nor that our Confessor must needs be a Papist Priest , or one chosen by the Pope , or our Enemies ; and not by ourselves . 

3.  Nor that we must open all our Secrets to him ; or make any Confession , which will do more hurt than good ; nor over far to trust the Fidelity of a Knave , nor a suspected or untried person . 

4.  And we have reason to suspect them that are importunate to know our Secrets . 

5.  And when Confession is required , as in order to obtain a false forged pardon , and to set up the Domination of Usurpers over man's Consciences , and over the World , it 's then unlawful : If protestants would force Papists to confess all their secret Sins to them , would not this same Deceiver say , it were unlawful ? 

The Sixteenth accused Point . That Pardons and Indulgences were not in the Apostles time . 

Ans . Another mere Lie , as undistinguished . Such Pardons as I before owned were in the Apostles times : But the Popish feigned pardons were not . 

The Seventeenth accused Point . That the actions and passions of the Saints do serve for nothing to the Church . 

Ans . Most impudent calumny and falsehood . 1.  We hold that the Prayers of all the Saints on Earth , are of great importance for the Church's welfare . 

2.  And that their Doctrine , Counsel , and Reproof is so too , they being the Lights of the World , and the Salt of the Earth . 

3.  And that their Example is of grea● benefit to the Church and World , whi●● their Light so shines before men , that the● may see their good works , and glorify the●● Father which is in Heaven . 

4.  And their Charitable Works of themselves , sure are beneficial to the Church : And so is their Defence of the Truth . 

5.  And their Sufferings Glorify God's Power , and his promises of reward ; and they encourage others to Victorious Constancy . Do all these serve for nothing to the Church ? 

6.  Yea , we are so far from holding what he feigneth , that it is not the least cause of our hatred of Popery , that it liveth by the Defamations , Slander , Persecution , and cruel Murder of Saints . 

7.  Yea , as Abel's Blood cried against Cain , so the Blood of Martyrs , and dead Saints , cryeth for Vengeance against the Persecutors of the Church . 

8.  And seeing Christ saith , that the Children of the Resurrection are like or equal to the Angels , we have reason to believe that even now they are perfected Spirits , Heb. 12.24 . And knowing that Angels are very serviceable and beneficial to the Church on Earth , we know not how far the Spirits of the just are so too . 

But we have a sufficient Mediator and Advocate with the Father , whose Sacrifice , Merits , and Advocation are perfect , and need no supplement : And the Spirits of the just do praise him as saved by his Merits , and never boast that they have of their own a Redundancy to save others . But we all with thankfulness confess , that God useth to bless the Houses of the Faithful ; the Children for the Parent's sake , and hath expressed this in the Decalogue , and by many Promises : Yea , that he would have spared Sodom , had there been but Ten Righteous persons there : And a Potiphars House , and a Prison may be blessed in part for Josephs sake . And when Parents are Dead , this blessing may be on their Children , through many Generations . And God remembered Abraham , when his Posterity provoked him . David had a special promise for his Seed . None of this is denied by us . 

But , 1.  There is no Merit in any man's Works , but their Rewardableness by God's free Grace and promise , for the sake of Christ's meritorious Righteousness , Sacrifice , and Intercession , their Imperfection being pardoned through him , and their Holiness amiable to God.  

2.  no man shall be saved for another's Merit , or Holiness , or Works , that is not truly Regenerate and Holy himself . 

The Eighteenth accused Point . That no man can do Works of Supererrogation . 

Ans . Supererrogation is a sustian word of your own , by which you may mean what you please . 

1.  no man can perform to God , more Duty than he oweth him : it 's a Contradiction ; Duty is quod debetur . 

2.  no man can profit God by any thing that he doth . 

3.  no man , save Christ , lived wirhout all Sin : And he that sinneth doth not all his Duty , or keep all God's Law perfectly . And he that doth not all , doth not all and more . 

4.  There is no Moral good done by any man , which was not his Duty , and God's Law commanded not : For God's Law is perfect , and therefore obliges to all Moral good : And as Sin is the Transgression of the Law , so Moral good is the conform Obedience to the Law.  

5.  God hath not Counsels to Moral action , which are not obliging Laws , and make not our Duty . For to keep them is Moral good , and the Law were imperfect if it obliged not to all such good . If the Counsel oblige ut norma officii , it 's a Law : If it oblige not , it 's vain . 

6.  But there are many actions that are neither Commanded , nor Counselled , nor forbidden : But those are not Moral actions , as being no objects of our Choosing or Refusing by Reasons Conduct . The nictus oculorum , our Breathing , our Pulse , the Circulation of the Blood , etc. are no Moral acts , Commanded or forbidden , but necessitated : Man maketh it no act of deliberation and choice , which Foot he shall set forward first , or just how many Steps he shall go in a Day ; which of two equal Eggs he shall Eat , and an hundred such . These are neither Duty nor Sin , Commanded , nor Counselled , nor forbidden ; neither virtuous or vicious . 

7.  And there are innumerable actions , that are not the Matter of any Common-law or Counsel , and so as such , are neither Sin nor Duty , which yet as Circumstantiated and Clothed with Accidents , are to this or that man either Duty or Sin.  

This not understood , maketh these Ignorant Casuists abuse the words of Christ and Paul , about Chastity , and Marriage . And because Christ saith , every man cannot receive this Saying , and Paul , she hath not Sinned : He that Marrieth doth well , and he that doth not , doth better ; they gather that there are Moral actions which are not best , and yet no Sin.  

The true plain solution is from the two last Considerations . 1.  God hath made no Law commanding or forbidding Marriage , or Celibate as such , or in Common . To Mary is no Sin , considered merely as Marriage . 2.  But God hath made Laws against hurtful and injurious Marriages , and to guide men to know , when Marrying is a Duty or a Sin. 3.  And if any one's case were so neutral , as that it could not be discerned , whether Marrying were a hurt or benefit , it would be no Moral , eligible or refuseable action . 4.  But to some it is a great Duty by accidents , and to some a great Sin. Therefore Paul never meant that it was no man's duty , and no man's sin , but only that simply as Marriage it was no man's duty or sin , or the matter of a commanding or forbidding Law , but only by accident , it may be such to one more than to another . 

That this is Paul's meaning , the Papists must confess . For 1.  Do not they say that the Marriage of Priests , Friars and Nuns are Sin ? 2.  If any one Mary an Infidel , or utterly unsuitable Person , without necessity , against Parent's wills , or one that is impotent , or hath the Pox , or that he cannot maintain , & c. ? Is not this a heinous Sin ? What else signify God's Law , and man's , against unlawful Marriages . 

And if one cannot live chastely without Marriage , and Parents command it , it is not a Sin to refuse ? The Law saith , Let all things be done to Edification , and whether ye Eat or Drink , or whatever ye do , do all to the glory of God. And is it only Counsel and no Command , to Mary or not Mary , as it makes to God's Glory or against it ? There are few actions of a man's Life , that make so much to his hurt , and utter misery , as unwise and unmeet Marrying . And is this on Sin ? May they not see Paul's meaning then , if they were but willing ? It is hard to imagine a case in which so important an action as Marriage , can be neither Sin nor Duty . 

2.  But sometime men use the word [ Sin , ] and [ Sinners , ] for mere Wickedness , and such Sin as is inconsistent with a state of Salvation . And we easily grant , that all Sins are not such Sins as these ; But God's Law is perfect , though man be imperfect , and forbiddeth all Sin , even the least . 

3.  But see the Heresies of Popery ? This man here saith , [ To do that which is Counselled , is not necessary , because one may nevertheless be saved : But he who omitteth what is commanded , ( unless he do penance , ) cannot escape Eternal pains . ] 

1.  See here what a frivolous Counsellor they make Christ , when it 's not necessary to follow his Counsel . 

2.  See here how they make Necessity to be only of that which a man cannot be saved without : When Saul a Persecutor , and Blasphemer , an Infidel , Murderer , etc. may be saved , if he be truly Convicted : Obedience hath its Necessity , though we knew that God would forgive Disobedience , to the Convicted . 

3.  See here how they damn themselves and all mankind , every man living omitteth what is commanded many hundred times , for which he doth not that which they call Penance . He is a Liar , that saith he hath no Sin , specially of Omission . God's Law bindeth us all to Believe , to Hope , to desire Holiness and Heaven , to love God and our Neighbours , and our Enemies , with a stronger degree of Faith , Hope , Desire , and Love , than we do : Every Prayer , and Meditation is sinfully defective : Every hour hath some omission of improvement : And all this is not remembered , nor all confessed to a Priest , nor all known or observed by any Sinner : And some omission we are guilty of at our very Death , by gradual defect of Faith , Hope , Patience , Love , Content , and Joy. And must all these go to Hell ? 

4.  Seeing by Penance they mean not bare Repentance , but making God satisfaction by a task , of Penalty laid on them by a Priest , ye see how they damn themselves , would be the Masters of all others Salvation , by their Pennances . 

5.  But it 's like that Purgatory is included by them in Pennances ; or else no man should go to Purgatory , but all to Hell : For all have many omissions of commanded Duty , which they did no Penance for in this Life . 

6.  But you see of how little value they judge Christ's Sacrifice and Merit , that pardoneth no omission of a duty without Penance , and Satisfaction truly . 

The Nineteenth accused Point . That by the fall of Adam , we have all lest our Freewill , and that it is not in our power to choose good , but only Evil.  

Ans . Reader , I must desire thee not to judge of all the Learned Papists , by this Deceiver : For if thou hast read the loads of Voluminous Controversies about Grace and Freewill among themselves , it will remain doubtful to thee , whether this man's stating the protestants Doctrine , prove him ignorant of it , or a willing Cheater . He tells you not , that this is as much a Controversy among themselves , as with the Prorestants . He tells you not , how Augustine and Palagius managed it , and that their Pope Celestine took Augustine's part : He tells you not , that the Thomists , Dominicans , Oratorians , and most Nominals , and Scotists , say as much against Freewill as we do , and we as much for it as they . He supposeth that you never read what Lombaerd , Aquinas , Bradwardine , Cajetane , Ferrariensis , Zumel , Bannez , Alvarez , Aegedius Romi , Capreolus , and a Multitude more , say as much , and many more , against Freewill , than the protestants : He tells you , not that even the Learned Jesuits , Suarez , Vasquez , Bellarmine , with Penottus , and many such , are as much against Freewill , as most Learned protestants . The man takes you for a Herd of silly Animals , that know not but that he saith true , what falsehood soever he shall tell you : But the truth of the Controversy is this : 

1.  The protestants loathe so silly a stating of Controversies , as this chat of Freewill without distinction : And so of Power . 

2.  They know that Physical , Moral , and Political Freedom of will , are not all one thing . Physical Freedom or Power , is that by which the natural faculty of the will , can determine itself to act , ( not without a superior Cause , but ) without any extrinsic or intrinsic Coactor , or necessitating cause of Evil.  

Moral Freedom and Power , is that by which the will is from under the overstrong Bias of a vicious Disposition , or deceitful Argument . 

3.  Political Freedom is , when no Law of God or Man obliges him to any Evil , but all to good . 

Prothestants hold , 1.  That Physical Liberty and Power , is common to man , as man That is , that he wants not natural faculties to choose aright , but a right Inclination : And that he sinneth not for want of such faculties , but for want of their right disposition and action . 

2.  That all men have just so much , and no more Moral Liberty and power , as they have of God's Grace , to Relieve their vitiated wills and dispositions , and to help them in the act . no man is freed from vicious Inclinations , further than God's Grace freeth him , which is much more where there is special Grace and strong , than where there is but common Grace or weak . And that the Thraldom or Impotency of the Vicious , is but the disease of their wills , and aggravation of their Sin : e. g. Where the Drunkard or Fornicator saith , I cannot forbear my Sin : He is so much the worse and more unexcusable . 

3.  Every man hath not only Political Liberty to avoid Sin , but much more , even Gods urgent Precepts , Promises , and Threats : God doth not only give us Leave , but commands us not to Sin.  

1.  It is the very Essence of the will to be a natural power of faculty of willing good and nilling evil , as such , as so apprehended by the intellect , and commanding the inferior faculties , some politically , and some despotically , some difficultly , some easily , some perfectly , some imperfectly , according to its resolution and their receptivity . 

2.  Libertas hominis , when a man may have what he chooseth , is more than Libertas Voluntatis , which is but the Mode of its self determination ; as without constraint it is a self determining principle , of its own elicit acts , considered comparitively . 

Which is , 1.  Liberty of contradiction , or Exercise , viz , to will or not will , nill or not nill . 2.  Liberty of Contrariety , or Specification of the Act , viz. To will this or nill it . 3.  Liberty of Competition , to will This object or That : To nill This or That , ( of which see Robert Baronius his Metaphysics . ) 

The will hath such various sorts of Liberty , and the word [ Freewill ] is so ambiguous , that it is a shame , and irksome to read a pretended Teacher , state a case thus indistinctly , Whether we have Freewill or power to choose good and refuse evil : He is no man that hath no such Freewill and power . And no man hath all sorts of Freewill and power . Nay , as Liberty is opposed to Necessity ▪ every man is necessitated to will Good as Good , and nill Evil as Evil , and can do no otherwise : And whenever he willeth Evil , it is sub ratione bon● , mistaking it for good : And whoever nillleth good , doth it falsely , sub ratione malt . The will is free from Constraint to Sin : God will not so constrain it : Men , Devils , Objects , cannot . He that had read but their Pennattus and Gibi●uf only , would see what a shame it is thus confusedly to talk for or against Freewill . 

But that which protestants deny , is this . 

1.  They deny that man's will in his unregenerate State , is free from a Vicious Inclination , or from the Conduct of an Erring Intellect , or from the Bias and Temptation of Sensuality , or vitiated Senses and Imagination ; or from the Temptations of Satan and the World.  

2.  They deny that the will thus Vitiated and Tempted , will ever deliver itself without God's Spirit and Grace ; being rather inclined to grow worse . 

3.  They deny that this Grace is perfect in any in this Life , as without all defect in degree , or totally freeth any man from all Sin : and therefore they deny that any man's will is perfectly and inculpably free from every degree of vice and danger . 

4.  And as that degree of common Grace which is in the unregenerate , is but such as consisteth with the predominance or Reign of Sin , so that will of every unregenerate man in that pravity , is as a slave to it 's own , vicious disposition , and to Error , Objects , and Temptations ; being not delivered as to the predominance . 

5.  Yet we believe that common Grace is such , that these men are not utterly void of all good Inclination , and knowledge ; and therefore that in Moral Sense , every man can do more good , and lesle Evil than he doth : And that men perish , because not only they will not ( by pravity ) do what they have natural strength to do , but also because they will not choose and do what morally they might have chosen and done , as to the will's own power . 

6.  And we still say , that whenever a man sinneth , it was not because it was naturally impossible to do otherwise , ( as to touch the Moon , to see without Eyes , or through the Earth , etc. ) nor for want of natural faculties , nor doth God by Grace , give man other natural faculties , making him an Animal of another Species : But men sin because they will sin , and they will because they are tempted and now viciously inclined ; from which their wills are made free only in that measure , that God's Grace doth sanctify them . 

If our Priest would have told us , what there is in all this Doctrine of Freewill , that he dare accuse , ( and what dare he not cccuse , ) we should have seen cause to consider of his Arguments : But now he citeth Scripture as in a Dream . 

The Twentieth accused Point . That it is impossible to keep the Commandments of God , though assisted with all his Grace and the Holy Ghost . 

Ans . Still mere Confusion . protestants distinguish , 1.  Impossibility as natural or Moral ; 2.  Of Grace as perfect or Imperfect , and as determitately Operative , or only Assisting and not Determining . 

And they hold , 1.  That no Duty is Impossible , ( or the performing of no Commandment , ) by mere Physical Impossibility : The reason is , because God commands no Physical Impossibles : Such as before named , to speak without a Tongue , to see without Light or Object , to know things not knowable or revealed , to read without any Teaching or Learning , etc.  

If a man indeed disable himself , as put out his Eyes that he may not read , or cut out his Tongue that he may not Preach ; the disabling act is viciously aggravated , from all the good to which he disabled himself , as if it still had been his Duty : But we cannot say that God still commands him when Blind to Read , or when Dumb to Speak , etc.  Indeed God changes not his Law ; but recipitur ad modum recipientis : The man hath changed his Capacity , and is now no Subject capable of such an Obligation or Command ; though he be capable of punishment for disabling himself , and Non-performance : Sin is no further Sin than it is Voluntary , by the wills Omission or Act , immediately or mediately . 

2.  But that it is Morally by our pravity now Impossible , for any man to keep all God's Commandments and never Sin ; what needs there more than sad experience of the matter of Fact.  

1.  Did he ever know the man himself , that from his first use of reason to his Death , did spend every minute of his time as God commanded him , and did Believe , and Love God and Man , and all good , with as great Love as God commanded him ? And was as free from every Fault , Thought , Passion , Desire , Fear , Care , Trouble , Pleasure , Word and Deed as God commanded ? He would be no small Sinner that were so self ignorant , proud , unhumbled , as to say that he is no Sinner . 

2.  Why else do these Priests force all men to confess their Sins to them , if men be such as never sinned ? 

3.  Why do they compose all their Liturgies and Offices for their Churches , with Confessions of Sin ; and Prayers for Forgiveness ? 

4.  Why do they Baptise all , if they have no Sin ? And in what Sense do they give them the Eucharist ? 

5.  How little use do they feign such men to have of a pardoning Saviour ? 

6.  In what Sense shall such say the Lords Prayer , Forgive us our Sins or Trespasses ? 

7.  Doth not the Text expressly call him a Liar that saith he hath no Sin ; as aforesaid : And Christ condemn the Pharisee that justified himself , and justified the confessing Publican ? 

But it 's like he will say that he did not mean , that any man doth keep all the Commands , but that he can do it , though he do not . Ans . I again say , 1.  He can as to natural strength , if he were but perfectly and constantly willing : But it cannot be that he should be so willing without Grace , and Grace is not perfect in this Life . 2.  The more he boasteth of his Power to keep all God's Laws , the more he condemneth himself that can and will not . 3.  And frustra fit potentia quae nunquam & a nemine reducitur in actum : If he confess that no man doth it , he must confess such a Moral impossibility as the Prophet meant , that said , Can the Leopard change his Spots , or the Blackmore his Skin ? then may they that are accustomed to do Evil , learn to do well . 

But perhaps he meant not that it is possible to keep all the Commands , for all our Lives , but for some short time ? I answer , 1.  While a man hath the use of his Reason , he doth not reach the commanded degree of Faith , Love , Joy , Heavenlyness , one moment of time : But indeed , when a man is asleep , in a Swoon , an Apoplexy , stark mad , etc. he may for that time break no Command , nor keep any . 

But perhaps he speaketh but of sincere Obedience , and not of absolute sinless perfection . Ans . If so , he is a deceiver to feign that we deny it : But their Doctrine of Perfection and Supererogation is contrary . 

Obj. But he speaketh not what man can do without Grace , but by its assistance . Ans . Grace maketh no man absolutely sinless , and perfect in this Life . 

Let him know , that protestants do not only say that man by God's Grace may keep God's Commandments sincerely , ( though not sinlesly and perfectly , ) but that no man of Age and Reason shall be saved that doth not so . 

2.  And that though all our Obedience be imperfect , the Imperfections are pardoned , and our Obedience accepted and rewarded , for the Merits of the perfect Obedience , Sacrifice , and Intercession of our Saviour . 

The One and Twentieth accused Point . That Faith only Justifieth , and that good Works are not absolutely necessary to Salvation . 

Ans . Many wordy Controversies are made about things , that in Sense men are commonly agreed in . 1.  We all believe God's Word , that they were deceived that thought they could be justified either by the Law of Innocency or Nature , or the Law of Moses , or any meritorious Works of their own , without , or as a supplement to the Sacrifice , Merits and free Grace of Christ our Saviour , and Faith in him . 

2.  By Faith is meant Christianity : In the Gospel it is all one to be a Believer , a Disciple of Christ , and to be a Christian. The Christian Faith is that which is expressed in the Baptismal Covenant , believing in and giving up ourselves to , God the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost : To Christ as our Prophet , Priest and King , to be saved by his Merits and free Grace : And this is put in opposition to the Works of Adam's or Moses Law , or any other that are conceited to suffice and merit , without the foresaid Redemption by Christ . And is not this the true Doctrine of all true Christians ? 

2.  These good Works that are our Obedience to the Law of Christ , are but the performance of our Baptismal Covenant , and the Fruits of Faith , without which it is dead Hypocrisy , and are of absolute necessity to Salvation , to all that have time to do them . 

Against the charge , That we are Sinners deserving Hell , we are justified by Christ believed in : Against the accusation , That we are Infidels , Ungodly , Hypocrites , we must be justified by our Faith , Godliness , and Works , or perish . 

But we do also hold , 1.  That if a man be convicted , as the Thief on the Cross , and should die suddenly , no outward good which he cannot do , is absolutely necessary to his Salvation , but only his inward Faith , Love , and Repentance , and Confession if able . 

2.  We do firmly hold , that Works done with a conceit of obliging God by Merit , in commutative Justice , or as conceited sufficient without a Saviour , and the pardon of their failing , are such as more further Damnation than Salvation , at least in those that hear the Gospel . 

3.  And we are no Papists , and therefore believe not that ignorant words of Prayer in a Tongue not understood , and wearing Relics , and going on Pilgrimages , and needless confessing to Priests , and subjection to an universal Vice-christ , and living upon the Blood of Saints , Murdering the Living , and praying to the Dead , and the Sons honouring their Days , Relics and Monuments , whom their Fathers Burned or Persecuted ; these are not Good Works necessary to Salvation , as is plain , Math. 23. and Revel . 14.17 , 18 , etc. We do , with Paul , renounce all Works of our own , that are thought to make the Reward to be of Debt and not of Grace , and that are set in the least opposition or competition with Christ's Merits , or any place save commanded Subordination to him . 

The Two and Twentieth accused Point . That no Good Works are Meritorious . 

Ans . The word Merit is ambiguous , and so abused by Papists , that indeed the protestants are shyer of it than the Fathers were , lest the use of it should cherish the abuse . 

1.  There is Merit of man , and of God. 2.  And this in Commutative Justice ( conceited , ) or only in Governing distributive Justice . 3.  And this is either according to the Law of Innocency or Moses , or according to the Law of Christ . 

Now protestants hold , 1.  As to the Name , that 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , worthy and worthiness , are Scripture words , and may be used ; and Merit is but of the same signification , and we condemn not the Ancients that so used it : But the worst Sense must not be cherished . 

2.  Do they hold , 1.  That no Creature can merit of God in Commutative Justice , that giveth quid pro quo to his Benefit : God receives not from Man or Angels ; unless he will call Acceptance and Complacence Receiving . 

3.  None but Christ merited of strict Governing Justice , according to the Law of Senseless Innocence , nor by any Works that will save man from the charge of Sin and desert of Death . 

3.  All at Age that will be saved , must have good Works according to their Capacity , for Christ is the Author of Salvation , to all those that obey him . Heb. 5.9 ▪ Thou they obey not an unknown Priest at Rome . 

But all these Works are our Obedience to Christ's own healing Government , such as the Laws of a Physician to the Sick. And we all agree , that he will Judge ( that is , Justify or Condemn in Judgement ) all men according to their Works , that is , according to the Law and its promulgation , by which in their several Ages and Nations he governed them . 

4.  Your own Doctors that know what they say , tell us , that by Merit , they mean nothing but the Rewardable quality of their acts , related to God's promise through Christ's Merits . And doth any Protestant Church deny this ? 

The Three and Twentieth accused Point . That Faith once had , cannot possibly be lost . 

Ans . Still confused slander and deceit . 

protestants hold , 1.  That the Faith not rooted , prevalent and saving , is frequently lost , such as you call sides informis . 

2.  That even sincere Faith may be lost , as to the Act for some little time , that is , suspended in a deliquium , as Peter and theirs , Luk. 24. that said , We trusted this had been he , etc.  

3.  That many loose to the Death some degree of their habitual Faith.  

4.  But they differ in the rest , just as you do among yourselves , Dominicans and Jesuits . 1.  Some think that no one ( at Age at least ) in a State of such Faith as at present would have saved him , doth ever totally lose it . 2.  Some think that many have but such loseable Grace as Adam had . 1.  As being not Elect to Salvation , and therefore not in God's decree of Preservation and Perseverance , 2.  As having a Faith not Rooted and Confirmed : And that these may fall from a justified State : But that , 1.  The Elect. 2.  Nor the Confirmed , never fall away . This was Augustine's Judgement , and his followers , of which see Vossii Theses . And is that Jesuit honest that feigneth this proper to the protestants , where the Controversy is the same among themselves ? 

The Four and Twentieth accused Point . That God by his will and inevitable decree , hath ordained from all Eternity , who shall be Damned and who Saved . 

Ans . What a false Deceiver is this , that would make us believe , that this is proper to the protestants , when it is the Common Doctrine not only of the Dominicans , but of the very Jesuits themselves , and all their Church . 

1.  None of them dare say , that men are Damned or Saved without God's foreknowledge , nor against his absolute will , by overcoming his Power . 

2.  None of them dare say , that this foreknowledge of God was not from Eternity , but that he knew one day what he knew not before . 

3.  All that the Jesuits themselves say , is , that God decreed it upon this foreknowledge , and that he hath a Scientia media , what will come to pass , positis quibusdam , if such and such things be done by man ; and that this foreknowledge in order of Nature is before the Decree , but both from Eternity . But Cardin Cameracensis ( Petrus de Aliaco , ) hath irrefragably confuted this imposing Priority and Posteriority of act on God ; though I think some Divine acts as denominated only Relatively from the order of Objects , may be so distinguished . 

4.  In all this , we say not , that God hath by his will and decree ordained from Eternity , ( or in time ) that men shall sin , or will and choose Evil , but only who shall be Damned for sin , which God never willed or caused , but foresaw ; not as if he were an idle Spectator , but a willing suspender of his own acts , so far as to leave Sinners to their self-determining wills . 

5.  But God being the cause of Good , and Men and Devils of Evil , our Salvation is of him , and our Destruction of ourselves ; and therefore God decreeth not Man's Salvation or Sanctification , merely on foresight of our Faith , but decreeth our Faith itself : Sin he permitteth , but Faith , he effecteth , and decreeth to Effect . 

6.  As for them that feign that we say , that God decreeth that some shall be Saved and others Damned however they Live ; it is but the dictates of the Father of Lies : We say that God at once decreeth the End , and the Means ; as he doth not decree that men shall live though they neither Eat nor Drink , nor that they shall have Corn , though they neither Blow nor Sow , but that they shall Eat and Drink , and live thereby ; and that they shall Blow and Sow , and manure the Soil , and so have Corn.  So God doth at once decree , [ that this and that man shall have the means of Grace , ( especially a Saviour and the Gospel , ) and shall faithfully use them , and be Sanctified by them , and sincerely obey God , and overcome the World , the Flesh and the Devil , and persevere to the End , and that for Christ's Merits he will give them the Grace of his Spirit , and pardon their Sins , and bring them to Glory . ] All this is our Decree of God.  

But he doth not decree that men shall sin , that they may be Damned : For sin is no Work of God , nor a means appointed by him for Man's Damnation , no more than a Righteous King doth make men Traitors or Murderers , that he may hang them . But he justly denyeth his Grace to many that forfeit it by wilful Resistance , Disobedience , and Contempt ; though he take not the forfeiture of his Elect.  

He is deceived and wrongeth God that maketh him the Author of Man's sin : And so doth he that feigneth God to send his Son to redeem the World , and his Word and Ministers to call them , and his Spirit to renew them , and all this at Random , not knowing whether it may not be all lost , or leaving it chiefly to the Freewill of them , whose wills are contrarily inclined and vitiated ? Whether Christ and all his Preparations shall be lost ? 

The plain Christian that holdeth but to these two points , that our Destruction is of ourselves , but our help and Salvation of God , and that God is the first and chief cause of all good , and Men and Devils of all Evil , is liker to be wise with Sobriety and Safety , than the Ignorant Intruders into God's Secrets , and the prating Calumniators that speak Evil of the things which they understand not ; and reproach those that speak not as Rashly and Ignorantly as themselves , even in some equivocal unexplained words 

Methinks Papists should be so kind to God , as seeing the Pope can tell who is a Damned Heretic , and to be killed , ( even all that believe not in the Pope , or are not his Subjects , ) and who is in Purgatory , and how long he shall stay there : Or how many years Torment the Pope can shorten : They should allow God to know a little more , and that not as one whose Power and Grace is Conquered by impotent Worms , against his absolute William  

The Five and Twentieth accused Point . That every one ought Infallibly to assure himself of his Salvation , and to believe that he is of the number of the Predestinate . 

Ans . I would fain excuse the man as far as I can , and therefore I hope , that as the man was excusable that did eat Snakes for Snigs , ( or Eels , ) so he read some Pamphlet of an Antimonian , either Crisp or Saltmarsh , or some other such , or talked with some of their silly Novices , and thought he had Conversed with the Reform Catholics , or read the Confessions of the Reform Churches . 

The first Sentence is a Fundamental Truth , and a damnable Falsehood , as the Equivocal words are variously understood . And is it not pity that the Priests of the Infallible Church , should put things so different into the same words , and that in an accusation of so many Churches and Nations ; when yet God himself is feigned by them to write by his Spirit so Unintelligibly , that without these Doctors skilful Exposition , it is but like to make men Heretics , ( that is , Adversaries to the Pope and his Clergy . ) 

To assure ourselves of our Salvation [ may mean , to give all diligence to make our Salvation infallibly sure : This every one ought to do . ] 

Or it may mean , that every man ought to believe it as an infallible Truth , that he shall be saved . ] The next Sentence seemeth to make this his meaning in the first : Which if it be , he is a false Calumniator of the Reform Churches . 

But if the first be his meaning , and he deny it , he is an open Enemy to Man's Salvation . 

What is all the Scripture for , and all our Religion , but to make sure of our Salvation ? 2 Pet. 1. 10.  Give all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure . And if no man can be sure , to what purpose hath God made so many promises of it , expressing the Conditions , ( to them that believe , that love God , that forsake all for him , ) if no man can know whether he perform the Condition , and that he is within this promise ? Why doth God lay down so many signs to difference the Children of God from the Children of the Devil , if they cannot be discerned ? Sure Heaven and Hell be not like ; and yet are the Heirs of Heaven and Hell undistinguishable ? Is the Image of God and the Devil so like that none can know them asunder ? no , not the man that hath had them both ? And why doth God so aften call on Believers to Rejoice , if they cannot know whether they shall be in Heaven and Hell for ever ? If you say , he is not sure to persevere , many Papists grant that the Confirmed may . And why may not Bradford , Hooper , Sanders , and thousands else , that are Dying by the Sacred bloodthirsty Church , be assured when they are Dying , that they have forsaken Life and all for Christ . 

But oportet mendacem esse memorem still : Why do you not tell men when the Pope is selling them Pardons , and saving them out of Purgatory , that when all 's done they can have no assurance of Salvation ? yea , that they ought not to endeavour to make it sure ? And whose now is the safe Church and Religion , if a Papist can never be sure that he shall be saved in your Church and Religion ; nor sure that he is in a State of Salvation ? That is , that he is a true Christian , and hath Charity , and is an honest man ? 

2.  A man that hath got true and clear Evidence that he hath a Confirmed Faith , and Hope , and loveth God , as God above all , ought consequently to take it for an infallible Truth , that so Dying , he shall be saved : Else he must either give God the Lie , that hath promised it , or he must be supposed to be deceived when he thinketh that he believeth and loveth God.  

But that every man must believe that he is of the Number of the Predestinate to Salvation , is a damnable Doctrine , because it requireth all the Million of ungodly men to believe a Lie , yea to believe it as a Divine Truth , and to make God both the Author of the Lie , and of the deceit of ourselves by this Command . And when Million are not of the Number of Sanctified , and therefore not of the Predestinate , if they so continue , what can more harden them in their Impenitence , than to tell them that they must all believe that they shall be saved ? How many hundred Protestant Books , and thousand Sermons tell the World that it is the Preachers earnest drift , to save Wicked men from such Presumption , which makes men call them terrible Preachers ? Every man is bound to believe God's promise to be true , and that he himself shall be saved if he be a true penitent sanctified Christian , and so continue , and that else he shall be Damned ; and not to distrust God as unwilling to continue the Grace he hath given him . 

The Six and Twentieth accused Point . That every man hath not an Angel Guardian or Keeper . 

Ans . 1.  We hold that every true Christian , even the least , hath his Angel who beholdeth the Face of his Father in Heaven : And that Angels are God's Ministering Spirits , for the good of his Elect ; and that they guard us and pitch their Tents about us , and bear us up in their Hands , and keep us in and from Danger , and rejoice at the Conversion of a Sinner , and that we live in invisible Communion with them , and shall be like them . 

2.  But whether every Christian have one Angel to himself alone , that guardeth no other , or one Angel guard Hundreds or thousands : Or whether some ( as Lower Officers are set over a few , and others as General Officers are over whole Kingdoms , ) we leave to the determination of the Infallible Pope , who is bolder with God's Secrets than we dare be . 

3.  But till now , I thought they had not been so presumptuous , as to assert that every man hath a Guardian Angel. Where is there one word of God for this ? Is every man an Heir of Salvation , or one of Christ's little ones , or under his promise ? Had Cain and Judas such Angels , and all the Sodomites ? 

Christ made it an argument of Terror to Persecutors , that they offend such as had such Angels with God : And dare you paint them as Devils , and Burn them , or Murder them by the Dragon's Dragoons , if you believe that every man hath such a Guardian Angel ? Surely Saints , though called Heretics , have such . 

The Seven and Twentieth accused Point . That the Holy Angels pray not for us , nor know our Thoughts and desires on Earth . 

Ans . A false accusation . We say not that they pray not for us , nor that they know not our desires , nor any of our Thoughts . We say that Angels are no such Strangers to Saints and sincere Godliness , as not to know that all Godly men desire the Hallowing of God's Name , the coming of his Kingdom , and the doing of his Will on Earth as it is done in Heaven : They that know what Grace is , and what our Prayers are , know much of our desires : And we do not think that Angels know lesle of our Thoughts than Devils , who we feel to our Trouble are not altogether unacquainted with them . And those Angels that rejoice at a Sinners Conversion , are not unacquainted with it . 

And as to their Praying , we know not how it is that Angels express their desires to God ; but we all agree that they desire our welfare , and therefore may be said to pray for it , if all notified Desire be Prayer . We suppose that they know and Love us , far better than we know and Love each other . 

But we read that the Heretical Gnostics , or their like , did deceive men , [ by Voluntary Humility , and worshipping of Angels , intruding into those things which they had not seen , vainly puffed up by a fleshly mind , ] Col. 2.18 , 19  Therefore we dare not pretend to Papal Infallibility , nor boldly to conjecture , how far it is that our Thoughts are known to Angels , nor how much they are ignorant of them ; nor when , or how oft , or how far , or in what manner they pray for us : How far particularly , and how far only generally , etc.  Had this knowledge been needful to us , God would have revealed it : Much lesle do we know what Angel of what departed Soul of a Saint hath the care or charge of our Sheep , and of our Cattles , and who of our Pigs and Geese , and who of our Fruits and Corn ; abundance of these things we leave to the Infallible Church : As we do their acquaintance in Purgatory , while our acquaintance and Conversation in Heaven , can reach no higher than the prospect which we have in and by the Glass of Scripture Revelation . 

The Eight and Twentieth accused Point . That we may not pray to them . 

Ans . 1.  We may desire Living Saints to pray for us , and this may be called Praying to them : So a Child prayeth to his Father or Master . But we pray not to dead Saints nor Angels : 1.  Because we have an hundred Commands to pray to God , and not one to pray to them , and where there is no Law , there is no Transgression or Sin. Therefore while we are sure it is no Sin to forbear it , and know not but it is Sin to do it , we go the safe way : If they say , it is against the Pope's Law or his Clergies , we say with Paul , it is a small thing to us to be judged of man , ( who can but kill our Bodies , ) we have one that judgeth us , even the Lord Let the Pope Damn us if he can . 

2.  As the first Commandment forbiddeth us to have any God but one , so the second forbiddeth us to worship so as the Heathens did their Idols , because it is Bodily interpretative Idolatry and Scandal : But the Heathens used to pray to their under Deities , whom they judged to be much like that which the Papists judge of Angels , and praying to Invisible Spirits is to imitate them as scandalously as praying toward Images : no wonder therefore that you so usually leave out the second Commandment . 

3.  God's Word is the Rule of all acceptable Religious Worship , ( though but a General Rule in many Modes and Circumstances , ) and therefore we fear swerving from it . 

4.  Angels themselves never demanded it , nor Christ bespoke it for them , yea , they twice forbade it John : See thou do it not . 

5.  Angels being more holy than we , are more for the Glory of God , and the hatred of Creature arrogance and Idolatry ; and as God calleth himself specially Jealous against bodily Worship like the Idolaters , in the second Commandment , so Angels are more jealous against it than we are . 

6.  As Angels said , See thou do it not , so contrarily Satan tempted Christ , with the offer of the Kingdoms and glory of the World , to fall down and worship him . Therefore we had rather harken to the Angels than to Devils : And fear , they that do otherwise , worship Devils for Angels , because only Devils have sought such Worship . And the Devil oft turneth himself as into an Angel of Light to deceive , as his Ministers do into Ministers of Righteousness . 

7.  We know not when Angels hear us , and when they do not : And therefore know not when and how to pray to them . 

8.  As we are sure that God would have bid us do it , if he would have us do it , so we know that he is all sufficient to tell them what and when to do for us ; and to pray to him is the way to secure their Service . 

9  And we know that there is one Mediator between God and Man , whose Intercession is sufficient . 

10.  And we know that Christians praying to Angels and separated Souls , greatly hardeneth the Heathen World that pray to separated Souls , and Daemons that are their Sub-deities . 

11.  And when these men say not , we must pray to Angels , but we may do it ; what horrid Murderers are they , that will Burn , Kill , and Damn men , for not doing all that they think they may do , without any must or Divine Obligation ? Why take they it not at best , as part of their Works of Supererrogation ? 

12.  The Deceiver profaning the Scripture , 1.  Puts Jacobs Benediction desiring the Angels guard on his Son , to be a prayer to Angels . Yea , when the Fathers say , that Angel was Christ himself . 

2.  And Jacobs words to the Angel that appeared to him , to be a reason for our praying to unseen Spirits : If they appear to us , we shall the better know what and when to speak to them . 

The Nine and Twentieth accused Point . That the Angels cannot help us . 

Ans . This is too gross stating of Controversies for a Collier or a Cobbler , though not for a Doctor of Infallible Church . 

1.  We say , that not only an Angel , but a Man , an Ass , ( as Balaams , ) a blast of Wind , Flies , Frogs , Lice ( as in Egypt , ) can help us , when God sendeth them to help us . 

2.  We believe that Angels are specially Empowred and willing for it . So that they are Gods Eminent Ministering Spirits for the good of his Elect.  

3.  But we believe that they can do nothing for us , but what God empowreth and Commissioneth them to do . He that Curseth those that trust in man , and make Flesh their Arm , instead of trusting God , will so Curse them that so trust in Angels . But yet we may and must trust man and Angels , according to their several measures of Gods authorising and enabling them . The great Mercies of Protection and assistance that God giveth us by Angels , is the matter of much of our daily thanks to God : And I am daily thankful to Angels themselves ; and I think I love them better than any Friends on Earth , because they are better , and love God better : And I am the willinger to Die , because I shall go to the World of Love , where as God and Christ is Love , so Angels love God , and we for his sake , better than I love myself , while our Papists that pray to Angels , devour the blood of Saints . 

The Thirtieth accused Point . That no Saint Deceased , hath after appeared to any on Earth . 

Ans . A mere false Calumny . What Protestant Confessions have any such Article ? How know we what hath been done of that kind in all the World to this day ? Read but Dr. more , and Mr. Glanvils Books of Apparitions , and Mr. Ambrose , and Mr. Lawrences' Books of our Communion with Angels . Read Zanchius , Luther , Melaucton , Manlius , Lavalu , etc. and you may see that this is no Protestant assertion . We know that Christ appeared to Saul , and that many Bodies of Saints arose at Christ's Death , and appeared to many : And what the Witch of Endor showed as Samuel , we know not : We only say , 1.  That it is much liker that Apparitions are oftest made by Devils or bad Spirits that dwell in the lower Regions , than that blessed Spirits come from Heaven . 2.  But yet seeing Angels thence appear , we cannot say that Holy Souls never do . 3.  But that God will not have it to be any ordinary or trusty means for Man's Salvation : For we cannot know when it is a Holy Soul , and when a Devil : And they that will not believe Moses and the Prophets , ( and Christ , ) neither will they believe though one rose from the Dead : it 's no Article of our Faith , that they ever did appear or not . And if these men think otherwise , why must this Opinion more than Ten thousand such , be obtruded as necessary on all others ? 

The One and Thirtieth accused Point . That the Saints Deceased , know not what passeth here on Earth . 

Ans . Confusion and Calumny . There is knowledge Immediate by Intention , and Mediate by Notification from others . And there is knowledge perfect , and in part . 

1.  We take not on us to know the extent of the knowledge of separated Souls . And these proud Infallible men know no more than we , but so much lesle , in that they know not their own Ignorance : Yet neither Lily , nor any Astrologer , nor Conjurer , that ever I heard of , that pretendeth the greatest acquaintance with Spirits , did ever pretend to make their Opinions of them necessary to Salvation ; nor to kill all Dissenters as Heretics , but the Vice-christ and his Church , we cannot know all that they pretend to know . And why must we needs know whether ever such Souls appeared ? If they did , we will try what they are by the word of God , which is our Rule . And why must we know how much they know ? We know that they are not Omniscient , nor Omnipresent . And how much they know by present Intention , not one of these Pretenders know . That they know more than we , and know much by the notices of Angels or one another , and specially of the General State of Christ's Kingdom on Earth , we make no doubt : And what Christ himself maketh known to them , we know not . O! what sort of men are these , that forbid us to Read the Word of God , and yet obtrude on us ( on dismal Penalties , ) so many things more than all the Bible doth contain ! 

The Two and Thirtieth accused Point . That the Saints pray not for us . 

Ans . Equivocal and false . 1.  All Saints on Earth pray for us : It is part of the Communion of Saints . 

2.  We say of the Prayer of departed Souls , the same that we said before of the Prayer of Angels . Their General Requests for the Church and against Enemies , proveth not to us what extent their knowledge of particulars hath , nor what particulars they ask , nor that every Christian can say that they pray for him , and that in his particular cases . 

The Three and Thirtieth accused Point . That we ought not to beseech God , to grant our prayers in favour of the Saints , or their Merits : Nor do we receive any benefit thereby . 

Ans . This is before answered to the 17th . Accusation . I told you that we hold , that God blesseth Children for their Holy Parents sakes , their Relation making the welfare of the one to be the others : And God blessed others for Josephs sake , and sometimes preserveth whole Countries for the sake of the Godly there : And on what account , and how far , I will not again repeat . 

And the Union and Communion of Saints in Heaven and Earth are so near , that I dare not say that God doth any good to any one faithful Soul , that is not in some respect for the sake of all the rest ; as the Cure of an aching Tooth is for the sake of all the Body : That is , 1.  For the good of the whole . 2.  And done out of love to the whole . 

But this will not satisfy confounding Deceivers . no doubt it is dead Saints that he meaneth : And what he meaneth by Merits , I suppose he knoweth not himself ; or else he would have told us : How far we own , or abhor the pretence of Merits , I showed before . All Saints are saved by the full sufficient Merits of Christ , and have none at all of their own , unless the amiableness of Grace freely given them be called their Merits , as a thankful Child more deserveth his Father's Love , ( that is , is more Lovely ) than a Rebel that scorneth him ; and a piece of Gold deserveth to be esteemed above Dirt ; and a Nightingale above a Toad . Yea their own Jesuit Vasquez , not only denieth all Merit of God in Commutative Justice , ( as all save Romans and a few such Sots do , ) but also in point of distributive Justice , by which he seemeth to deny Merit more than protestants do . For by Merit we mean but Moral aptitude , for the reward of a free Benefactor who is also Rector , when the ordering of a free Gift suspended on official Conditions , is sapientially made a means of procuring Obedience . 

Whatever God hath promised to give us for other Man's sake , that he will so give . But our Faith shall not go beyond his Promise : If God have told us any where , who Saint Nicolas , and St. Becket , and St. Christopher , and St. Joan , and St. Jane , and St. Winifrid are , and what they were to us more than others , and that they were real Saints , and that he hath promised us Mercy for their sakes , and bid us pray to him for their Meriting for us ; let them show us this in his Word . But if it be only the Pope's Command and promise , let his Subjects obey and trust it . 

We are certain that none but Saints are saved : And why then must I go to God , for the Merits of St. Nicholas , or St. Bridget , any more than for the Merits of all the rest , which are many Million ? 

As God is jealous of his Honour against Idols , so is he of Christ's Honour against Antichrists and false Mediators , and we must do nothing that seemeth to ascribe any part of Christ's proper Office of Mediation to any Creature : And doth it not seem so , if we pray , Lord hear , pardon and save me for the Merits of Becket or Bridget , etc.  For what more can we say of the Merits of Christ ? 

But still mark , that these men say not that , we must pray thus for the Merit of Saints , but that we may : And must all be Burned or Damned that will not do all that the Pope thinks they maey do ? 

That we receive no benefit by them , is a forged Calumny and not our Doctrine : We believe that the Jews had benefit by Abraham , Moses , David , when they were Dead : And that the Reform Churches have had benefit by the Blood of the Martyrs , shed by the Bloodthirsty Papists to this day ; and that the whole Church hath benefit by the writings of Chrysostom , Nazianzen , Augustine , etc. Luther , Calvin , etc.  

The Four and Thirtieth accused Point . That we ought not expressly to pray them to pray or intercede to God for us . 

Ans . There was enough said of this before , about praying to Angels . 

When God bids us pray to dead Man's Souls , we will do it . Till than your saying we may do it , proveth neither may nor must to us . Why then cannot you keep your [ may ] to yourselves ? Never a Conjurer in England can tell us , how far Souls in Heaven can hear , nor where and when they are present or within hearing ; nor which of them are so , whether all , or one , or which ; no nor whether those Saints that understood not Latin on Earth , do understand Latin Prayers sent up from Earth , wh●●● the Speaker himself understandeth them not . Alas ! Christian Reader , what a dark uncertain Worship , like Charming , would this Infallible Church compel men to offer the most Holy God , while they accuse his Word of ensnaring dangerous obscurity . 

We will pray to those alive , that we know do hear us , to pray to God for us , for the sake of Christ : But it 's but profanation of the Scripture , to say , that because Luke 16 , a man in Hell supposed to see and hear Abraham , did pray him to send Lazarus on Earth ; therefore we that neither see nor hear the Dead , should pray to them . But Dives prayed in vain , and so may you . And what if those Souls should prove to be in Purgatory ? Must we pray both to them that are in Purgatory , and for them also ? And is it certain that the Pope and all his Church , are sure which Saint is not in Purgatory , when all are there or worse ( say they , ) that ever sinned and did not Penance for it ? 

The Five and Thirtieth accused Point . That the Bones or Relics of the Saints are not to be kept or reserved ; no Virtue proceeding from them after they be once dead . 

Ans . 1.  Where hath God Commanded us to keep them , for the Virtue that proceedeth from them ? 

2.  We deny not but a man may keep a Skeleton or Skull , and if it be his Fathers , we will accuse him no higher than of Imprudence and Passion . But what proof have you of Virtue proceeding from Bones , till you see it by experience ? Is it any appointed means for God to work Miracles by ? And how know you that all were Saints that the Pope calleth so ? Had all the Debauched Popes of Anno 800 , 900 , 1000 , skill Infallible to know Saints from Hypocrites ? And hath God promised Virtue to all their Bones ? And are you sure that they are their Bones ? Alas ! what numerous Tricks have men to trust to , to deceive themselves and others , that yet will not obey Christ's plain Commands , and trust his promise ! 

The Six and Thirtieth accused Point . That Creatures cannot be Sanctified , or made more holy than they are already of their own Nature . 

Ans . A downright slander . 1.  We believe that all men that shall be saved , are or shall be Sanctified , and made more holy than they are of their own Nature . 

2.  We believe that to the Pure , all things are Pure , and are Sanctified by the Word and Prayer : And that whatever we do , we should do it to the glory of God : And when a Christian devoteth and useth his Food , Estate , and all to God's Service , it is Sanctified . 

3.  We believe that a Temple , a Font , a Table , and Utensils , may well be separated from common uses to God's Worship : And that Separation is a sanctifying of them . 

To be Sanctified or Holy , is but to be separated from common use , to Gods special Service , according to the nature of the thing used . 

1.  Godly men are Sanctified and Saints , because by Soul-consent and Devotion , and Practice , they are sincerely separated to God , from the slavery of the World , the Flesh and the Devil ; being Habitually and Predominantly lovers of God and Holiness , by the grace of Christ and the Holy Ghost . 

2.  Professed Christians are Sacramentally Sanctified , when by outward Baptism , they are devoted to God in Christ . 

3.  Even bad Ministers are externally sanctified , as separated and consecrated to a Holy Office.  

4.  Temples , and Books , and Church Utensils are sanctified , when by men they are separated from common and unclean usage , to God's Worship . So that though Holiness in all be this separation to God , yet , as the persons and things are not the same , so neither is their Holiness in specie , but only in genere . 

And there is a Superstitious and an Idolatrous Mock-holiness , when men will devote that to God and Holy uses which he abhorreth , or accepteth not , nor ever required of them : And say as the Hypocrite Pharisees , it is Corban , who required this at their hands ? The Hypocrites and Idolaters have always been forward for this unrequired Mock-holiness , to quiet their Consciences , instead of real saving Holiness . it 's Cheaper and Easier to have Holy-water , Holy-oil , Holy-spittle , Holy-images , Holy-crosses , Holy-vestments of many sorts , Holy-altars , Holy-shrines , and Pilgrimages , Holy-bones , and Chips and Places , than to have Holy-hearts and Lives , which love God , and Grace , and Heaven , above all this World and Life itself , and by the Spirit mortify all fleshly Lusts . 

The Seven and Thirtieth accused Point . That Children may be saved by their Parent's Faith , without the Sacrament of Holy Baptism . 

Ans . Can you unriddle this charge ? Whether the man mean that they may be saved by Baptism without their Parent's Faith ? Or that both must be conjoined as necessary to Salvation ? He will not tell us that . 

1.  That God hath made abundance of promises to the Seed of the Faithful , and taketh them into the Covenant of Grace with their Parents , and saith that they are Holy , 1 Cor. 7.14 ; protestants have copiously proved against Anabaptists and Papists . But it is God's Mercy , and Christ's Merit , Grace , and Covenant , that they are saved by : The Parent's Faith is but that Qualification and Relation , which maketh them receptive and capable of this saving Grace . The Parenrs Faith saveth themselves , but as the Moral ▪ qualifying disposition and condition of Gods saving Gift : And to Infants it is required , not that they be Believers , but Believers Seed , devoted to God by Parents or Pro-parents , whose they are . 

2.  We doubt not , but regularly , where it may be had , this Dedication should be solemnly made by Baptismal Covenanting : Ask the Anabaptists whether we hold not this . But we believe , that as private Marriage maketh Husband and Wife before God , but solemn Matrimony is necessary for public Order , without which they may be punished as Fornicators : So if an Infant be the Child of one believing Parent , dedicated to God , he is Holy and in the same Covenant with the Parent , ( and were else unclean : ) But that before the Church , he is not regularly to be judged in Covenant till it be solemnised in Christ's appointed way by Baptism . 

Still excepting where Baptism cannot be had ; and there even sober Papists say , that the Votum , the Vow , or desire , will serve . 

And this necessity is manifold : 1.  When the Child dieth , before Baptism could be had . 

2.  Where there is no capable Person to do it , or that will not utterly deprave it . 

3.  When the Parent is an Antipoedo-baptist , and omitteth it , thinking it a Sin. If they think that the Infant is not saved by the Parent's Faith , why should they think , that believing Parent's Children are damned because the Parent Erreth in such an external thing ? 

But Papists , that turn other parts of Holiness into Form and Ceremony , and make a Religion of the Carcase mortified , would here also persuade People that the very outward act of Washing , is of so great moment with God , that though it were the holiest persons or their Seed , a mistake , or a delay , or surprise of Death , will damn them if they be not Baptised , ( or Martyred . ) This tendeth to Subject all to the Mercy and Dominion of the Priests , that they may seem more necessary to Salvation than they are , or at least their external Forms , by Laymen or Women Baptizers administered . 

Constantine himself , the Churches great Deliverer , was not Baptised till near his Death : Are they sure that he was till then in a state of Damnation , and had been Damned if he had so Died ? Methinks in gratitude , the Church of Rome , should have cast him no lower than the Torments of Purgatory . 

The Eight and Thirtieth accused Point . That the Sacrament of Confirmation is not necessary , nor to be used . 

Ans . You may so mean by the Word [ Sacrament ] and [ Confirmation , ] as that we do deny them . And you may so mean , as that we are more for them than you are . 

1.  If by a Sacrament , you mean one of God's Institution , appointed by him to be his Solemn Delivery and Investiture in a state of Christianity or necessary Grace ; and if by Confirmation you mean Arch-bishops anointing Infants , or Ignorant Children , or persons , with hallowed Oil , compounded once a year , and his Ceremonious boxing them , and such other Formalities ; then we deny that such Confirmation is any such Sacrament , nor is necessary , or to be used ; because Holy things are not to be mortyfied and profaned . 

2.  But if by a [ Sacrament ] you mean , but a Solemn renewal of our Covenant with God in Christ ; and by Confirmation you must , that those Baptised in Infancy should at due Age , understandingly , under the Pastor's hand or Care , profess their serious personal Consent to that Covenant which by others they imputatively made in Baptism ; we are so far from denying this , that we think till this Solemn personal Covenanting , and owning their Baptism with understanding and seeming seriousness , be made , the Entrance into the state of Adult Church Communion , the woeful Corruption of the Church is never to be well healed ; but while one side turn Confirmation into a dead Shadow and Mockery , and the Anabaptiss scandalised Heresy , are all for Rebaptising instead of Confirmation , Profanation and Schism will gratify Satan . You know , that the English Bishops practise Confirmation , and the Liturgy describeth it as I here do : And are the Church of England no protestants ? And diverse Protestant Nonconformists here have about 29 and 30 years ago , written full Treatises for Confirmation . 

The Nine and Thirtieth accused Point . That the Bread of the Supper of our Lord was but a Figure , or Remembrance of the Body of Christ , received by Faith , and not his true and very Body . 

Ans . 1.  protestants hold , that as all words are to be taken according to the usage of the Subject or Science that they are used about , Physical Terms Physically ; Rhetorical Rhetorically , Geometrical , Astronomical , Arithemetical , accordingly , Law Terms according to Law , and Moral and Theological Terms Morally and Theologically ; so , if as Naturalists , we ask what the matter of that Sacrament is , we say Bread and Wine : If as Moralists and Theologues , we say , it is the Body and Blood of Christ : As if you ask of a Gold and Silver Coin , what it is in a Natural Sense , we say , it is Gold and Silver : But if you ask in a Civil , Political and Law-sence , we say , it is a 20 s. piece , a Jacobus , a Carolus piece , or it is a Crown , or a Shilling . So we say that Sacramentally and Morally , and Relatively , that which is naturally true Bread and Wine , is yet also the true Body and Blood of Christ : And we say not that it is only a Figure and Remembrance , but it is such a Figure as is Representatively his very Flesh and Blood : And it is to Deliver to us , and Invest us in a Spiritual Union with Christ himself , and right to his saving Grace . 

A proxy that as Representative of a Prince Marrieth a Foreign Lady , is more than a Remembrance ; and so is his Image , if it be used in the Marriage . A Key , or a Twig and Turf , by which Investiture in House and Land is delivered , and a Staff and Ring , by which Bishoprics were of old delivered by Investiture , are all more than a bare Remembrance . 

2.  As to your implied Doctrine of Transubstantiation , that after the words of Consecration , there is left no real Bread and Wine , it is Copiously and undeniably proved a Novel Doctrine , so monstrous , as if it had been form to engage Mankind in a Renunciation of Christianity , Humanity , and common Senses , and to be an obliging profession of this Renunciation . It is enough for us to believe , that after the true Consecration , it is no more mere Bread and Wine , ( as after the Coining a 20 s. Piece , a Crown , or a Noble , or an Angel , it is not mere Gold , but the said named Coyn. ) But if ever Satan showed himself a Dragon , under the Name of an Angel of Light , it was when he made the Canons of the 4th . Lateran General Council under Innocent the 3d. that set up Transubstantiation , and the Murdering of all that deny it , of deposing Princes that will not exterminate them . This adjuncts and effects will show the difference between this Counterfeit Sacrament and Christ . Christ's Sacrament was instituted to be a Sacrament and Covenant of dearest Love between God and Man , and one another : But as Satan , when he Covenanteth with Witches , to sell him their Souls , must have it sealed by his sucking their Blood , so the seal that he set to the Monster of Transubstantiation , was that his Church and it must live by the blood of those that own it not . 

But what will convince men , that by Noise and Worldly Interest have Conquered all that is proper to a man , yea , or a living sensible Animal . 

1.  They pretend Christ's Words , This is my Body , when they know that it was his ordinary parabolical phrase , and they will take this Physically and singularly as different from all the rest . Thou he say , I am the Door , I am the Vine , and ye are the Branches , and my Father is the Husbandman , and the Field is the World , and the Tares are the Children of the Wicked one , and the Harvest is the end of the World , and the Reapers are the Angels ; they that received the Seed by the Highway , are they that , etc.  And so he speaketh usually . 

2.  They know that in 1 Cor. 11.  Paul calls it Bread after the Consecration , three times in the three next Verses : And would they have Burned Paul for a Heretic ? What can they device against these plain words ? 

3.  They sentence all to Death and Hell that will believe their Eyes , Taste , Feeling or any Sense of themselves , and all others , that perceiveth true Bread and Wine after Consecration . 

4.  Hereby they make God as Creator , the Grand Deceiver of the World , by deluding all Man's Senses . 

5.  And hereby they overthrew all certainty of Faith Divine and Human . For Sense and Humanity are before Faith and Christianity , and their perception presupposed : And if Sense be presupposed fallible , yea false , Faith must needs be so : For we are not sure that ever we saw a Book , or Man , or Light , or heard man speak , or what he saith : And how can he believe God's Word or the Popes , or Priests , that is not sure that ever he heard or saw them ? 

6.  They feign every sottish filthy Priest , to work more Miracles at his pleasure , by his transubstantiating , than Christ or his Apostles did . 

7.  They enable a drunken Priest to undo Bakers and Vintners , by saying the words of Consecration Intention Consecrandi over all their Bread and Wine : And then they have none left . 

8.  They feign Christ to have eaten his own Body by his Body , and either that the same Body did eat itself , or that he had two Bodies that did eat neither . 

9  They feign that his whole Body did eat his broken Body , and that his Disciples did eat it , before it was broken ; and drank his shed Blood before it was shed . 

10.  When two General Councils C.P. the 5th . and Nice the 2d . tell us , that Christ's body in Heaven now is not Flesh and Blood , and Paul saith 1 Cor. 15 , that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God , yet they maintain that Christ hath had these 1600 years a body of Flesh and Blood.  

11.  They feign abundance of Accidents without subject Substances , that are the Accidents ( Quantity , Quality , etc. ) of nothing . 

12.  They feign a sottish Priest to make his Maker day by day . 

13.  When Christ saith , He that eateth my Flesh , and drinketh my Blood , shall live for ever ; they feign the most wicked men to eat his Flesh and drink his Blood.  

14.  They feign Mice to eat God.  

15.  They feign every wicked man to eat his God , and digest part of him into his own Flesh and Blood , and cast out the other part into the Jakes . 

16.  They teach men to commit Idolatry , by worshipping Bread as God.  

17.  All this is enforced by Fire and Sword , against the Blood of Holy men . 

18.  All this is Novel Heresy , contrary to the Doctrine of the Universal Church , for a Thousand years after Christ and more . 

19  it 's contrary to Paul's Quere , 1 Cor. 12.  Are all workers of Miracles ? understood Negatively . 

20.  it 's feigned a sufficient ground to depose Princes , and destroy whole Lands . 

But these things , and specially the forged Miracles of the Transubstantiation , are more largely confuted in many Treatises . 

What hope of ending any Controversies with Papists , that agree not with us in the credit of Senses as Heathens do ? Can we bring any Controversy to a plainer issue , than to all Man's common Senses , about due Objects and due Mediums ? And is there any disputing where no principle is agreed on ? 

The Fortieth accused Point . That we ought to receive under both kinds , and that one alone is not sufficient . 

Ans . It concerneth them that deny this , either to keep men from Reading God's Word , or to tell them it is false , and the Pope's is true that contradicteth it : What is a flat defiance of God or his Word , if this be not ? Christ saith , Math. 26.27 , 28.  Drink ye all of it : For this is my Blood of the New-testament , which is shed for many , for the remission of sins . And St. Paul saith , 1 Cor. 11.23 . I have received of the Lord that which I delivered to you : That the Lord Jesus , the Night in which he was betrayed , took Bread , etc. Verse . 25.  After the same manner also he took the Cup , when he had Supped , saying , This Cup is the New-testament in my blood : This do ye as oft as you drink it , in remembrance of me : For as often as ye eat this Bread , and drink this Cup , ye do show the Lord's Death till he come : wherefore whosoever shall eat this Bread , and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily , shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord : But let a man examine himself , and so let him eat of that bread , and drink of that Cup.  

These words do so plainly say , it is bread after the Consecration , and do so plainly require all to drink of the Cup , as well as to eat of the Bread , that the Infallible Clergy are fain to accuse the Light of Darkness , the Text of deceitful Obscurity , till the Pope and his Prelates have expounded it , by giving it the Lie : Just like the Knave in Ignoramus' Play , that Proclaimed the man to be Mad , from whom he intended to extort Money , that is , for binding and abusing him . What is it to proclaim Christ and Paul to be Fools , that could not speak Sense , if this be not ? 

But the Doctors have also contradictions to charge on Christ , even that elsewhere he saith , [ He that eateth his Flesh shall live for ever : ] Ans . 1.  That is , He that trusteth in a Sacrificed Christ as the means of his Salvation , as bread is the means of natural Life : He that would not understand , cannot understand the plainest Words : But doth Christ say , that any man eateth his flesh , that drinketh not his blood ? Or that he shall have Life , that doth the one without the other ? 

2.  And seeing they take every Rogue that eateth their Wafer to eat Christ's Flesh , do they not here falsely say that all such shall have Eternal Life : OH happy ( miserable ) Church , that hath Eternal Life , how wicked soever , for eating the Wafer , and calling it Christ's Flesh ! And all this , that Faith may not be thought to be meant by eating . 

3.  But seeing it must needs be eating by the Teeth , or by Flesh eating that is meant , they have found out a crafty literal way : Christ saith that he loveth and cherisheth his Church as his own Flesh , and we are Members of his body , of his flesh , and of his bones : And so they that Murdered a Million of the Albigenses , etc. and Massacred 40000 in France , and 200000 in Ireland , and Burned them in England , Germany , the Low Countries , and Tormented and Killed them in Bohemia , and many other Lands , did learn the literal way of eating Christ's Flesh . And who doubts but the Devil tells them that they shall thereby obtain everlasting Life ? But why then are they against drinking his blood , when actually they draw it out by streams ? Perhaps by Burning his Bones , ( as they did Buce●ss , Phagius , Wickliff's , and 1000 more ; ) they think that their Teeth scape the trouble of gnawing them , and thus they feed on Christ's body , flesh and bones : For their Masters beaten Witches if they bring him not accounted at every Meeting , of some mischief that they have done . 

3.  And what but flat opposition to Christ , should move these men to forbid one half of his Sacrament , which he calls the New-testament in his blood ? One would wonder what should be their Motive : It is no matter of Pleasure , Profit , or Honour : This very Deceiver had more wit than to pretend Antiquity for it , or any one ancient Doctor of the Church . They dare not deny ( save to Ignorants and Fools , ) that it is a Novelty contrary to unquestioned Consent and Practice of all Christ's Church , for above a thousand years , or near at least . It is undeniably against Christ's Institution and Command , against his Apostles Doctrine , and Scripture Practice ; against all the Judgement and Practice of the ancient Church , against the Nature and Integrity of the Sacrament , against the Concord of the Church , that will never Unite against all these , against the Sense and Comfort of Believers . What then doth overrule so many men to Tear the Church , to Murder so many Bohemians as they did , etc. for such a thing as this is ? Reader I will tell thee all that I know : The Devil is in constant War against Christ and his Kingdom , and the Souls of men : As he thought he could have triumphed in making Job curse God to his Face ; so he would fain show that he can make Christ's own pretended Ministers oppose and despise the plainest of his Commands , and defy his Word and him to his Face . To this he gets by the baits of Worldly Wealth , Honour and Dominion , a sort of Fleshly Worldly men to be Bishops , whose very hearts are against the Laws of Christ : And puffing up these men by degrees , he tells them how they must be Great , and arrogate Power equal to Christ's Apostles , and so domineer over the Souls of men ; and all this on pretence of honouring Christ : And having gotten a Generation of gross ignorant debauched Villains , into the Papal elevated Seat , and the Ruling Church Power , when some poor Woman once or twice shed some of the Wine , or a Priest chanced to spill it , their profane Holiness decreed that they should drink the Wine no more ( save the Clergy , ) but should eat Christ's Blood , which they said was in his Flesh , and a while they dipped the Wafer in Wine ; and then pretended Infallibility being their vain Glory , they must not change lest they should seem to be fallible , and should Repent ; for Repenting undoes Satan's Kingdom . 

The One and Fortieth accused Point . That there is not in the Church a true and proper Sacrifice ; and that the Mass is not a Sacrifice . 

Ans . True and proper , if the words are intelligible , are put against false and equivocal or figurative . And what man can tell us which Sense of the word [ Sacrifice ] must be taken for the only proper Sense , when with Heathens and Christians the word is used in so many Senses , and there are so many sorts of Sacrifices ? This man would not tell you whether it be the Thing or the Name that he controverteth ; that would be to come into the Light. If it be the thing , we never doubted but diverse things are and must be in the Church , which are called Sacrifices , some in Scripture , and some by Papists : And some things by them called Sacrifices , are in their Church which God is against . 

If it be the Name that is the question , we know that in a General Sense it may be given to many things of different Species , and equivocally yet to more ; but which Sense to call proper among so many , let quibbling Grammarians tell him : We strive no further about Names , than tendeth to preserve the due Judgement of things . 

Sometime a Sacrifice signifieth a second thing offered to God by way of worship . 

Sometime more strictly , somewhat supposed highly to gratify or please him , offered to expiate some Crime that displeaseth him , or by pleasing to procure some benefit from him . 

Among Heathens and Jews , there were various sorts of Sacrifices : Some Hilastical , some Eucharistical : Some of things Lifeless , and some of Living Creatures ; where strictly part was burned and so offered to God , and part given to the Priest , and part eaten by the Offerers . 

We hold , 1.  That Jesus Christ offered his Body on the Cross a Sacrifice to God for the expiation of Sin , as a thing pleasing to God , in a sense which no other Sacrifice ever ▪ was or is ; not that God delighted in his Blood , Pain or Death as such ; but as finis gratiâ , it was the most excellent means to demonstrate his Wisdom , Love , Justice , and Mercy , and save a sinful race of men , with the honour of his Law and Government . 

2.  We hold that Christ hath instituted his Sacrament , to be a visible Representation of this his Sacrifice , both for Commemoration and for actual Investiture and Collation of Christ to be our Saviour , and Head in Union , and of his Grace and Benefits , Pardon , Reconciliation , Adoption , Justification , Sanctification , and Title to Glory . And we know that the ancient Churches called this often a Sacrifice : Not in the same sense as Christ was our Sacrifice ; nor as the Mosaical Types were Sacrifices ; but a Representative Sacrifice , representing Christ's own . But we are the shire to use the name Sacrifice , where Papists apply it to Idolatry . 

3.  We know that all Christians are bound to dedicate themselves to God , and even to lay down their Lives when he requireth it ; and bound to offer him penitent Confession , Praise , Thanksgiving , and to give Alms to the poor , and serve and honour him with all their Wealth and Power . And all these are called Sacrifices in Scripture , because they are sacred oblations , acceptable to God through the merits of Christ's Sacrifice . 

Is not this man a Calumniator then , that faith we hold , [ that there is not in the Church a true and proper Sacrifice , ] unless he call none true and proper but what no man can offer to God.  

But what say we to the Sacrifice of the Mass ? We say , that for the Priest to pretend that after his words , Bread is turned into Christ's Flesh in a Physical sense , and Wine into his Blood , and that this is our God , and that he sacrificeth this God to God , and eateth and drinketh him so sacrificed , and that all that so receive him have Eternal Life : This is a profanation of Holy things , a deceiving of Souls , a blaspheming of Christ , and Idolatry against God. And all sacrificing in their Mass , that is more than a Representation of Christ's own sacrificing himself , for Commemoration and Communication of the gifts of his Testament , and the expression of our Gratitude , and Devotedness to God by him , is their own profane invention . 

How do they offer his broken body and blood shed , any otherwise than Representatively , unless they kill him , and eat him when he is Dead ? It was only a Representation of his own sacrificed Body and Blood , which he made at the Sacrament himself ; not then broken and shed , but to be broken , slain , and shed soon after , ( unless he had two bodies , one dead and one alive . ) The Sacrament indeed was called a Sacrifice by the ancient Churches , to signify that it is not Christ's body as now glorified in Heaven that is there Represented , but his body as once flesh and blood sacrificed on the Cross : And how can it be that , but by Representation , sacrificing it was kill it : Do they kill Christ a thousand thousand times over , yea , and kill his Gloryfied body ? He hath no existent Flesh and Blood in Heaven , speaking properly and formally ; but a Spiritual glorified body , that was Flesh and Blood on Earth : And doth every Priest turn Christ's Spiritual glorified body into Flesh and Blood again ? OH what a Mass of profanation is their Mass . 

Thomas Two and Fortieth accused Point . That Sacramental Unction , is not to be used to the Sick.  

Ans . In those Hot-countries , anointing their bodies was used as a great refreshment for Delight and Health . And Christ and his Apostles applied it to the Miraculous use of Healing , as Christ did Clay and spital to a blind Man : And while that miraculous use continued , St. James bids those that are sick as a punishment for some sin , to send for the Elders of the Church , that they may pray for the pardon of his sin , and for his recovery , and anoint him with Oil , and if he have not sinned unto Death , ( that is , a Capital Crime , which God would have Magistrates punish with Death , and will do so himself , ) his Sin shall be forgiven , and he shall be healed . 

See now the Malice of the Prince of Darkness . He that tempteth men to cast out half the substance of the Lords Supper , merely to show what they can and will , and dare do against his Word , and tempteth men to forbid the very Scripture itself , yet to undo , he will overdo , and draw men to be wise and Righteous over much : Who would think these men are against the sufficiency of Scripture , that will turn its temporary occasional actions into perpetual Sacraments ? They make Conscience of washing Feet , of bearing Palms , of the Holy-kiss ( but on the Pax ) and a Sacrament of anointing the sick : And why they make not a Sacrament of anointing the Blind with Clay and spital , of washing at Jordan or Siloam Pools , and of the said Kiss , and washing of Feet , of bearing Palms , of the Pope's Riding on an Ass , etc.  I know not . 

But for the Name of a Sacrament , ( bring first a Military , and then a Church Term , not used in Scripture ) we will not quarrel with them : They may laxly extend it to almost any Ceremony or sign Religiously used , rightly or wrongly . But , 1.  They use that to the Dying , when they judge them past hope , which St. James spoke of using for Recovery . 

2.  They use that as an ordinary thing , which was to be used only for miraculous Cures : and yet show not that they have the Faith or gift of Miracles , nor cure any by it . 

3.  They force men to that feigned Sacrament now ceased with that gift , which was used to none but such as Voluntarily desired it . Why are they not con●●●●ed to use it themselves , but they must force all others to it as necessary ? What Man , Woman , or Child , do you read of in all the New-testament , that was anointed in order to Death , save a Woman that meant no such thing , that anointed Christ in Health ? Where read you that Dragoons or Inquisitors enforced it , and draged naked the bodies through the Streets , and Buried them in Dunghills , or where Dogs may eat them , if they refuse it ? Whose Sacraments can we think are these ? 

The Three and Fortieth accused Point . That no Interior Grace is given by Imposition of hands in Holy Orders : And that ordinary Vocation and Mission of Pastors , is not necessary in the Church . 

Ans . Contrarily the Reform Catholics hold , 1.  That God often gave miraculous interior gifts to men , by the Imposition of the Apostles hands . 

2.  And if he please he may now bless Ordination to the increase of man's mental fitness for the Ministry ; and when he doth so , we know not . 

But we hold , 1.  That men should be supposed by the Ordinances to be true Christians , and to have competent Ministerial Abilities before they Ordain them . 

2.  That now miraculous gifts cease , no man can tell when any other inward Grace is given by Imposition of hands in Ordination , than Relative , which is Obligation and Authority for the work of the Ministry . And Durandus and other of their Schoolmen , say that their Indelible Character is no other . And the rest know not what to make of it . 

3.  If we read of Multitudes of Debauched , Ignorant , Apostatical Popes and Prelates , and many Ages of Church Barbarism , and Bruitishness , ( even in Baronies , Genebrard , and the fiercest Papists ; ) and if we see Priests after Ordination to be Ignorant , Drunkards , Fornicators , unable and unapt to Teach , haters of a Godly Life , we cannot tell what Grace it is that these men are said to receive in Ordination : Whatever it is , it will not keep them out of Hell , as it keeps them not from serving Satan . 

4.  We take an ordinary Calling and Mission to be ordinarily needful to the Church Ministry . This Calling consisteth , 1.  In necessary Abilities , without which God sendeth none . 2.  In willingness and Consent . 3.  In the Ordination by Signior Pastors , where it may be had . 4.  And to fix them in relation to particular Congregations , the mutual consent of themselves and the Flocks . 

5.  But we know Rules of mere Order are for the things ordered , and the Edification of the Church , for which all Church Power is given , and God Commands that all be done : And we know that God who will have Mercy and not Sacrifice , would not have us destroy the substance by pretence of a Ceremony . And that in several Cases , Ministers may be lawfully called without Imposition of hands , and Canonical Ordination . As , 1.  In case men be cast into Infidel Countries , where no Bishops or Pastors can be had : As by Shipwreck , or Merchants Factory , or Ambassadors , or when a Bishop with them dyeth by the way : They must not be without all public Church Worship , for want of an Imposing Bishop . 

2.  In case Persecution drive all the Bishops out of reach . 

3.  In case the persecuted Bishops refuse to Ordain for fear of suffering . 

4.  In case the Bishops be Heretics , or intolerable Usurpers and no true Bishops , wanting the Essentials of a Qualification and a Call.  

5.  In case the Bishops impose any false Oath , Subscription , Covenant , or Profession , or any other Sin , as the Condition without which they will not Ordain , ( which is the case of all the Papists Prelates ; ) their Ordination in these cases is not necessary . 

6.  We know that in such cases the Ministry faileth not , but there may be a true succession of Pastors , though regular Canonical Ordination be interrupted . For there is nothing necessary after God's Law , which specifieth the Office by stated Institution , but only the determining who the persons are that God would have in this Office : Which may be well known without Canonical Ordination , where that cannot lawfully be had . There are instances in the ancient Churches , that when some Elected to be Bishops , fled or hid themselves ; the Bishops Ordained them absent , by writing , without imposition of hands . 

7.  Yea , we know that if in any one Church or Nation , the succession were totally interrupted , for many years , God hath left means sufficient to restore it . 1.  His Word describeth the Office , and giveth the Authority and obligation to the Person when determined of . 2.  That Determination may be made , 1.  By the due Qualification of the Person : 2.  The inviting Necessities of the People and opportunity . 3.  Mutual Consent ; and without these the Ordination and Mission of a Bishop is vain . 

8.  The Church of Rome more needeth this Doctrine than the protestants : For it is notoriously certain , that regular Succession hath failed oft and long in the Papacy , and consequently in its Clergy . 1.  There is no more notorious interruption than by the utter incapacity of the Unqualified : And such have been those that were Children or declared Sots , Beasts , Simonists , filthy Lechers , Heretics , Infidels , Schismatics , by General Council , and the most Papal Historians . Their Succession now is from Eugenius the 4th . deposed as an Heretic by a General Council . 

2.  When there have been two or three Popes above twenty times , no man knoweth which was the right . 

3.  Either Election is in the power of some in special , or not ; if not , the Turks , or Heathens , or Heretics , may choose a Pope : If it be , then who have the Power ? it 's known that at first the Bishop of Rome was chosen by the People of one Congregation : After by the Clergy and people of the Christians of the City : After that by the Bishops of the Diocese : Sometimes by the Emperors : Or Arrian Kings ( with the Clergy and people : ) Sometimes by General Councils : Sometimes against General Councils , by an Armed Faction : And of late times by things called a College of Cardinals . If all these were lawful , no one sort have the Electing Power : If any was unlawful , the Succession hath been interrupted . 

4.  Either the Ordination of a Superior is necessary , or not : If yea , than the Pope having no Superior , was never truly Ordained : If not , than a Presbyter may be Ordained without a Bishop . Rome is more concerned to answer these things than we . 

The Four and Fortieth accused Point . That Priests and other Religious persons who have Vowed their Chastity to God , may freely Mary notwithstanding their Vow . 

Ans . 1.  Must none keep Vows but Priests and Religious People . 

2.  The known Doctrine of the protestants about Oaths and Vows ( which you may see in Sanderson de Juramento , ) is , 1.  That Antecedently it is unlawful to ensnare ourselves by unneecssary Vows , of that which is out of our Power , or so mutable , that it may hereafter be made our Duty which now is not . 2.  But having once Vowed , we must distinguish of the Imposing , the making of the Vow , and the Matter of it . And that , 1.  Though it was by Parents , or others unlawfully imposed , 2.  And by ourselves , by temerity unlawfully made or sworn , 3.  Yet if the Matter consideratis considerandis be necessary or lawful , the Vow must be kept : But if it be Sin that is Vowed , it must not be done . Because Man's Vows cannot abrogate or suspend God's Laws . Can any of your Casuists deny this ? 

Therefore , if Boys or Girls Vow Chastity , and it prove thar they cannot keep it without sin , the Matter becometh to them unlawful , and they must break it : As for instance : 1.  If they cannot keep it without apparent hurt to their Souls by Lust . 2.  Or if the Heir of the Crown , or some great Estate , Vow it , and if he keep it , the Kingdom or Church is like to suffer by it . 3.  If Parents or Prince countermand the Vow in Youth . 

But if they can keep it , and that keeping become not Sin by consequent accidents or changes , they ought to keep it ; though they must repent of their rash unlawful making it . God's Law is perfect , and maketh Duty enough for us , and we should not foolishly make more as Lawgivers to ourselves , when we are conscious how far short we come of keeping Gods own Laws . 

The Five and Fortieth accused Point . That Fasting and abstinence from certain Meats , is not grounded on Holy Scripture , nor causeth any Spiritual good . 

Ans . Still deceitful Confusion : protestants hold , 1.  Fasting is a needful Duty to several persons in several cases . As , 1.  To take down the Flesh when it groweth too strong in Lust . 2.  For the cure of many Diseases from fullness . 3.  To exercise our Humiliation in times of public Danger and Calamity , or of personal repentance for some great Sin , or under some affliction that calleth for great Humiliation . 

2.  They hold that Abstinence is needful in its time and place , as Fasting is in its : And that all Eating and Drinking is unlawful , which gratifieth the Appetite by Quantity or Quality against Man's health , and the just Rules by which we should judge what is healthful : Yea , that bore Eating and Drinking to please the Appetite , which doth not some way conduce to fit us for our Duty , is Sin.  

3.  We know that the same Meat and Drink for Quality and Quantity which is best for one , is hurtful and mortal to another : And we know that Fasting is as Physic , whether for Health , or for the Soul : and if we are fallen into the hands of such Physicians , as will tie all the Land and all the World to take the same Physic , and on the same days , to take a Purge or a Vomit every Wednesday , Friday , and Holy Evens , we shall obey them when we are weary of our Lives . I think our London Colleges would deride such prescribers . 

4.  And if any will tell us that we shall merit of God , and save ourselves by forbearing the coursest sort of Flesh , and eating the more costly Fish , Junkets , Sweetmeats , and drinking Wine and strong-drink , we abhor such Mock-fasts , for God will not be mocked : But Hypocrites turn all Religion into a Mockery . I have heard those called strict precise protestants , accused as being against abstinence and Fasting ; and upon enquiry I found that those of my acquaintance , eat and drink lesle all the year , than their accusers of my acquaintance do on their Mock-fasting days . To such their Diet would seem a strict Fast , even Calvin that macerated his body , with eating but a few bits once a day , is by some Papists called a sensual Glutton , ( though Massonius saith the contrary . ) 

The Six and Fortieth accused Point . That Jesus Christ descended not into Hell , nor delivered thence the Souls of the Fathers . 

Ans . 1.  And do not these false Accusers know that both the Creed which we all profess , and the Articles of the Church of England , say expressly that Christ descended into Hell ? 2.  And those ahat dislike the Translation of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 into Hell , yet grant Christ went into 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; and that 's all the Scripture saith : So that all the doubt is but what 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 signifieth ? Whether the Hell of Torment , or more Generally the unseen state of separate Souls ! If you mean the last , what protestants deny it ? If you mean the first , what presumptuous cruelty is it , to believe that all the Souls of the Fathers were in Hell , till the Death of Christ ? Christ alleging , I am the God of Abraham , of Isaac , and of Jacob , sure meant not , that God was their God , because they were in Hell : Was Lazarus in Hell when Abraham said , Now he is Comforted ? It was a Hell of Joy and Comfort : Were Samuel , Elisha , Job , Daniel , etc. in Hell ? Was Moses in Hell , that appeared in Glory on the Mount with Elias ? But what is it that the Infallible Church cannot make good , when they have once presumed to affirm it ? 

The Seven and Fortieth accused Point . That there is no Purgatory Fire , or other Prison , wherein sin may be satisfied for after this Life . 

Ans . 1.  Which way this Church came to be so much acquainted with Hell , and Purgatory , and Prisons , and satisfying in them , in the other World , more than is revealed in the Word of God , we know not , unless some have told them that come thence , or from Heaven . But for our parts , we think God's Word more trusty than Dead men whom we know not : God sendeth us to the Law , and to the Testimony : If they speak not according to these , it is because there is no Light in them , Isa . 8.20 . Abraham preferred Moses and the Prophets before one from the Dead . The profane citation of Scripture by him for such a Purgatory-prison , and Satisfaction , needs no answer save the perusal of the Texts . 

What mean these men by [ satisfying for Sin ? ] 1.  If they mean that Satisfaction by the merits whereof God pardoneth sin without dishonour to his Justice , Government , or Law : ] Christ , and he only , hath thus fully satisfied for sin , already , and there remaineth no more Sacrifice for sin ; for by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified . 

2.  But if by satisfying for sin , they mean that all must suffer all the punishment that their sin deserveth , than God forgiveth no sin at all : For to forgive the sin , is to forgive the punishment : And then they renounce the Office , Sacrifice and Blood of Christ , which are for the pardon of Sin : And they renounce Baptism and the Lords Supper that give and Seal it : And they cast away all hopes of Salvation , and damn all Mankind : For all Sin deserveth some degree of Damnation in Hell. But if the Pope can pardon , sure God doth pardon some : To deny pardon , is to deny all the Scripture , and all human hope and mercy . 

3.  But if by [ satisfying for sin , ] they mean that God when he forgiveth through Christ the destructive everlasting Punishment , will yet require some corrective temporal punishment , with which he is said to be satisfied , in that he requireth no more , we confess de re , that such a thing there is in this World ; Death as Death , and Pain as Pain are such ; and the Curse on the Earth , and the loss of some degrees of Grace ; they are all corrective Penalties : And if any say that a lower degree of Glory for the loss of some degree of Grace is such ; or that the separation of the Soul from the Body till the Resurrection , hath some nature of Penalty ; we strive with no man about such things : But de nomine we justly here dislike the Word , [ Satisfying , ] because in common Sense , it soundeth as some Compensation , and somewhat that is of the same nature with Christ's satisfaction ; and that is all that Justice requireth to purchase our pardon . And it encourageth the ill use of it by Papists , that make it meritorious . 

And de re we believe no such Purgatory , ( much lesle the Pope's Power to deliver men out of it , for Masses or the like , ) because God tells us of no such thing . And the Primitive Churches never owned it : Augustine first seemed to doubt of it : But I find none before that ever held it , unless you will call Origens Opinion such , that thought the Devils and Damned should have a time of Deliverance , ( now called Heresy . ) 

As to 1 Cor. 3.13 , 15.  Is there no fiery Trial of mistaken Doctrine , and of the Erroneous in this Life ? 

As to Joh. 11.22 . What an Expositor is this : I know ( saith Martha , ) that whatever thou wilt ask of God , he will give it thee : Ergo , Lazarus was delivered out of Purgatory . As well he may say , All Saints shall have a Resurrection : Therefore all are in Purgatory . Or God denyeth Christ nothing : Therefore there is a Purgatory . 

So Acts 2.24 . Whom God hath raised up , having loosed the pains of Death , because it was not possible that he should be holden of it . Here he noteth two things . 1.  That where Christ was , there was pains . Ans . As if Death itself were not a Penalty : It was Christ's pains , or penal State of Death , that Peter mentioneth , and the man himself here confesseth that Christ had no pain in that place . 2.  But he saith that it was not Christ's , but others pain that is said to be loosed ; when the Text plainly saith , 1.  That it was Christ's pains of Death . 2.  Loosed by his Resurrection . 3.  Because it was impossible that he , ( not they ) should be held of it . 

So 1 Cor. 15.24 . Because there is no mention of Baptising for the Dead , he feigneth a Purgatory meant . And Luk. 16.9 . That Receiving at Death into the everlasting Habitations , proveth a Purgatory : When yet they say that Purgatory is to none an everlasting Habitation : And Luk. 23.42 . Because the Thief would be remembered by Christ in his Kingdom , Souls may be holpen after death out of Purgatory : As if it was Purgatory that was the Paradise with Christ , where that Thief was to be that day : Is it not tedious but to read such profanation of God's Word ? 

The Eight and Fortieth accused Point . That it is not lawful to make or to have Images . 

Ans . This Lie hath conquered the blushing Passion . 1.  Can such men believe that there are no Protestant Painters ? Are there none of their Shops in London , or Holland ? Do none but Papists make or sell Pictures ? Are not the Statues of Kings at the Exchange , the Stock-market , Chaering-cross ? Are there no Images on our Coin ? Nor our Banners ? Nor on the Escutcheons of the Nobility and Gentry of this and other Lands : Are there no Images at the Sign-posts in all London , nor in all the Cities , and Market-towns in the Kingdom ? Nor in any of the Church-windows ? 

But perhaps they will say , though we speak so universally ( to deceive the ignorant , ) yet we meant it of Images of Religious signification and use . Ans . And do not all the Lutherans keep them in their Churches ? Are they not continued in most Church-windows in England ? 

Obj. But at least its true of the Calvinists or Puritans ? Ans . 1.  And will you therefore slander the rest ? 2.  But we must not hastily believe any thing that false accusers say ? Have not the Holland Calvinists multitudes of Pictures ? Did you never see Beza and others , Icones virorum illustrium , nor Mr. Samuel Clerk's Lives with Images ? Nor the Puritans English Geneva Bible , with the Images of the Histories ? Nor the Dutch Quarry-bricks for Chimneys , on which most of the History of the Bible is painted ? O! for Truth or Modesty . 

2.  But we confess that there are some Images Bawdy , some Superstitious , Idolatrous , or Blasphemous , which we leave to such as choose them , they being not for our use , ( of which after . ) 

The Nine and Fortieth accused Point . That it is not lawful to reverence Images , nor to give any honour to insensible things . 

Ans . Methinks you should sometime speak truth , if it were but before you are aware . 1.  protestants commonly hold , that they should give Honour to all Insensible things : They are all the work of God ; dishonouring or not honouring the Creature , or Work , is dishonouring or not honouring the Creator and Maker as such . The due praise and honour of a Building , a Book , etc. is necessary to the due praise and honour of the Author ! Do you think protestants Condemn the 18th . Psalms , the 104th . Psalms , the 145 , and all the rest that Magnify the works of God ? Is there any above a Beast , that doth not honour and praise Sun , Moon , Stars , Heaven and Earth , Sea and Land , as the works of God ? Yea we honour every Plant and Flower , every Vigetable and Mineral , knowing that God is wonderful and unsearchable in all . What is Physic , Astronomy , Geography , but the shell of knowing and honouring Gods Works , and God in them . 

2.  And the Image of Kings , of Holy Men , are purposely made and Printed by protestants , in Love , Honour , and Reverence to the persons Living or Dead , whom they represent : You may see many Rooms adorned with the Images of the Fathers , and of late Divines : For their Relation they love with some sort of honour the Pictures of those whom you have burned as Heretics : See whether you find them not in John Fox his Acts and Monuments . 

3.  But we are warned oft enough by God , and by the mischievous effects of it in the Churches , against all Idolatrous and scandalous , and ensnaring respect and use of Images , which are either false Representations , or are used contrary to the second Commandment , to Corporal Idolatry though not mental , in such likeness to the Heathen use of their Demons Images and deified Heroes and Emperors , as seemeth to be but a change of the object persons ; or may tempt others to unlawful usage of them : Especially the use being not commanded us of God , while it is dangerous . 

And we abhor the Papists Omission of the second Commandment , and turning the Tenth into two , lest the people should perceive the evil of such Imagery . no wonder that their Proselytes must be kept in Ignorance , and forbid the Scriptures in a known Tongue , without a special Licence , when they must not ordinarily read or hear all the Ten Commandments , even these Ten written by God himself in Stone , are too much for them to be trusted with ; and yet all the Mass of Ceremonies , and Ocean of Canon Laws , are not too much : And he that must be killed for not obeying these , must not know all Gods own Ten Commands ; yea many have been burned for having his Word Translated . 

4.  And to pray before the Image of Saints , and then to say , we do not pray to them , but to those that they represent , is but to do what the Heathen Idolaters promised to do to their Demons : They usually said , We be not such Fools as to think Wood , and Stone , and Gold , and Images , to be God. But as the first Commandment forbids us to have any Gods but the true God ; so the second forbids us to seem to have any more , though our minds despise them , or by their way of Image-worship , to seem to be of their mind : For as a man that useth the common Words of an Oath , without any purpose to Swear , is a profane Swearer with the Tongue , ( which the mind should better rule , ) though his mind Swear not ; so he that on his Knees in Religious Prayer , looketh on Images , as the mediate Object of his Worship , his act is bodily Idolatry , and his mind is guilty by not better ruling it . 

Where God affixeth the mention of his Jealousy , even to the Third and Fourth Generation , calling the bowers to Images , those that hate him ; it is needful to us to be jealous of our actions : For our God is a Consuming Fire . And we are n●t ignorant of the Doctrine of your St. Thomas , who saith that the Image is to be Worshipped , with the same sort of Worship as that which it representeth , and the Image of the Crucifix , with Latria , called Divine Worship . 

The Fiftieth accused Point . That no man hath seen God in any Form , and that therefore his Picture or Image cannot be made . 

Ans . 1.  But what if it were Lawful to Paint God ? Is it Necessary ? Why may you not be contented to have a painted God yourselves ? Must all be burned and damned as Heretics that are not of your mind ? Will you be jealous against those that bow not to a painted God , as God is jealous against those that do it ? God saith thou shalt not bow down to them , nor worship them : Where saith he , thou shalt bow down to them , and worship them ? Or bow towards them , and say , It is not to them ? 

2.  God saith , thou shalt not make to thyself the likeness of any thing in Heaven or Earth , to bow down to them and worship them . Bowing down purposely towards them , and before them , is interpretatively bowing down to them , worshipping them . And God would not be so worshipped : Isa . 40.16 , 25.  To whom will ye liken God ? Or what likeness will ye compare unto him ? To whom will ye liken me , or shall I be equal , saith the Holy one ? See Leu. 26.1 . Deut. 16.22 . Hab. 18.2 . The Molten Image is a Teacher of Lie . 

It is Blasphemy to make a Picture or Image of God , but what he maketh himself ; as if we said , God is like that Image or Creature . 

But this Deceiver tells us , how God appeared to Adam and others , in a human or some certain shape . Ans . 1.  And yet he hath oft and earnestly forbid making Images of him to worship . 

2.  Anthopomorphits , that take God to have parts like man , are Condemned as Heretics by the Church of Rome itself . Every notifying sign of God's attributes , is not called his Image ; and man is called his Image , for the Divine Impressions on his Soul , which cannot itself be seen and Pictured . If God appear by an Angel , and that Angel appear in human shape , we are nevertheless forbidden to worship God pictured as a man Sun , Moon , Stars , yea , every Creature notifieth God to us ; yet may we not paint him like these , or any other Creature . Did not God's transcendency , and his express Word plainly and frequently reprove this , Popery had some small excuses . If they deny Christ's and his Apostles Words , that no man hath seen God at any time , save his Son , they reproach him : To see his Works , is only to se● that which notifieth him , and not himself : Else every Pagan and Brutus seeth God. We deny not but the Sun , and Fire , and a man may be pictured , and that God being partly notified to us by these , ( and every Creature ) may be said so far to appear in them ? And when did he appear so wonderfully as in Christ ▪ And yet it being not his Essence in it sell that we see in them , but his attributes is part ; an Image of a man , of the Sun , Moon , Stars , of a Horse , or a Dog , or a Toad , is not to be called an Image of God , else God may have as many Images as Creatures . 

The One and Fiftieth accused Point . That Blessing or signing with the sign of the Cross , is not founded in Holy Scripture . 

Ans . The man would not tell you whether he mean the Lawfulness of the Cross only , or also the necessity of using it . But what are his Proofs ? 

1.  rev. 7.3 . Hurt not the Earth , nor the Trees , till we have sealed , ( we read signed , ) the Servants of our God in their foreheads . 

Is here any mention of Crossing or Blessing with the Cross ? An Angel in prophetical Vision , is bid to mark or seal the Servants of God , as those that are not to be destroyed , when God commissioneth other Angels to destroy the Persecutors : Therefore the Priest must sign all Christians with the Cross . And I would they did not infer as one did from Ezek. 9.4 , 5.  [ Andrea to the other he said , go ye after him through the City and smite ; let not your Eye spare , neither have ye pity , stay utterly Old and Young , and little Children and Women ; but come not near any man on whom is the mark , and begin at my Sanctuary . ] And thus whatever Plague or Death God bid Angels execute on his uncurable Enemies , Idolaters , and Persecutors , the Devil will teach men , that Priests and their Hangmen may execute on all that are not marked in the Forehead with a Cross ? But as long as Rome is so like to Babylon , they were better teach men a truer Exposition of the Revelations . Thus they can prove , that the Scripture is but like a Nose of Wax , by using it as if it were so . It was Idolatrous Persecuting Rome that was to be destroyed , and it was those that had Gods mark , and not the Beasts that were to be secured . And who is that Idolatrous persecuting Beast ? 

The next Text is Mark 10.16 . Christ put his hands on Children , and blessed them ▪ And would he make men believe , that we deny Christ's blessing them or others ? Or that Pastors may bless the people in his Name ? Is here ever a word of signing with the Cross ? 

The other is Luke 24.50 . He led them out as far as Bethany , and he lift up his hands and blessed them . Therefore the Priest must Cross men in the Forehead : Reader , this is the fashion of these Man's confuting the Reform Catholics , and proving Popery , and using Scripture . And have they not reason to challenge the sole Interpreting of it ? Let but the Pope and his Priests expound it , and it shall all speak for them , and speak Blood and Fire against all that obey them not : But till then , they are its Enemies , because it is the greatest Enemy to them . 

2.  But suppose Christ's blessing had been Crossing : With what Face do they feign protestants in England , to be against Crossing in the Forehead ? When the World knoweth that the Church of England is not only for it , but Ejecteth and Silenceth all Ministers that will Baptise the Child of the most Godly Christians without it . And they know that all the Churches called Lutheran use it . Are none of these protestants ? 

3.  And though those called Nonconformists , are not for the using of it as a dedicating Symbol of Christianity in Baptismal Covenanting , to bind the Covenanter to that Confession and holy warfare which is the promised duty of the Covenant , nor for denying Christendom to those that refuse this use of the Cross , ( out of a fear lest this Covenanting use make it a human Sacrament added to Baptism ; ) yet I meet with few of them that Condemn the ancient Christians , that lived among Heathens , ( who scorned them as worshipping a Crucified God , ) for their seasonable Crossing themselves in those Heathens sight , merely to show that they were not ashamed of such a Crucified Saviour ; ( not thinking what Papists would bring it to at last . ) 

The Two and Fiftieth accused Point . That the public Service of the Church , ought not to be said , but in a Language that all the People may understand . 

Ans . The Reform Catholics indeed hold this , with these exceptions : 1.  That by All be meant the Ordinary Congregation ; not meaning that if a Frenchman , or a Dutchman , come in among them , they must needs speak to him apart in his own Tongue . 

2.  That if any Rustic , Illiterate , or Novices , understand not many words in the Translation of the Bible , or some apt words of the Minister , we must not therefore change the Translation , nor forbear those apt words that are suited to the more Intelligent ; but help to amend the understanding of the Ignorant . 

But that in Public and Private , the Congregation should understand what they hear as the Word of God , and what is said in Confession , Prayer and Praise to God , this we hold as a matter of grand importance . 

1.  Because it 's purposely , plainly , and copiously decided so by the Holy Ghost , in the Apostle Paul , 1 Cor 14.  Do but read the Chapter and judge . 

2.  Because Christ always Preached to the people in a known Tongue . 

3.  He prayed , Joh 17. in a known Tongue , and taught them so to pray . 

4.  The Apostles where ever they came , Preached and Prayed in a known Tongue . 

5.  They wrote the Gospels , the Acts , and all their Epistles , to whole Churches , in the Tongue most commonly known to the Reader , and so to be read to , or by all . 

6.  It was their standing Rule ; Let all be done to Edification . 

7.  Their Preaching and writing was all for Teaching : And it is no Teaching to speak to men in a strange Language , ( unless we be teaching them to understand it . ) 

8.  Praying is the expressing of known desires to God : it 's no Prayer that expresseth no Desire , and Ignoti nulla Cupido : There is no Desire , save sensitive Appetite , that supposeth not Knowledge that the thing is good and needful . The words of a Parrot are not a Prayer . And confession of Sin is the act of a penitent Soul , and it is no Repentance or Confession that is but words of they know not what : it 's no penitent Confession to hear or speak words , not understood what Sin they signify . 

And to give God thanks , implieth that we understand what Mercies or benefits the words express . And to praise God is understandingly to magnify his perfections or Works . So that words without understanding them , are no more to be called Prayer , Praise , Confession , Thanksgiving , than the singing of a Bird is , or the Crowing of a Cock.  

9  no reasonable man would be thus served or conversed with : A Parent indeed can understand an Abba , or a look from an Infant ; but it is on supposition , that the Infant himself perceiveth what he would have : And if it be not by intellectual but sensitive perception , it is no more a Petition to his Father , than a Dogs waiting for Food , though the person deserves more pity . So God understandeth the meaning of Spiritual Groans , in one that wants words for large expression : But that supposeth that it is true inward desires after him which those Groans signify . 

But public worship requireth a conjunction of Soul and Service , and therefore a conjunct understanding : Else there is no true Union and Communion in the worship . For one sound of words with discord of desires , is no Christian Union and Communion . It must be supposed that either the Hearers are not praying at all , or else that every one is secretly praying after his own thoughts for various things , without any Concord . 

What melody would it be for all the Church to sing in as many Tunes as persons ? What King or Judge will take it for a Petition , for a man to talk-gibberish to him , or say he knoweth not what ? 

10.  Even Papists deride Quakers , for meeting to say nothing : And what difference is there , when they hear and say nothing understood , saving that the Voice maketh it a more pompous Mockery , than the Quakers Silence ? O! who would have thought that the primitive manner of public worship , should ever have degenerated into such a profane abuse of God and man , against plain Scripture , universal practice , and human Reason ? And this as a part of a grand design to kill the Life of all true Religion ▪ and delude Souls with the dead Carcase of mortified Formalities , and Ceremonies ; and that men should think that Souls are saved as Wizards do pretend , to do Cures by Charms of words not understood ; they serve God with empty shells , when they have cast away the Kernels : Like the silly Samaritan ▪ Woman , that looked for a Christ to come to tell them , whether in this Mountain or at Jerusalem men ought to worship , little knowing what it was to worship God as a Spirit , in Spirit and Truth , when it should be neither at that Mountain , or at Jerusalem . 

But hath this man no Scripture , ( against Scripture ? ) Yes , Luk. 1.8 . [ The people were praying without , while the Priest was offering Incense within . ] Therefore the public Worship may be performed , so as the people understand not : That , 1.  The Priest's action only out of their sight is the public worship , and the people's praying is not so . 2.  The offering Incense , is Praying ; or because the people are not to do the Priest's Office in Incense and Sacrificing , therefore Ministers must pray and praise God alone , without the people , and all this public worship . 3.  If the Levitical , Sacrifices were offered by the Priest alone , Christ's Gospel worship must be performed by the Priest alone , the people not knowing what he saith : And the precepts and examples of the New-testament , must all be reduced to the Levitical Order of Incense and Sacrificing . 4.  And is he sure that all the people in the outer Court , prayed they knew not what , or in an unknown Tongue ? What use is Scripture of to these men ? 

His next is , Levit. 16.17 . None was to go in with the Priest to make atonement for the Congregation , etc.  Ans . You see that these men are Judaizers , and set up the Levitical Law for the Church's Rule of Service , as if Christ had not changed the Law. But our Question is not now , Whether their Priest have any solitary atonement to make for the Congregation ; but whether Christ hath not instituted such public worship , in which Ministers and people must understandingly join ? Doth their Priest celebrate their Mass alone , out of the people's sight or hearing , in a Sanctuary while they are in the outer Court ? Do not their people assemble to their Mass ? Will they stand to it , that their Church renounceth all worship of God in Holy Assemblies , save by the Priest alone ? And is this the Holy Catholic Church ? 

And the man here professedly calls the Priests solitary action , the public Service , which is for the people , and not by them , and therefore they need not understand ; and all the people's Prayers are private and should be understood ; so that ( the Mystery opened , ) either the Priest is all the Church , or else they have no public Church Service , if they must meet , that every one may have a secret Prayer of his own , and may only see the Priest's Service called public . And by this he pretends that he answereth Paul , 1 Cor. 14.  Adding most shamelessly , 1.  That it seemeth there by the Text , that the common Service of the Church , was not then in a Tongue commonly understood . 2.  Because there was one to supply the place of the Idiots , to say Amen , where he saith , that the Geneva-men , most deceitfully and maliciously Translated , [ He that is an Idiot , how shall he say Amen ? ] And raileth at them for putting [ So be it . ] O! what is man , and how incredible is the pretended infallible Clergy , that can expect that all men trust their Souls on such palpable deceit ! When St. Paul spent a great part of the Chapter to dissuade those that by Inspiration , could speak strange Languages , that they should not use them in the Church , as being unedifying , or at least not without an Interpreter ; this man gathers , that the common Service was in an unknown Tongue ? As if this dissuaded use of some Prophet's gift , were the common Service . 2.  And when he dissuadeth them from Praying in an unknown Tongue , or giving thanks in it , saying , else how can he that occupieth the Room of the unlearned say Amen , this man feigneth , that yet they were to give thanks in an unknown Tongue , and one was to supply the place of the Idiot or unlearned , in saying Amen , ( See verse . 23. ) Paul would have all say Amen , this man says one was to do it for them : Paul argueth that therefore they must speak to the understanding of the unlearned : This man turneth his own words against him : Doth his Supplier of the Idiots place himself , understand or not ? If not , Paul saith , How can he say Amen ? If he do , how doth he supply the place of the Idiots , that are supposed should say Amen , and cannot ? 

For the sake of this Chapter and Instance , I shall never think any words so plain , that Papists cannot turn against their most evident sense . 

But what is the Man's pretence for this erroneous Confidence ? Why , the Vulgar Latin Translateth it , Qui supplet locum , instead of Qui implet locum : And that Latin Translator by supplet meant the same as implet , possidet vel tenet : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 is well known to signify to fill up : Their own Expositors are many of them for the Sense which this Doctor charges as deceitfully and maliciously given : Cornelius a Lapide saith that , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 is Denuo implere , vel simul & Communiter omnes implere , to fill again , or all together , or in common to fill : It is not Qui supplet vicem indocti , but Qui locum occupat inter in ▪ doctos , or Idiotae locum tenet . 

And so it is expounded by the ancients , Chrysostom , Occumenius , Theophysact . 

And are not these Roman Priests notoriously Perjured , that all Swear to expound the Scripture , according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers , when as ( besides that the Fathers have but few of them written Commentaries on the Scriptures , there are very few of them that unanimously agree , of the Sense of the one half of the Scripture Texts , but either say nothing of them , or differ : And not only in this , but in most points named by this Doctor's Touchstone , he and others go flat against them ? 

And what meaneth the man to rail at them , that say So be it , instead of Amen ? Is it not a true Translation ? But he will prove that it should not be Translated , and consequently that Servict may be said in an unknown Tongue , for Amen is not Greek but Hebrew . Ans . 1 . Who can stand before these Arguments , if they be but backed with Guns and Swords , or Smithfield Fires , which are too hot for any Answer save Patience . He may also prove it from Christ's Words on the Cross , Eloi Eloi Lamasabacthani : For Christ was now the most public Priest , and was offering the most public Service by his Sacrifice : Ergo , the public Service should be in an unknown Tongue : And it may be , they may find some other untranslated word , that shall confute not only all the Bible , but all the Septuagint and Vulgar Latin Translations . 

But seeing these Man's Arguments are too hot for me to answer , as they might know that the Church of England refuseth not AMEN , so neither will I , ( though as I can prove , that the Corinthian Church were Hebrews and Gentiles mixed , and that Amen was understood by both ; so protestants use it as a word understood . ) 

From the Serpent's Seed , and his deceiving subtle Lies : From Cain and his Successors , and the malignant and Bloodthirsty Enemies of Abel's faithful acceptable worship ; from such a worldly and fleshly Sacred Generation as take gain for Godliness , and make their worldly carnal interest the Standard of their Religion , and their proud Domination to pass for the Kingdom of Christ : From an Usurping Vice-christ , whose ambition is so boundless , as to extend to the Prophetical , Priestly and Kingly Headship , over all the Earth , even at the Antipodes ; and to that which is proper to God himself , and our Redeemer : From a Leprous Sect , which Condemneth the far greatest part of all Christ's Church on Earth , and separateth from them , and calleth itself , the whole and only Church : From that Church that decreeth Destruction , to all that renounce not all human Sense , by believing that Bread is not Bread , nor that Wine is Wine , but Christ's very Flesh and Blood , who now hath properly no Flesh and Blood , but a Spiritual Body ; and that decreeth the Excommunication , Deposition , and Damnation , of all Princes that will not exterminate all such ; and absolveth their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance : From that Beast whose Mark is PER Perjury , Perfidiousness , and Persecution , and that think they do God acceptable Service , by kill his Servants , or tormenting them ; and that Religion which feedeth on Christ's Flesh , by Sacrificing those that he calleth his Flesh and Bones , Ephes . 5 . From the infernal Dragon , the Father of Lies , Malice , and Murder , and all his Ministers and Kingdom of Darkness : GOOD LORD make haste to deliver thy Flock ; and confirm their Faith , Hope , Patience , and their Joyful desire , of the great , true , final , Glorious Deliverance , AMEN . AMEN , AMEN . 

FINIS . 

This Book was delivered by Mr. Baxter himself to the Bookseller , and not being seen by us the Authors of the Epistle to the Reader , till the Sheets were printed , these Erratas must be corrected . Page 76. line 24. read after God through him . Page 81. l. 14. read Converted for Convicted . Page 94. l. 24. read converted for convicted . Page 96. l. 21. read they do hold , for do they hold . Page 97. l. 1. read sinless for senseless . Page 116. l. 9 read intuition for intention . Page 119. l. 17. read Reneus for Romans . Page 149. l. 4. r. Ordainers for Ordinances . Page 150. l. 15 , 16. r. preference for pretence . Page 152. l. 2● . r. Councils for Council . Page 162. l. 10. r. there is mention . Page 165. l. 3. r. Vegetable . Page 166. l. 27 , 28. r. professed for promised . Books Printed for John Salusbury at the Sun over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill . AN end of Doctrinal Controversies , which have lately troubled the Churches , by Reconciling Explication without much disputing : by Richard Baxter . 

The Certainty of the World of Spirits , fully evinced by unquestionable Histories of Apparitions and Witchcrafts , proving the Immortality of Souls . By Richard Baxter .. 

The Harmony of the Divine Attributes in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of Man's Redemption by our Lord Jesus Christ , etc. By William Bates , D.D.  

The Duty and Blessing of a Tender Conscience , plainly stated , and earnestly recommended to all that regard Acceptance with God. By T. Cruso . 

Two Sermons , opening the Nature of Participation with , and demonstrating the Necessity of Purification by Christ . By the same Author . 

Five Sermons on various Occasions : by the same Author . 

The Mirror of Divine Love Unvailed : In a Paraphrase of the high and mysterious Song of Solomon . 

Thomas Country's Concurrence with the London United Ministers . By S. Chandler . 

A Summary or Abridgement of the whole Bible , whereby Children , and the Younger sort , may learn the Contents of it in a very short time , and give an Account of the principal passages of it . 

A New Examination of the Accidence and Grammar . 

A New Discourse on the Marriage of Isaac and Rebecka . 12o. 

The Suffering Christian . 12o. 

Nostradamus' Prophecies . 

THE CONTENTS . 1 OF the Rule of Faith p. 1 2 Of the Judge of Controversies in matters of Faith p. 6 3 Of the Scriptures difficulty p. 8 4 Of Traditions p. 19 5 Of the private Spirit p. ●9 6 If Saint Peter's Faith failed p. ●4 7 If the Church can err p. 39 8 Of the Church's Infallibility p. 50 9 Of her Universality p. 56 10 Of her Unity p. 58 11 Of St. Peter's Headship p. 60 12 Of a secular Prince's Headship p. 63 13 Of Antichrist p. 67 14 Whether none but God can forgive Sin● p. 7● 15 Whether we ought to confess to none but to God p. 7● 16 Of Pardons p. 7● 17 Whether the Actions and Passions of 〈◊〉 Saints are profitable to us p. 7● 18 Of works of Supererogation p. 18 19 Of Freewill p. 82 20 Of keeping the Commandments p. 89 21 Of Faith and good works p. 99 22 Whether good works are meritorious p. 96 23 Whether Faith once had cannot be lost , p. 97 24 Of God's inevitable decree , who shall be damned and who shall be saved p. 99 25 Whether we ought to assure ourselves of our salvation . p. 103 26 Whether every one hath his Angel-keeper p. 107 27 Whether Angels pray not for us p. 108 28 Whether me may not pray to them p. 110 29 Whether they can help us or no pawn 113 30 Of Saints Apparitions p. 114 31 Whether they know what passeth on earth p. 117 32 Whether they pray not for us ib.  33 Whether we may allege their Merits in favour of ourselves p. 118 34 Whether we may not pray to them p. 121 35 Of the Relics of Saints p. 122 36 Of hallowing of Creatures p. 123 37 Of the Necessity of Baptism p. 126 38 Of Confirmation p. 128 39 Of the last Supper p. 130 40 Of receivers under one kind p. 136 41 Of the Sacrifice of the Mass p. 14● 42 Of Extreme Unction p. 14● 43 Of Holy Orders p. 148 44 Of Religious Vows p. 15● 45 Of fasting and abstinence from meats p. 155 46 Of Limbus Patrum p. 157 47 Of Purgatory p. 158 48 Of making Images p. 162 49 Of worshipping Images p. 164 50 Of making the Picture of God p. 168 51 Of blessing with the sign of the Cross p. 170 52 Of service in an unknown Tongue p. 173 There will in due time be published a large Account of Mr. Baxters' Life , mostly written by himself . 

