One sheet against the Quakers by Richard Baxter. / Baxter, Richard, 1615-1691. (Printed by Robert White for Nevil Simmons ...,London :1657.)

One sheet against the Quakers . 

by Richard Baxter . 

London , printed by Robert White , for Nevil Simmons , bookseller , in Kederminster , anno dom. 1657.  

One sheet against the Quakers . The lamentable ignorance and ungodliness of too many of the common persons , and the pride and self-conceitedness of many professors of godliness , and the weakness , unsettledness and giddiness of others , doth give advantage to all sorts of heretics and deceivers to make their attempts with hope of success . And to our wonder , grief , and shame we see , that scarce any of them are so grossly unreasonable and vile , but they get some followers in most places where they come : and when this wind ariseth to try our congregations , and neighbours , the light , unstable , chassie professors are carried away . And though one sect have carried away some of them , and another hath risen and condemned that , and carried away more ; and another and another have done the like by them ; yet still the next sect that riseth up , is as confident that they are in the right , and as zealously vent their own conceits , and condemn all others , as if they had never been warned by the examples of so many before them , whose confidence hath left them in contempt , like prognosticators , wizards and false prophets , that will be bold to prophesy of uncertain events , though so many of their predecessors have lest their names to the derision of posterity ; we cannot wonder therefore , if among other sects , the Quakers ( With their German brethren , the Paracelsians , Behmenists , and seekers ) do step in and take their turns in the game ; who will come down with greater shame than most that have gone before them , when they have played their part . 

The man that will stand safe , and look on the folly and misery of all these sects , with prudence to his own advantage , must be a sincere catho●●ck Christian , saved from infidelity and impiety : having one God , one mediator between God and man , one holy spirit ; being a member of that one Catholic church , which is not confined to the sect of Papists , or the sect of Anabaptists , or any sect , but containeth all the true Christians in the world , though some parts of it be reform and pure , and others more deformed and corrupt : having one Catholic rule , the word of God ; and a Catholic love to all Christians in the world , with a care and desire of their welfare , proportionable to their several degrees of loveliness , being myself a member of this Catholic church , and finding myself on the rock which the gates of hell shall not prevail against , the security of my station encourageth me the more boldly to do my part in defending the cause of God , against the assaults of all these deluded ones ; and particularly the Quakers . And if any man find in himself the least temptation to like of their way , i shall here give him those reasons in a little room that move me to conceive , that no Christian , or reasonable man , should be a Quaker , or approve of , or excuse their way . 

reason 1.  The Quakers ( With the seekers ) deny and revile the church and ministers of Christ , and yet cannot tell us of any church or ministry which is indeed the right , and to be preferred before these that they do despise . If the Quakers are of no church themselves , they are no Christians ; and then they are infidels , atheists or heathens . If they be of the church , let them tell us which is the church that they are of . They renounce the church that we are of : and that is the only church on earth , containing all true believers in Christ . They have not told us of any sect but their own , which they take to be the true church : and he that takes the Quakers to be the only Catholic church , must deny the church and Christ himself , if he understand what he saith . For the Quakers are but of a few years standing : they rose from among the Papists , Seekers , ranters , and Anabaptists but a while ago . And if Christ had not a Catholic church before then , and ever since his ascension , he ceased to be Christ in office , the head and saviour of the church : for no church , no saviour ; no , no head : no school , no teacher : no kingdom , no King : no wife , no husband . So that its all one to say , that the Quakers have made a new Catholic church , when there was none before ; and to say , they have made a new Christ , where was no Christ before . This argument the Papists abuse upon false suppositions ; but it is only the Catholic that can make just advantage of it , and May better ask the Papists , [ where was your Roman Catholic church before 400. or 500 or 600. years after Christ ? ] then they can ask us , [ where was your church before Luther : ] where there were visible societies of Christians , there was a visible church . I dare not be of so narrow a Catholic church as the papal is , much less as the Quakers or any upstart sect ; i profess myself a member of a far wider Catholic church then all of them set together ; in which i hope to live and die . 

reason 2.  No wise man can be a Quaker , because their religion is an uncertain thing ; and so is not that religion that must save us . The things that they agree in , besides the furious opposition of others , are but a few broken scraps of doctrine , which they never yet set together , as making the substance of their faith : i never met with man that heard of any sum or body of their divinity , faith or religion , which they have published : no not so much as in catechism , or short confession : nor did i ever hear that one of their speakers did ever recite the substance of their belief . If they know not yet the contents of their own religion , they are too blame to be so zealous for it , and thrust that upon others , which they know not themselves : and well May we stay till they know it better , before we become their followers for we know not what . The Christian faith is known long ago , even this 1600 years , and more . If they say that they wait till the spirit revealeth it ; i answer , the spirit hath revealed and sealed the Christian faith long ago : though it must transcribe it out of the scripture into the heart of every believer . The spirit is not given now to make us a new religion , or new gospel , gal. 1. 8 , 9 but to cause us to believe and receive the old one . I abhor any gospel or religion that was not made 1600 years ago at least . If they look for a spirit to make them a new religion or belief , they have not , and expect not the Christian religion or belief . Well , and will any but a mad man let go his Christian faith , before he know where to have a better ? or for he knows not what ? shall we turn Quakers merely because they bark and bawl at our religion , ministry and church , before they once tell us where to find a better , or give us so much as a catechism , or confession to tell us what their own religion is , which they would have us to receive ? We know not but the fag-end of it that is yet out of sight , May be so abominable as to shame all the rest ; i am resolved to be of no religion that is kept in the pockets of men , and must not be all made known to the church , as the Papists keep things undetermined , to make us new articles of saith ( quoad nos , as they speak ) when they please . 

reason 3.  No man of reason should be a Quaker , considering that among those scraps of their religion which is made known , there is so much notorious falsehood and ungodliness . it 's like to have a good end that hath such a beginning . This falsehood and wickedness , cannot solder with saving truth . The very person of Jesus Christ many of them blaspheme , and speak allegorically and equivocally when they mention his name and nature , and so show that indeed they are not Christians . One of them lately spoke to a Christian in these words , [ i deny the god that thou worshippest . ] the scriptures , many of them in my hearing and in others , have denied to be the rule of faith and life , and the Hebrew and Greek text they expressly said , they do deny . They reproach the Catholic church , and the ministers : they deny many of God's ordinances ; not only the baptism of infants , but of any ; and use not the Lord's supper : they deprave the doctrine of justification , denying the imputed righteousness of Christ , and trusting to that which is in them only : many more such abominations they maintain , which certainly tell us they are not of God . If any man say that all of them are not of these opinions : i answer , what a fair distracted company are they already then , when they are of so many minds , and we are never the nearer knowing what they hold by hearing and reading the sayings of so many ! 

reason 4.  Besides their false pernicious doctrines , their practical religion doth much consist in notorious wickedness , injustice and uncharitableness . I shall here instance but in three parts of it . 1.  Their very preaching and zealous talk is much , if not most of it , malicious prating against God's servants , ( 3 joh. 10. ) and railing accusations and reviling words ; yea lies and slanders ; impudently charging that upon the ministers of Christ , which they have not so much as a reasonable pretence to accuse them of . There is scarce a scold heard among us in seven years' time , that useth so many railing words to the basest that they quarrel with , as these persons will use familiarly in their religious exercises against the faithful servants of Christ . Nay i have had more railing language from one of them in one letter , than i ever heard from all the scolds in the country to my remembrance this twenty years . And no servant of Christ who hath learned of him to be meek and lowly , can believe ( If he be well in his wits ) that this is the language of the spirit of Christ . He that being himself reviled , reviled not again , 1 pet. 2. 23. and hath commanded us not to eat with a railer , 1 cor. 5. 11. and hath given such an odious character of such , 2 pet. 2. 10 , 11 , 12.  Jude 8 , 9 , 10 , &c. will hardly own them for his best servants . If we May judge what country men are of by their language , these are not of heaven , nor fellow-citizens with the saints , that so reproach and rail at saints . And it is the more impious in that they entitle God to it , and think they do him service , by reviling his servants : yea , and abuse the phrases of scriptures to it ; as if they Might call such by any names which God hath called the worst of men by ; even dogs , wolves , greedy dogs and hirelings , children of the devil , and enemies of all righteousness , hypocrites , devils , with abundance such . 2.  They break the fifth commandment by open dishonouring of magistrates and ministers , and impenitently justify themselves in all . They will not only deny civil honour to the magistrate , but revile him if he displease them . Their language is like the rebellious followers of Corah , numb 16. 3.  ye take too much upon you — wherefore list ye up yourselves above the congregation of the Lord ? ] 3.  Many of them live idly and disorderly , going up and down the country , and living on the bread of others , and not working with their hands , contrary to 2 thes. 3. 6 , 11.  

reason 5.  The worst of all is , that they behave themselves like malignant enemies to the very cause , and church , and gospel , and servants of Jesus Christ . And if they be of the serpentine brood , they cannot be the only servants of Christ sure . Most of them that i have seen , have an altered countenance , looking upon every man that they suspect to be a minister or a friend to the ministry , with such detestation and hatred , as if malice itself had chosen their faces to demonstrate its complexion in . Their very design , religion and work , is , to make the persons hate the ministers and revile them as they do , as if this were a mark of a converted man . And besides this ministry ( As much as they revile them ) who have we to carry on the work of the gospel ? A mean wit May easily see what would come of the gospel , and of the church , and the souls of men , if the ministry were hated , rejected or cast out . Doth it go well with any nation on earth without them ? Name me the place . Will the gospel be propagated without preachers ? Or have you better enough if all these were down ? Where be they ? that we May see and know them . He that would destroy the commanders , and magistrates , is like to be an enemy to the army and the commonwealth . They take the same course against the church and cause of God , as the malicious enemies in all ages have done ; even to oppose the best and painfullest ministers . Such as the heathens tormented , and the Papists burned , and others silenced , these men choose out to vilify and oppose . Mark when they come to any town , whether they do not ten times more oppose the ministers that spend themselves in private and public labours against sin , than they do the most ignorant or vicious men . Cannot we see whose servants they are , when we see who they fight against , even the choicest servants of Christ ! It is a wonderful thing that even malignant enemies shall be thought to be Christ's only servants by any that know what it is to serve him , or what an enemy differeth from a friend . 

reason 6.  Moreover that part of the Quakers peculiar religion , which consisteth not in error and malignant impiety , is very much of it made up of childish unreasonable fopperies . When they have called me dog and devil , and abundance of such names , and i have asked them what was my fault ? forsooth , it was that i was called Master , that i stood above the persons in a pulpit , that i preached by an hourglass , that i preached by doctrine , and use , and such like . And doth the Christian religion consist in such ridiculous accusations as these ? Doth God lay men's salvation upon an hourglass , or a pulpit , or being called Master ? Little do i care what they call me , or where i stand , so i May but be heard : or whether i have glass or clock . As for the grounds of these silly cavils , i have showed in [ the Quaker's catechism ] how weak they are . Christ doth no more forbid the title of [ Master ] then of [ father ] or then [ sitting in the uppermost seat ] as you May see in mat. 23.  And seriously would these wise men have no man called father , or sit uppermost ? It is the proud affectation of honour , and the abuse of it that Christ doth forbid , and not the thing ; when he hath made it the first commandment with promise , that children ( And so all subjects and inferiors ) must honour their parents and superious in the Lord . See what a difference there is between this sort of prophetical persons , and the ancient prophets and apostles of Christ . The apostles of Christ did preach up faith , and hope , and love , and a kingdom consisting in righteousness and peace , and joy in the holy ghost , and not in meats or drinks , circumcision or uncircumcision . But see now a new generation of preachers ; and what is their message ? I am ashamed to mention it . They go about the world to preach down hour-glasses , and pulpits , and tithes , and the title of Master ; do you think that the salvation of the world doth lie upon this doctrine ? They come to preach down ribbons , and lace , and points , and cuffs : oh glorious and excellent doctrine , for children to make sport with ! 

reason 7.  Moreover their malignity doth blind them to make that the principal cause of their rage and revilings against the ministry , which is plainly agreeable to the will of God , and necessary to the churches good . The principal sin which we must be hated , reproached and cast out for , is , that we take either tithes or other set maintenance . And where is this forbidden ? They liken us to the covetous priests among the Jews who neglected the work of the Lord , and looked every one for his gain from his quarters : and do they believe that God was then against paying tithes , or that this was the sin of those priests that they took tithes ? Let them read mal. 3. 8 , 9 , 10. and judge , and be ashamed [ will a man rob God ? yet ye have robbed me . But ye say , wherein have we robbed thee ? In tithes and offerings . Ye are cursed with a curse , for ye have robbed me , even this whole nation . Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse , that there May be meat in my house , and prove me now herewith , saith the Lord , if i will not open the windows of heaven , and pour you out a blessing . ] and Christ himself saith of them that ●ithed mint and anise , [ these things ought ye to have done , and not to leave the other undone , mat. 23. 23. ] And Paul saith , 1 cor. 9 6 , 7 , 11 , 12 , 13.  [ have not we power to forbear working ? Who goeth a warfare any time at his own charge ? who planteth a vineyard , and eateth not of the fruit thereof ? or who feedeth a flock , and eateth not of the milk of the flock ? Say i these things as a man ? or , saith not the law the same also ? — if we have sown to you spiritual things , is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things ? Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things , live of the things of the temple ; and they which wait at the altar , are partakers with the altar ? Even so hath the Lord ordained , that they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel . ] God ordaineth it , and the Quakers make a new religion of railing at it . The law of the land ordaineth it : and God bids every soul be subject to the higher powers , and saith , the resisters receive to themselves damnation , rom. 13. and yet the Quakers expect salvation by resisting . The tenths are the churches , and not the peoples : and God saith , thou shalt not steal : and yet the Quakers make a religion of teaching the persons to steal or defraud others of the tenths . In the apostles days men sold all and devoted it to God , and laid it down at the apostles feet ; but now we ask not men for a penny , they are taught by the Quakers to deny those tenths which be none of their own ; forgetting that A●anias and Sapphira were struck dead , for retaining half their own , when they had devoted it to God and the church . But i have said enough of this to them in two books already , viz. the defence of the Worcestershire petition , and the Quakers catechism . 

reason 8.  The Quakers way is too cruel and uncharitable to be the way of God . They damn the most humble , holy , faithful servants of God ; to whom God hath promised salvation . All the ministers and churches of Christ that adhere to the ministry , they pronounce them , children of the devil : and as soon as they do but hear a man speak for the ministry , though they know nothing of his life , they can presently tell that he is an hypocrite and child of the devil ; so quick and sagacious they are in damning men , as if they were as forward to it as Christ to save , and pleased as much in cursing , as good men in blessing . Yea they must venture into the throne of God , and ordinarily take on them to know men's hearts , to judge them hypocrites . Those that dwell and walk with God , and have lain longer at his feet in prayers and tears , than any of them , and walk in uprightness in the midst of a malicious world , and spend themselves in the work of God ; even these must be damned at a word by a boy or wench that 's but a Quaker , as confidently as if God had bid them speak it . And thus they repeal the gospel itself , the ground of our salvation , which saith , that whosoever believeth shall not perish . 

reason 9  After all their sins , they most impudently pretend to a sinless perfection . They are not content that we allow of a perfection in kind , which is our sincerity , or a perfection of parts , which is our integrity , or a perfection of eminency or high degree : all these we do allow of ; and we desire an absolute sinless perfection , and confess it is our commanded duty . But they maintain that many of them are without sin altogether . Though James saith , in many things we offend all , James 3. 2. and John saith [ if we say that we have no sin , we deceive ourselves , and the truth is not in us : if we say that we have not sinned , we make him a liar , and his word is not in us , 1 John 1. 8 , 10.  And Christ saith , that the whole have no need of the physician , but the sick , mat. 9 12.  So that by this you May see that the Quakers suppose themselves to have no need of Christ , and so the word and truth is not in them . They dare say it seems , to God or to the redeemer , we will not be beholden to thee for the patdon of any more sin , or for the blood of Christ to that end . They will not say , forgive us our trespasses : for what need they a Christ and pardon that have no sin ? And thus they suppose themselves to be in heaven already ! For if they are perfect and sinless , what 's that but a great part of heaven ? and how is it that they have not the beatifical vision , and be not with the angels ! for what can hinder them but sin ? Nay it seems , they take themselves to be as perfect as Christ himself . For what can they have more than a sinless perfection ? And see here what an unhumbled persons these are that dare think so highly of themselves ; and how shameless , to boast of finless perfection , even with railing and other sin in their mouths , or open in their practices and doctrine . 

reason 10.  And in this and many other doctrines , they do so openly comply with the Papists , that we May plainly see that the Jesuits and friars are their leaders . This hath been proved by many confessions , as i have showed elsewhere . The Papists make the scripture a dead letter , no sufficient rule of faith , or judge of controversies ; and so do they . The Papists cry down our church and ministry , and so do they . The Jesuits cry up freewill and sufficient grace to all , and a common sufficient light , and so do they . The Papists do extenuate imputed righteousness , in setting up inherent : and so do they . The Papists place most in external abstinence , and observances , and seeming austerity ; and so do they . The Papists say the Pope is not the Antichrist ; and so do they . The Papists say that they can keep all God's commandments , and have a sinless perfection ; and so do they . Many other of their doctrines they maintain . So that you May easily conjecture , that Quakers do but prepare you to be either Papists or open infidels , at last . 

reason 11.  Their doctrines are self-contradictory , and therefore they cannot be of God . They say that all men have a sufficient light within them . And yet they go up and down preaching with great zeal and violence . And what do they preach ? is it light or darkness ? If darkness , who would have such preachers ? If light , what needless labour is this , when all men have sufficient light already ? And they will revile the ministers as blind guides , and tell their persons they are all in darkness , and the way to damnation ? And yet all have sufficient light within them ? If all , why not the ministers , and their persons ? Are not they men ? 

reason 12.  Consider also how suitable their doctrine is to the interest and pleasure both of the Papists and the devil ? When they damn all the ministers and churches of Christ , how can they please the devil better ? Oh what would he give them that this were but true ? Now the Kings of France and Spain are striving for part of Italy or Flanders ; if you say , this country is all the King of Spain's , and none of it the Kings of France , is not this for the interest of Spain ? so Christ and the devil are striving about the souls of men , and you step in and say of almost all the church of Christ , yea of the most eminent godly Christians , [ all these are hypocrites , and the children of the devil ] is not this for the devil's interest , and are you not the patrons of his cause against Christ ? And if you do but unchurch all the reform churches , the Papists will give you a see . 

reason 13.  The doctrine and practice of the Quakers is contrary to the experience and holy nature of the saints . They have found a renewing light and life by this scripture and ministry which the Quakers make so light of . They tell our persons , that our ministry doth no good , and none are the better for it : which the experience of many thousands doth confute , who can say as the man in John 9 25.  one thing i know , that whereas i was blind , now i see . ] moreover , the Christians nature containeth in it a Catholic love to all the saints , and they honour them that fear the Lord , psal. 15. 4.  And therefore it is quite against their holy nature to damn and reproach the saints , and call them the children of the devil ; and to dishonour and spit in the faces of them that are their fathers or guides in Christ , that watch for their souls as men that must give an account , 1 thes. 5. 12.  heb. 13. 17.  They cannot be so barbarously ungrateful , and so rebellious . 

reason 14.  The Quakers are unlikely to be better than other men , seeing they are so notoriously proud . Pride is an high esteem of ourselves , with a desire to be highly esteemed by others . And this they manifest openly without all shame : some May take them to be humble that judge by their clothes and crying down high titles . But alas it is a childish pride to be proud of fine clothes . This is too low a game for them to play . The greater the matter is that men are proud of , usually the greater is their pride : it is The supposed spirit of God , and extraordinary holiness and inspiration and abilities that they are proud of . Do you need any proof ? How could the devil himself show pride more notoriously ? when they proclaim themselves perfect without sin ; can they yet think highlier of themselves , or speak highlier of themselves , than this ? What is proud boasting if this be not ? And when they pretend to know men's hearts , which is the prerogative of God ; and to speak by inspiration : when they condemn almost all the church of God , and vilify the holiest of his persons ; as if they should say , [ stand by ; we are more holy than you ; you are all ungodly in comparison of us ] when they revile the ablest godly ministers , as if they said , [ come down thou deceiver ; thou ignorant man , thou hypocrite , thou dog ; and let us be the speakers that can do it far better than thou ; that are more understanding , holy , self-denying and sincere . ] is not one half of this their ordinary speech , and the other half their practice , when they set up themselves to speak in the stead of ministers , yea and proclaim their own goodness to the world ? I confess i never saw greater appearance of pride in men . 

reason 15.  They plainly discover a persenting spirit . For what man can in reason think but that they that run up and down the world to bring the ministry into hatred , and call them greedy dogs and devils , and judge them to damnation , and call on the magistrates and persons to cast them out as dung , would quickly use them thus themselves , if it were in their power ? Will they persuade others with such exceeding pains and zeal to that which they would not do themselves ? And they that so damn our godly hearers , would not they persecute them also : i confess i make no doubt of it , but if they had power , many of them would do more than silence the ministry , even persecute them to death as their ancestors have done . 

reason 16.  What reasonable man would turn Quaker that seeth the common fruit of their doctrine ? What good do they where they come ? but make persons hare both godly teachers and persons whom they loved ? and doubtless love is Christ's work and sheep-mark ; and envy , strife and hatred is the devils . They break persons into divisions , and set them a reviling , and cast their spirit into a malicious mould and tincture of bitterness , and bring in confusion and abominable error : and to say that this wisdom is from above is to glory and lie against the truth : no , it it earthly , sensual , devilish . For the wisdom from above is first pure , then peaceable , gentle , easy to be entreated , &c.  Jam. 3. 13 , 14 , 15 , 17.  The fruit of their labour is to make some silly professors turn malignant enemies of the church , and to show themselves humble , to cast off some points or lace , and wander about the country , and at last many of them fall into distraction . 

reason 17.  And it 's no great encouragement to us to turn quakers , when we consider who are their followers and society that make all this ado in the world . Very few experienced , humble , so●er Christians , that ever i heard of that turn to them ? but its the young raw professors , and women , and ignorant ungrounded persons that were but novices and learners in the principles , and such as are notorious for self-conceitedness and pride , being wise in their own eyes . And most of all these that ever i heard of , were Anabaptists or the members of some such sect , that by their division and error were prepared before . 

reason 18.  So that 't is an evident judgement of God upon those persons that turn Quakers ; and a punishment for their former sin . Because they received not the truth in the love of it , that they Might be saved , God giveth them up to believe a lie , 2 thes. 2. 10 , 11.  Because they were false to the light revealed , and unprofitable under precious helps , and proudly disobeyed and slighted their faithful guides , God giveth them up as a prey to these devourers : and who would choose that for his religion , which is nothing but a dreadful judgement of God upon proud , dividing , self-conceited , ignorant men , especially of the Anabaptists ? 

reason 19  They are already in divisions among themselves , as few as they are : as the contention between Naylor and his followers , and Fox and his followers , and others of them show . 

reason 20.  And to make all their delusion a more odious wickedness , they father it upon the holy ghost , and would persuade the world that they speak all their most wicked speeches by his inspiration or command : and say [ thus saith the Lord : ] and [ the spirit of God within me saith thus or thus . ] oh horrible impiety ! when they dishonour the very word of God , the righteousness , yea the ●erson of Christ , they say , God bids them do it , and indite all as from the spirit of the Lord , when they speak against the doctrine of the spirit . They cry down the union and love of the saints , and the ministers and ordinances of Christ , and say , the spirit bids them do it . When they pronounce damnation against God's church or holy servants to whom Christ hath promised salvation , and the spirit sealed it , yet do they profanely make the holy ghost the author of their wickedness . I think there 's not a whore or thief , or swearer in the town or country , but Might as justly say , the holy ghost commandeth them to whore , or steal , or swear . Yea when some of them preach another gospel , they father it on the spirit : when Paul saith , if an angel from heaven preach other gospel than had been preached , he should be accursed , gal. 18.  

reason 21.  The Quakers themselves renounce ( In words ) the ranters and the Papists , as a deluded sort : but the ranters and Papists hold the substance or greatest part of the Quakers doctrine , in which they differ from us . Yea the ranters did fall into trances as they do ; and spoke just as they against the ministry and scripture : yea the drunkards and all profane ungodly malignants cry out against the same ministers , and same exercises and ordinances , and same churches and godly persons as the Quakers do . Now let any man judge that hath not forsworn all wit and reason , whether it be likely that the holy ghost would inspire a generation of new prophets , to acquaint them with the same points , which ranters , Papists , and drunkards knew before , and could have taught them without the spirit ? Or whether the same point be heavenly in a Quaker , and hellish in a Ranter , Papist or drunkard ? And whether the Quakers have not condemned themselves in condemning these sects that hold their opinions ? And whether it be likelier that ranters , drunkards and all malignants , or the holy and faithful ministers and persons of Christ should in these points be in the right ? 

reason 22.  And if i had any cause to be weary of the Christian Catholic reform religion , what reason have i to turn Quaker any more than to any other sect ? why not to the sect of Papists as well ? or to the Anabaptiss , or the Antinomians , or libertines , or Familists , or Socinians , or such like ? How do they prove that they are more in the right than all these ? What do they bring to satisfy a wise man that they only among all these and many other sects are in the right ? 

reason 23.  Moreover , the way by which they prevail , is not by producing any evidence : for they renounce that , and offer you all on the authority of the spirit within them ; and therefore they must prove that authority , and their revelations and divine mission by miracles , or such supernatural means , before any reasonable man can believe them : unless you will believe every man that saith , he is sent of God . I have asked them to show their commission from God , or prove that he sent them , and not one of them would ever do it , but tell me i was blind , and he had the witness in himself : but why must i believe him that saith this more than other men ? Can i see the witness in him ? He must be a witness to me if he will have credit . The ministers of Christ do not call you to receive their doctrine upon the authority of themselves or their own mission , but of the apostles and their mission , from whom they prove they had it , and who sealed it with miracles long ago : and therefore whether we were ministers or no , you have reason to believe us , when we prove our doctrine to be from God , as delivered by apostles in scripture , and sealed by the spirit : but Quakers that give us their doctrine on a new authority within them ( And so Behmenists , paraceisians and all enthusiasts ) and Papists that give it us on their own authority as above or before the scripture authority , these are bound to prove their pretended authority by miracles , if they will be believed by wise men that love their salvation . 

And we see that it is by the novelty , and the seriousness and earnestness of speech , and threatening hell to poor persons , that frightneth-in their followers to them , and not by evidence of truth . I have urged many of them to name one truth which the Quakers held , but what we hold as well as they : and i could never yet hear of any one . 

reason 24.  Lastly , they teach but such like doctrines , and take the like course as many of the ancient heretics did ( Of whom Epiphanius , Irenaeus , and other ancients will give you a full account . ) Presently after the apostles days just such heretics as these arose and troubled the church : and they brought themselves to shame by their wickedness , folly and division , and God was still against them , and brought them to confusion ! And so all along through most ages have they sped , even down to the David-georgians , Wegelians , Familists , and the like of late . And shall we play an old game as if it were a new one , where all have sped so ill before ? And shall we run ourselves into the fire , which hath consumed such heresies through former ages ? 

To conclude , as i am sure it is not an unwillingness to be informed , but the knowledge of their gross deceits , that hath caused me to oppose the Quakers ; so i beseech all young and raw professors , to consider impartially of these 24 reasons ; and withal to bethink themselves , 1.  What a doleful case it is that professors of religion should be so ignorant , loose and unstable ; and God and his word should have no more hold of them , but that any confident sect that riseth up shall presently carry them away , even with nonsense , or that which a child Might see through ? Oh what a shame is this to your profession ? 2.  What an heavy judgement is it to yourselves to be self-condemned and self-divided from the church , tit. 3. 10 , 11. and carried away as chaff with every wind of doctrine , ephes. 4. 14. and to prove rotten in a day of trial ! Know you not that heresies must arise , that those that are approved May be made manifest ? 1 cor. 11. 19 3.  Would you not turn Jews and infidels , and renounce Christ himself , if you had but some body to ●ry you ? it 's most likely that you would . For an infidel can put a far greater show of reason upon his cause , in opposing Christ , than these Quakers have yet put on theirs ! Well Sirs , as ever you would stand fast and be saved , 1.  See that you be serious Christians , and true to the light received ; and prepare not by unholy hearts and lives , to be forsaken of God . 2.  Stick close to the word of God . 3.  And to a faithful ministry ; and obey their doctrine . 4.  And to the unity and Catholic peace of the church . 5.  And to the communion of saints . 6.  And to the spirit which still concurs with these . 

sept. 5. 1657.  Finis . 

