A second sheet for the ministry iustifying our calling against Quakers, seekers, and papists and all that deny us to be the ministers of Christ by Richard Baxter. / Baxter, Richard, 1615-1691. (Printed by R. White for Nevil Simmons ...,London :1657.)

A second sheet for the ministry justifying our calling against Quakers , Seekers , and Papists , and all that deny us to be the ministers of Christ . 

by Richard Baxter . 

London , printed by r. White . for Nevil Simmons bookseller in Kederminster , 1657.  

A second sheet for the ministry : justifying our calling against Quakers , Seekers and Papists , and all that deny us to be the ministers of Christ . The corruption of the Romish church being most in the errors and vices of the priests , which made men abhor the offering of the Lord ( 1 sam. 2.17 . ) the reproach which they brought upon themselves , did much prepare men to hearken to the reformers : the observing of this , and of the necessary dependence of the persons on their pastors , hath caused the Papists to bend their force against the ministers of the reform churches , and to use all their wit to defame their persons , and callings , and make them seem ignorant , unworthy , or no ministers to the persons . On this errand they send abroad their agents ; this is the saving gospel that the seekers , Quakers , and their brethren preach ; that the scripture is not the gospel or word of God , and that we are no true ministers . Whatever doctrine we are preaching , the opposers ▪ work is , to call us deceivers , and ask , how we prove ourselves true ministers ? My work therefore at this time , for the sake of the ignorant in our assemblies , shall be , to acquaint them with our answer to this demand . And i shall give it you in order , in certain propositions . 

Prop. 1.  both in the old and new testament there is mention of two distinct sort of ministers , of God's appointment . first , such as received some new revelation ▪ ( Either a law , or a particular message ) immediately from God ; so that the persons could not be sure that their doctrine was true , till they were sure that the men were sent of God . These were called prophets , in the old testament , and apostles , prophets , &c. in the new . So Moses received the law from God : and the following prophets their particular messages . So the apostles received the gospel from Christ ; and so did the seventy ▪ and other disciple that conversed with him : and other prophets and evangelists had it by immediate inspiration . All these were necessarily by miracles , or some infallible evidence to prove their own call , before the hearers could receive their doctrine : for this was their message ; [ the Lord hath commanded me to say thus or thus to you ] or [ the word which the Lord spoke to me is thus or thus ] this sort of ministers the Papists and Seekers do confess . 

But besides these , there is a second sort of true ministers , whose office is not to receive from God any new doctrine , law , or message ; but to proclaim the laws already delivered , and teach men the doctrine already revealed , and to oversee and govern the churches of Christ according to his laws , and to go before the persons in the worship of God : the prophets and apostles did both these ; both reveal the doctrine which they received from Christ , and teach and guide the church by it when they had done : but the latter sort of ministers do but ▪ the later sort of the work . The Papists and Seekers cheat men by jumbling all together , as if there were no ministers of God's appointment but those of the former sort ; and therefore they call for miracles to prove our ministry . Here therefore i shall first prove , that the second sort of ministers are of God's institution : 2.  That such need not prove their calling by miracles ; though yet God May work miracles by them if he please . 3.  That we are true ministers of Christ , of this sort . 

1.  Christ found such ministers under the law , that were to teach and rule by the law before received , and not to receive new laws or messages : i mean the ordinary priests and Levites , as distinguished from prophets . these priests were to keep the law , and teach it the persons , and the persons were to seek it at their mouth , and by it they were to judge men's causes : and also they were to stand between the persons and god in public worship , as is expressed , deut. 31.26 . josh. 23.6 . neh. 8.1 , 2 , 3 , 8 , 18.  & 9.3 . levit. 1.  & 2.  & 4.  & 5.  & 7.  & 13.  & 14. throughout , num. 5.  & 6.  deut. 17.12 . mal. 2.7 . ier. 18.18 . The prophet had visions : but the priest had the law , ezek. 7.26 . isa 8.16 , 20.  hag. 2.11 , 12.  num. 1.50 . 1 chron. 9.26 . & 16.4 . 2 chron. 19.11 . & 20.19 . & 30.17 , 22.  He was called a teaching priest , 2 chron. 15.13 . lev. 10 10 , 11.  deut. 24.8 . 2 chron. 17.7.9 . ezek. 44.23 ▪ 2 chron. 35.3 . And Christ himself sends the cleansed to the priest , and commandeth them to hear the Pharises that sat in Moses chair , though they were no prophets : so that besides the prophets that had their message immediately from God , there were priests that were called the ministers of the Lord , Joel 1.9.2.17 . and Levites that were not to bring new revelations , but to teach , and rule , and worship according to the old . for Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him , being read in the synagogues every Sabbath day , acts 15.21 . The Jews rejected Christ because they knew him not , nor the voice of the prophets which are read every Sabbath day , acts 13.27 . and even unto this day , when Moses is read the veil is on their heart , 2 cor. 3.15 . And they that would not believe Moses and the prophets ( Thus read and preached ) neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead , Luke 16.29 , 31.  

2.  And as priests and Levites were distinct from prophets before Christ , so Christ appointed besides the apostles and prophetical revealers of his gospel , a standing sort of ministers , to 1.  Teach , 2.  Rule , 3.  And worship according to the gospel which the former had revealed , and attested , and proved to the world . These were called overseers , or Bishops , presbyters , or elders , pastors and teachers ; and also the deacons were joined to assist them , acts 14.23 . they ordained them elders ( Not prophets or apostles ) in every church , tit. 1.5 . Titus' was to ordain elders in every city . Timothy hath full direction for the ordaining of Bishops or elders and deacons , 1 tim. 3.  

That their work was not to bring new doctrine , but to teach , rule , and worship according to that received , i now prove , 2 tim. 2.2 . the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses , the same commit thou to faithful men , who shall be able to teach others also ] mark , that its the same , and not a new doctrine : and that as heard from Paul among many witnesses , and not as received immediately from God : and others were thus to receive it down from Timothy . and v. 15.  study to show thyself approved unto God , a workman that needeth not be ashamed , rightly dividing the word of truth , ] it is not to bring new truths , but rightly to divide the old . And 2 tim. 1.13 . hold fast the form of words which thou hast heard of me ( Not which thou hadst immediately from God ) in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus ; that good thing which was committed unto thee , keep , by the holy ghost which dwelleth in us . the holy ghost is to help us in keeping that which is committed to us , and not to reveal more , 2 tim. 6.13 , 14.  [ i give thee charge in the sight of God — that thou keep this commandment without spot , unrebukable , till the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ . there was a form of doctrine delivered to the church of Rome , rom. 6.17 . And 1 tim. 5.17 . the elders that rule well are worthy of double honour , especially they that labour in the word and doctrine . you see their work was to rule and labour in the word and doctrine , 1 tim. 4.13 , 14 , 15 , 16.  till i come , give attendance to reading , to exhortation , to doctrine ; meditate upon these things : give thyself wholly to them , that thy prof  ing May appear to all : take heed unto thyself , and unto thy doctrine : continue in them : for in doing this , thou shalt both save thyself and them that hear thee . ] 1. tim. 4.6 . [ if thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things , thou shall be a good minister of Jesus Christ , nourished up in the words of faith and of good doctrine whereunto thou hast attained : ] mark here the description of a good minister of Christ ; one that 's nourished up in ▪ the words of faith and good doctrine , ( Which is the use of schools and universities ) and having attained it , makes it his work to teach it , and put others in remembrance of it , tit. 1.7 , 9 , 10 , 11.  for a Bishop must be blameless , as the steward of God — holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught ( Mark that ) that he May be able by sound doctrine , both to exhort and convince the gainsayers . For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers , whose mouths must be stopped , who subvert whole houses , teaching things which they ought not , &c. ] So 1 tim. 3.1 , 5.  The office of a Bishop is to rule and take care of the church of God : ] to take heed to themselves , and to all the flock , and feed the church of God : and to watch hereunto , according to the word of God's grace , which is fully and wholly delivered by his apostles , and is able to build us up , and give us an inheritance among the sanctified : as act. 20.28 , 20 , 27 , 35 , 32. 1 thess. 5.12 , 13.  we beseech you brethren to know them which labour among you , and are over you in the Lord , and admonish you ( This is their office ) and to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake ( And not revile them as the servants of Satan do ) and be at peace among yourselves , heb. 13.7 , 17 , 24.  remember them which have the rule over you , which have spoken to you the word of God : obey them that have the rule over you , and submit yourselves : for they watch for your souls , as they that must give account , that they May do it with joy , and not with grief : for that is unprofitable for you . Salute all them that have the rule over you : the elders of the church are to pray with , and for the sick , jam.   . 14 . They must feed the flock of God among them , taking the oversight of it , 1 pet. 5.1 , 2.  Thus you see their office and work . 

2.  And that they were not to bring any new doctrine , further appears , in that they have a charge to preach no other doctrine , 1 tim. 1.3 . Nor to be tossed as children with every wind of doctrine , eph. 4.14 . Nor carried about with divers and strange doctrines , heb. 13.9 . 

3.  Yea , if any man bring not the doctrine of Christ , we must not receive him into our houses , or bid him God speed , lest we be partakers of his evil deeds , for be that abideth not in this doctrine hath not God , 2 John 9.10 , 11.  Gal. 1.8 , 9  [ though we or an angel from heaven , preach any other gospel to you , then that which we have preached unto you , let him be accursed . As we said before , so say i now again : if any man preach any other gospel to you then that ye have received , let him be accursed . ] And rom. 16.17 , 18.  now i beseech you brethren , mark them which cause divisions and offences , contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned , and avoid them . ] 1 tim. 6.3 . if any man teach otherwise , and consent not to wholesome words , the words of our Lord Jesus Christ , and to the doctrine which is according to godliness , he is proud , knowing nothing , but do  ing . — ] 

4.  And if all ministers must be receivers of new doctrines , the church would never know when it hath all , but would be still obeying an imperfect law . 5.  And it would be an oppression to the church instead of a direction , to be so overwhelmed with new doctrines and precepts . 6.  And it would accuse Christ the lawgiver of such mutability , as wise Princes are not guilty of ; to be still changing or adding to his laws . 7.  There was great occasion for the new testament or gospel , upon the great work of our redemption : but there is no such cause for alterations since . 8.  The priests before Christ were not to receive new laws , as is said . 9  The companions of the apostles that wrought miracles , had not all new revelations ; but did it to seal up this gospel . 10.  What need we more than actual experience , that God doth not give new revelations to the world , and none since the scripture-times , have sealed any other by miracles . 

And thus i have proved to you the two sorts of ministers : as Paul plain  distinguisheth them , 1 cor. 3.10 , 11 , 12.  eph. 2.20 . There are planters and waterers , Master builders that lay the foundation , and others that build thereon :  there foundation can no man lay then that which is laid : but every man that  ildeth hay or stubble and loseth his work , doth not nullify the ministry . we are built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets , Jesus Christ being the head cornerstone : but we are not built on the foundation of every pastor , teacher , elder , Bishop or deacon : though both in their places ( Apostles , prophets , evangelists , pastors and teachers ) are given for the perfecting of the saints , for the work of the ministry , for the edifying of the body of Christ , eph. 4.11 , 12.  That we Might be one united body , having one fixed standing doctrine , ver. 14 , 15 , 16.  And how shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation ; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord , and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him : ( Mark whence the church receiveth it ) God also bearing them witness ( But not every elder or teacher ) both with signs and wonders , and with divers miracles , and gifts of the holy ghost according to his own will , heb. 2.3 , 4.  

prop. 2.  And now that these later ministers need not prove their calling by miracles , i prove thus : 1.  God never imposed such a task upon them , nor commanded the persons to require such a proof , & not to believe any but workers of miracles . 2.  God gave not all the gift of miracles that were employed in his work even in the apostles days : are all workers of miracles ? saith Paul ; some had by the spirit , the word of wisdom , and of knowledge , and others tongues , and others interpretation , and others miracles , 1 cor. 12.29 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10. 3.  They that have the holy ghost are owned by Christ ; and so have many without working miracles . See rom. 8.9 . 1 cor. 12.3 . gal. 5.18 , 22 , 23 , 24. 1 cor. 6.11 . eph. 3.16 . & 5.9 , 18. 1 pet. 1.2 , 22.  rom. 15.13 , 16.  tit. 3.5 . 4.  The law of Moses was kept and taught by priests and Levites that wrought not miracles . 5.  If the laws of all nations May be kept without miracles , so May the laws of Christ . 6.  If human writings are kept without miracles , ( As Homer , Virgil , Ovid , Cicero , Livy , &c. ) so May the laws of God much more , as being the daily subject of the belief , meditation , conference , preaching , controversies , devotions of Christians through the world , and translated into so many tongues . 7.  There is nothing in the nature of the thing that requireth ordinary miracles . Cannot man sufficiently prove without miracles , that there have been such men as Caesar , Pompey , Aristotle , or which be Calvins' or Bellarmine's writings , &c.  much more evidently May they prove what doctrine is essential to Christianity , and the scripture that contains the whole . 8.  Else parents could not teach their children , nor bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord , eph. 6.4 . Nor teach them with Timothy , from a child to know the scriptures , which are able to make men wise to salvation through faith in Christ , 2 tim. 3.15 . Must no parents teach their children to know Christ , but such as can work miracles ? 9  The doctrine which we preach is fully confirmed by miracles already , by Christ and his apostles : there needs no greater than Christ's own resurrection , nor more than were done ; which universal unquestionable history and tradition hath brought down to our hands . 10.  It is a ridiculous expectation , that every person should see the miracles before they do believe . Then if Christ had done miracles before all Jerusalem , save one man , that one man should not be bound to believe : or if i could do miracles in this town or country , none must believe me ever the more but those that see it . And so you May as well say , i should not believe that there is any sea or land , city or kingdom , France , Spain , Room , &c. but what i see . Are these men worthy to be talked with ? that believe no , and confess themselves such liars that they would have no believe them . It was not all that saw Christ's miracles or resurrection , or the apostles miracles ! It seems the rest were not bound to be Christians ? Even as clem. writer told me , that no man is bound to believe that Christ did rise again , or the rest of Christianity , that seeth not miracles himself to prove it : adding withal , that indeed Antichrist May do miracles ; and so it seems for all the talk , miracles themselves would not serve if they saw them . 11.  Is it not to put a scorn on God almighty , to say that the glory of all his most miraculous works should be buried to all that saw them not ; and that parents should not tell them to their children , or children should not believe them if they do ? 12.  it 's injurious to posterity , that the knowledge of the most wonderful works of God shall be only for the good of them that see them ; and that all ages after shall be never the better . 13.  It tends to make men mad and as idiots , that must know and believe no more than they see : what ▪ kind of folks must these be ? that know not that there is either Prince or parliament , city or country , or any folks in the world but those they have seen ? This will not stand with trading , converse , subjection , societies ; and its doubtful whether such are capable of managing estates ; or should not be put under others as idiots ? 14.  Children cannot learn to read nor speak without some kind of belief of them that teach them : nor can they obey their parents nor learn any trade : nor obey physicians : so that this conceit of incredulity is against the nature , livelihood , and life of man . 15.  And they would tie God to be at the beck of every unreasonable infidel that shall say , [ though all the town have seen thy miracles , yet i will see myself , or else i will not believe . ] 16.  They expect that God should overturn the course of nature : for if miracles be as ordinary as the operations of nature , they are confounded . 17.  And by this they would cross themselves , and make miracles uneffectual : for if they were ordinary , few would be moved by them as any proof of a divine testimony : were it as ordinary for the sun to go backward as forward , who would take it for a miracle ? To this clem. writer answers me , that [ miracles were convincing in the first age when they were common . ] answ. how common ? Not as natural operations : nor so as for all countries or persons to see them ; 500 saw Christ at once after his resurrection : 5000. were once miraculously fed : but as this was not every days work , so what was this to others ? And in that it was but for an age , and rarely in after ages , shows that they were not for every man's eyes . 18.  What need we more proof than actual experience , that God doth not often now work miracles ! And he that saith the gospel , and Christian faith , and church , and ministry are therefore ceased , its like will not take it ill to be taken himself for an heathen or infidel . 19  And we have experience of million that still do actually and steadfastly believe in Christ without miracles : and many have laid down their lives on that belief : therefore without miracles men May believe . But to this clem.  Writer saith to me , [ these believers of all sorts condemn each other as heretics . ] answ. but not as infidels . none but the ignorant or passionate condemn all other sorts as heretics . The sober do not . And it is not enough to prove you a bastard , if an angry brother call you so . 20.  Because this sheet alloweth me not room , i entreat the reader to peruse these texts , which tell him aloud that the word and works of God must be believed by tradition , though without miracles , exod. 10.1 , 2.  & 12.14 , 17 , 26 , 27 , 42.  deut. 11.2 . to the 22.  & 29.22 . to 28.  josh. 4.6 , 7.  & 22.24 . to 32.  psalm 48.13 . & 78.1 . to 9  & 102.18 . & 145.4 . & 89.1 . Joel 1.2 , 3 , 4.  Acts 1.8 . & 2.32 . & 5.30 , 31 , 32.  & 10.38 . to 42.  & 13.30 , 31.  & 1.22 . & 4.33 . & 22.15 . & 26.16 . & 23.11 . 2 tim. 2.2 . John 20.29 . & 19.35 . & 15.27 . & 12.17 . & 5.33 . & 1.15 , 32 , 34.  Luke 4.22 . 1 pet. 5.1 . And that you would read my determination of this very question , in my book against infidelity , i proceed to the next . 

Proposition 3.  this ordinary ministry for teaching , ruling , and public worship , was ordained by Christ ▪ to continue till his coming , and doth yet continue , and did not cease when the extraordinary ministry ceased . i prove it , matth. 16.18 . upon this rock will i build my church , and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it . ] The church never did nor can subsist without its officers , who are an essential part of it , as it is a political body , and the first and most eminent part , as it is a community . and therefore if the ministry be extinct , the gates of hell have prevailed against the church . And then Christ is overcome , or hath broke his promise . And then he were not Christ : so that if Christ be Christ , the church and ministry continue . So Luke 1.33 . he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever , and of his kingdom there shall be no end ; isa. 9.6 , 7.  of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end ; psalm 145.13 . thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom , and thy dominion endureth throughout all generations . Christ ruleth by his officers in his church . If church or ministry had an end , his kingdom had an end , and he reigned nor for ever , matth. 28.20 . lo , i am with you always , even to the end of the world . to this express promise , clem.  Writer hath no wiser an answer , but that , [ it is conditional . If they teach men to observe all things that Christ hath commanded , than he will be with them , else not . ] repl. this is your forgery : here is no such words ; but an absolute promise . His being with them , is to support and help them in his work . And will you feign Christ to promise them help on condition they do it without ? The further cavils against this text and others , the London ministers in their vindication have answered at large , eph. 4.11 , 12 , 13.  The pastors and teachers are given to the church for the perfecting of the saints , for the work of the ministry , for the edifying of the body of Christ , till we all come in the unity of the saith , and of the knowledge of the son of God to a perfect man , &c. ] Extraordinary and ordinary officers are here conjoined , who between them are to perfect the building , the first laying the foundation , and the others building thereon , 1 tim. 6.13 , 14.  i give thee charge in the sight of God — that thou keep this commandment without spot , unrebukable , unto the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ ] which must needs extend to his successors . The faithful and wise stewards that give the children their meat in due season , will be found so doing by the Lord at his coming , Luke 12.42 , 43.  And it is not till the last day that Christ will give up the kingdom to the father , 1 cor. 15.25 . 2.  The apostles actually settled an ordinary ministry in their time , as is proved . 3.  There are commands for settling successors of these , as 2 tim. 2.2 . tit. 1.5 . as is proved . 4.  These ministers are described , and the way of their ordination settled by canons , 1 tim. 3. tit. 1. 5.  We find the several angels of the churches in their places , revel. 2.  & 3. and promises to some of them for the future , with a command [ hold fast till i come , 2.23 . ] and 3.10 . [ i will keep thee from the hour of temptation which shall come on all the world : behold , i come quickly . ] 6.  Christ hath commanded the ministerial work to continue to the end : as the preaching of the word must be to all nations and every creature , matth. 28.19 . Mark 16.15 . And these most cruel men would have all the preachers give over their work , and leave the world to perish in infidelity . So for the assembling of ourselves together , and exhorting one another , we are commanded not to forsake it , as is the manner of some , and so much the more , as we see the day approaching , heb. 10.23 , 24 , 25.  So that the nearer we are to Christ's coming , the closer must we stick to church-communion and holy assemblies : considering that it 's but a little while , and he that comes will come , and shall not tarry : ver. 37.  God doth on purpose forbear his coming because he is long suffering , and will continue the means to call men to repentance , and then the day of the Lord will come suddenly , 2 pet. 3.9 , 10.  [ the word of the Lord endureth for ever : and this is the word which by the gospel is preached to you , 1 pet. 1.25 . The Lord's supper is instituted to be used to show the Lord's death till he come , 1 cor. 11.26 . Church-government or discipline is a fixed ordinance , mat. 18.15 , 16 , 17.  And if the work continue , the workmen must continue . 7.  The mercy of God , and the efficacy of Christ's blood , and the necessities of the church continue : we still need a teaching ministry , heb. 5.11 . and for our need it is instituted till the church be perfect , that we be not as children tossed up and down , eph. 4.13 , 14.  What enemies to us and to the love and mercy of God are they that would persuade men that he so quickly withdrew so great a mercy , when the gifts and calling of God are without repentance ? 8.  The law and its priesthood was not removed but by the glory of a better law and ministry : and Christ is the mediator of a better covenant and promises , heb. 7.22 . & 8.7 , 8.  Therefore he will not deal so much worse . 9  Christ telleth us that a wise man will consider whether he can go through with it , before he build or make war ? Therefore he would not himself begin to build his church , and enter himself the captain of our salvation , and presently let his enterprise fall . 10.  If the ministry continue not , than the church continueth not ; for as the head , liver , and stomach , or lungs are to the body , so is the ministry to the church , 1 cor. 12.13 , 19 , 20 , 28 , 29.  They plant and water it , 1 cor. 3.6 . and build it , ver. 10.  for how shall we believe on him of whom we have not heard , and how shall we hear without a preacher ? and how shall they preach unless they be sent ? rom. 10.14 . But the church doth continue : for first , else Christ were no longer the head of it , the King , prophet , or priest , and so not Christ : but he is a priest for ever , abiding continually : he continueth ever , and hath an unchangeable priesthood ; he ever liveth to make intercession for those that come to God by him , heb. 7.3 , 22 , 24 , 25. 2.  Those that deny the church , must needs deny themselves Christians and members of that church . 3.  There is no salvation promised but to the church , eph. 5.23 , 25 , 26 , 27.  Mark 16.16 . 4.  blindness is on the Jews but till the fullness of the gentiles be come in , and so all Israel shall be saved : therefore it is most evident that the gentile church shall not cease till the fullness have prepared for the re-ingrassing of the Jews , rom. 11.25 , 26. 5.  It is an everlasting kingdom , which cannot be moved , and the city of the living God , the heavenly Jerusalem , whereof even the angels and perfected spirits of the just are a part , to which we come by faith : therefore it ceaseth not , heb. 12.22 , 23 , 28. 6.  when that which is perfect is come , then that which is in part shall be done away , 1 cor. 13.10 but not before . 11.  If nothing can separate us from the love of God , no not any distress or tribulation , then are not all the ministers and church cut off , rom. 8.34 . to 39  Yea , those that in all ages suffer for his sake are not cut off from him : but so many faithful ministers do . 12.  But what should i say any more against that assertion which carrieth stark heathenism or infidelity in its forehead , reproaching Christ as no Christ , and teaching men that they are not bound to be Christians , and believe the gospel , and persuading the world to despise Christ's messengers and ordinances ; and ministers to cast off their Master's work ; which in two words is , to turn infidels , or apostates . I must refer you for my fuller answer to such men , to my book against infidelity . 

Prop. 4.  God hath in his law appointed a standing way for the calling of these ordinary teaching , ruling , worshipping ministers , in all ages ; and doth himself call them in this way . 1.  He instituteth the office . 2.  He commandeth that fit persons be ordained to this office . 3.  He describeth them by their necessary qualifications . All this is at large , 1 tim 3. tit. 1. act. 20. 1 pet. 5. &c. this is his work by his standing law . By which also he commandeth the persons to choose , consent to , or accept the fit , and to hear and obey them , acts 14.23 . 2 thes. 5.12 . Acts 6.3 , 5.  heb. 13.7 , 17.  And then by providence , 1.  He giveth them those gifts of the spirit that May competently qualify them for their office . 2.  He assisteth the choosers and ordainers to discern those qualifications , and do their duties . 3.  He causeth some special fitness of a minister to the special province or charge , which he is to undertake , and special inviting occasions and opportunities , and ofttimes causeth necessity to make the choice . 4.  He coweth the heart of the person called to consent , and usually to desire the work , ( For the right ends . ) 5.  And if he be called to be the pastor of a particular church ; he moveth the persons to consent or accept him . And thus God according to his appointed order doth call his ministers . Besides which , he afterward 1.  Helps them in his work 2.  And procureth them liberty , and often furtherance from Christian magistrates . 3.  And giveth them success . 

Proposition 5.  the faithful pastors of the reform churches , are these ordinary ministers of Christ , approved by him , and given in great mercy to his persons , who are bound to know , honour and obey them in the Lord . 

I exclude not all others , but i now prove that these are true ministers . argument 1.  they that have all that is essential to true ministers , are true ministers : but such are these pastors of the reform churches : as i prove thus : if the office itself be of God's institution , and their qualifications competent , and their entrance right in every point of flat necessity , than they have all that is essential to true ministers : but the former is true , as i shall prove in the three several parts . 1.  That the office itself is of God's appointment , is proved fully before , and confessed by all Christians that ever i knew , acts 14.23 . 1 tim. 3. tit. 1. 1 pet. 5.1 , 2. 1 thes. 5.12 . heb. 13.7 , 17 , 24.  Acts 20.28 . 2.  For qualifications , they have 1. competent knowledge , 2. and utterance , 3. and godliness : and these are the qualifications that God accepteth , 1 cor. 12.8 . 1 tim. 2.15 . 1 tim. 5.17 . Mark the canons of the holy ghost , 2 tim. 2.2 . They must be 1.  faithful men , 2.  able to teach others : but such are those in question , 1 tim. 3.  a Bishop must be blameless ( That is , not scandalous ) the husband of one wife , vigilant , sober , of good behaviour , given to hospitality , apt to teach , not given to wine , no striker , not greedy of filthy lucre , but patient , not a brawler , not covetous , one that ruleth well his own house , having his children in subjection , with all gravity . ] To which is added , tit. 1.8 , 9  a lover of good men , sober , just , holy , temperate , holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught , that he May be able by sound doctrine both to exhort , and to convince the gainsayers . ] Let all here note , 1.  That here is not only the mention of the virtue's necessary to the being , but to the well-being also of a minister : 2.  And yet through the great mercy of God , all these are the qualifications of multitudes of the pastors of the reform churches , as malice itself must be forced to confess . But if any deny it of any particular men , as that is nothing to the rest ; so an unproved accusation is not by honest men to be believed . The world knows that the act for rejecting scandalous , insufficient , negligent ministers is very strict , and commissioners in each county forward to execute it , and ministers have enemies enough to search out their faults , and yet none are more forward than ministers themselves to have the act put in execution , so that their standing justifies them before the world : or , if any will yet deny them the necessary qualifications , i here challenge and provoke them to accuse all that are guilty , and cast them out ; or else to confess themselves mere slanderers , and backbiters , and learn more truth and modesty hereafter . 3.  And for the third point , their entrance into the office : they have all that God hath made necessary to a just entrance , as i prove : they that have a true ordination , and the people's consent , and the magistrates allowance , have all that God hath made necessary to a just entrance , and more than all : but the said pastors of the reform churches have true ordination , and the people's consent , and the magistrates allowance : that they have true ordination , i shall show anon in answering all that can be said against it . The people's consent , by electing , or accepting is known by the fact : and so is the magistrates by law and fact : i put in all this ▪ though more than necessary , that all objections May be satisfied at once : so that the enumerations being unquestionable , the conclusion is so to . In short : all those are true ministers , that are in an office of God's own institution , and are competently fitted for that office by knowledge , godliness , and utterance , and have all , and more than all that God hath made necessary to a right entrance or admission , even true ordination , consent of the flock , and the magistrates allowance . but such are the said pastors of the reform churches , therefore they are true ministers of Christ . 

Argument 2.  those that have not only the essentials , but excel all other ministers on earth ( That are known to the world ) are certainly the true ministers of Christ . But such are the ministers before mentioned of the reform churches , ergo . This will be proved at once with the next , which is , 

Argument 3.  either these pastors of the reform churches , are the true ministers of Christ , or else there are none such visible in the world : but there are such visibly and certainly in the world , as was proved : else there is no church , no ordinances , no Christianity , no Christ : for he can be no King without subjects and laws : no Master without a school and scholars : no physician without patients : no husband without his spouse : no head without a body : no intercessor without a church to intercede for . And to believe the holy Catholic church , and the communion of saints , is part of our belief and therefore the Christian faith is gone if these be gone . And that either we , or none are Christ's true ministers , i prove thus : 1.  We challenge the adversary to name us the true church and ministry ; if these be none of them , where be they , and who are they ? speak out , or give up your wicked cause . If you know not who they be or where , then how know you that there are any such ? True ministers are like a light that shineth to all the house , even the lights of the world , and like a city on a hill that cannot be hide , matth. 5.14 , 15 , 16. 2.  But let us try the particulars : 1.  The seekers have no church or ministry . 2.  The Quakers have no ordination , that we know of , and are every way so unworthy , and had no being in the world till a few years ago , that he is either no Christian , or of a crazed brain , that thinks Christ hath no church or ministry but them . 3.  The Anabaptiss , Socinians , Swenkfeldians , Familists , Paracelsians , Weigelians , and such like , have no more to show for their ministry and churches than we , but their errors ; and are so few and so lately sprung up , that of them also i May say , that he that takes them for the only church , or ministers , is either out of the faith , or much out of his wits . 4.  The Eastern and Southern churches have no more to show for their ministry and churches than we : but are incomparably more ignorant . , and erroneous : few of them doing more than read their liturgies and homilies , and so administer the sacraments . 5.  All the controversy therefore lieth between us and the Papists . Either they are true ministers and a church , or not . if not , then it 's left to us . if they are , than we are so much more . for we have much more unquestionable evidence of our title . 1.  The office of a t●aching , guiding , worshipping presbyter which we are in , is beyond all question , and yielded by themselves , to be of divine institution . But the office of a mass-priest , to make a god of a piece of bread , and turn bread into flesh , so that there shall be quantity , colour , taste , &c. without bread , or any subject ; and a man's eyes , taste , or feeling shall not know that its bread or wine , when we see , taste , and feel it ; as also to celebrate public worship in an unknown tongue ; this office is more questionable than ours . 2.  It remaineth a great doubt , whether the Pope be not the Antichrist : but of our ministry there 's no such doubt . 3.  For knowledge , godliness and utterance , and all true ministerial abilities , as it 's well known what an ignorant rabble their common secular mass-priests are , so those military friars and Jesuits that are chosen of purpose to play their game among us , and credit their cause : if they have any relics of truth or modesty , will confess that the generality of our ministers are much beyond theirs for parts and piety ; or at least , that we cannot be denied to be true ministers for want of necessary abilities : we should rejoice if their ministers , priests , or Jesuits were near of such piety as those of the reform churches . Some of their Jesuits and friars are learned men : in which also we have those that equal the best of them : but for the learning , ability , or piety of the common ministers on both sides , there is no comparison to be made . 4.  All the question than is of the way of entrance . And there 1.  The Papists seek not the people's consent so much as we do . 2.  They despise the magistrates consent , in comparison of us . 3.  And for ordination , which is it that all the stress must be laid on , we have it , and nearer the rule of God than they . Are 〈◊〉 ordained with fasting , prayer , and imposition of hands ? so are we . M  it be by one of a superior order ? Who then shall ordain or consecrate the Pope ? And yet a multitude of our ministers are ordained 〈◊〉 Bishops , if that be necessary : but the great objection is , that we have not an uninterrupted succession from the apostles , and so those that ordained us had no power ; and therefore could not give it to us . 

Proposition 6.  the want of an uninterrupted succession , and so of power in the ordainers doth not disable our title to the ministry , or set us in a worse condition than the Papists . for if it be only the succession of possession of the office , there is no man of brains can deny , but we have an uninterrupted succession down from the apostles . but if it be a succession of right ordination that is questioned , 1.  The Papists have none such themselves . 2.  We have more of it than they . 3.  It is not necessary that this be uninterrupted . All these i prove : 1.  The Popes themselves from whom their power flows , have been heretics , denied the immortality of the soul , whoremongers , sodomites , Simonists , murderers , so that for many of them successively the Papists confess they were apostatical , and not apostolical : see in their own writers the lives of silve. . 2. alexand. 3 & 6.  John 13.  & 22.  & : 23.  greg. 7.  Vrban . 7. and abundance more . joh. 13. was proved in council to have ravished maids and wives at the Apostolic doors , murdered many , drunk to the devil , asked help at dice of Jupiter and Venus : and was killed in the act of adultery . Read the proofs in my book against popery , pag. 269 , 270 , 255 , 101.  The council at Pisa deposed two Popes at once , called them heretics departed from the faith . The council at Constance deposed joh. 23. as holding that there was no eternal life , immortality of the soul or resurrection : the council at Basil deposed Eugenius 4. as a Simonist and perjured wretch , a schismatic , and obstinate heretic . now these men are uncapable of the ministry , as an infidel is , for want of essential qualifications : as copper is no currant coin , though the stamp of the Prince against his will be put upon it : undisposed matter cannot receive the form . A fit man unordained is nearer the ministry , than such a man ordained . So that here was a nullity . 2.  And all the following Popes were the successors of Eugenius , that was deposed and thus judged by a general council ; but by force brought them to submit and held the place . 3.  Either the election , ordination , or both is it that giveth them the essence of their papacy . If election , than there hath been a long interruption : for somewhile the persons chose , and in other ages the Emperors chose , and in these times the Cardinals ; and therefore some of them had no lawful choice : and for ordination , or consecration . 1.  There have been three or four Popes at once , and all were consecrate , that yet are now confessed to have been no true Popes . 2.  inferiors only consecrate . 3.  And such as had no power themselves . Besides that , the sea hath been very many years vacant , and some score years the Pope hath been at Avignion , and had but the name of p. of Rome . and when three or four have been Pope at once , Bellarmine confesseth , learned men knew not which was the right , yea , general councils knew not . The council at Basil thought faelix the fifth was the right Pope , but it proved otherwise , so that many palpable intercisions have been made at Rome . 

2.  Our ordination hath been less interrupted than theirs . 

Object . but you are not ordained by Bishops . Answ . 1.  Almost all in England are till of late , if that will serve . 2.  Presbyters May or●●●● in case of necessity , as the generality of the old episcopal men grant , and their ordination is not null . 3.  Presbyters have power to ordain , and were restrained only from the exercise by human laws , as many of the schoolmen confess . 4.  Presbyters have still ordained with the Bishop : therefore they had authority to it , and the work is not alien to their function . 5.  Our parish presbyters are Bishops , having some of them assistants , and deacons under them . Or as Grotius notes , at least , they are so , as being the chief guides of that church : their own rule is , that every city should have a Bishop : and every corporation is truly a city , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , and therefore must have a Bishop . 6.  The jus divinum of prelacy is lis sub judice . 7.  Bishop Vsher maintaining to me the validity of the ordination of the presbyters without a Bishop , told me how he answered King c. who asked him for an instance in church-history , viz. that Hierom ad evag. tells us of more ; that the presbyters of Alexandria , till the days of Heroclas and Dionysius took one from among themselves , and made him Bishop : therefore they May make a presbyter , which is less . 8.  it 's at last confessed , that in scripture-times there were no presbyters under Bishops , but the single churches had single pastors . 9  No man can prove ordination by fixed Bishops over many churches ( Now called diocesan ) in the first age : the fixed Bishops had no more at first but single churches . Object . but you never received power from the Bishop to ordain : and therefore cannot have that which was never given you . Answ . if they put men into that office , to which God hath affixed the power of ordination , than they do their part to convey the power . As if you marry a couple , and express not the man's authority over the woman , yet he hath it nevertheless by being made her husband . So he that is made a pastor in city or country , May do the work of a pastor , though each particular was not named . 

Proposition 7.  ordination is ordinarily necessary as a means of our right entrance , but not absolutely necessary to the being of our office or power . for 1.  God , having already settled the office , duty , and power , and what qualifications shall be necessary , and giving these qualifications to men , he hath left nothing to man but mutual consent , and to judge of the person qualified , and solemnly introduce him . 2.  God hath not tied himself or us absolutely to the ●udgement of ordainers . If a Bishop ordain a heathen , or any man void of essential qualifications , its null , as being against a flat command of God : and if Bishops refuse to ordain us pastors , the persons must take them without : because the command of preaching , hearing , sacraments , &c. is greater than that of ordination , and before it . Positives yield to natural morals , and matters of order to the substance and end of the duty ordered . See my Christian concord , pag. 82 , 83 , 84. 3.  ordination is no more necessary to the ministry than baptism to Christianity . as those that are first Princes by title , must be crowned , and those that are soldiers by contract , must be listed and take colours , and those that are husband and wife by contract , must be solemnly married , which are celebrating , perfecting actions ; so they that are first heart-christians by believing , or by parents dedicating them to God , must be solemnly entered under the hand of the minister : and those that are by approbation and consent initially ministers , must by solemnization have the office publicly delivered them by the ministers of Christ . So that as a man is a Christian indeed before baptism initially , and is justified initially before , and in case of necessity May be saved without it ( The Papists confessing that the vow will serve ) so is it in the case of ordination to the ministry . 

Proposition 8.  it is only Christ and not the ordainers , persons or magistrates that give us our office and power : only the persons and approvers design the person which shall receive it from Christ : and our own consent , and the peoples is of necessity thereto ( And our own much as theirs ) and the ordainers do instrumentally invest us in it : but the power and duty arise directly from God's institution , when the person is designed . Now i proceed to prove our calling . 

Argument 4.  we have a far clearer call than the priests before Christ had to the priesthood : for they were not of the true line : they bought the priesthood : they corrupted the doctrine and worship , and were of wicked lives . And yet Christ commanded submission to their ministry , ergo . 

Argument 5.  if we have as clear a call to our office as any magistrates on earth have to theirs , than we are true ministers of Christ . for they are true magistrates : and God is the fountain of their power too : and its impossible they should have any but from him . Or from him but by his means . Officers have no power but from the sovereign . The Prince was at first chosen by God , immediately , as well as the apostles were by Christ , yet no Prince can plead an uninterrupted succession thence : and if they May reign without it , we May be pastors without it : and yet i cannot say that we are without it , though Princes be . Kings were formerly anointed by inspired prophets , and were prophets themselves . And as the continuance of this is not necessary to them , so neither to us . The differences between their power and ours , makes nothing against this argument : if conquest , or the people's consent , or birth , or directing providences can prove their title , than consent , ordination , providence , with due qualifications , will sure prove ours : were it not for fear , they should soon hear the arguments more set home against themselves , that are now bent against the ministers . 

Argument 6.  if besides all this God own us by such a blessing on our labours , that he maketh us the means of propogating and continuing his gospel and church , and brings most of his chosen to union with Christ , reconciliation , holiness , and to heaven by our ministry , then certainly we are his true ministers ; but experience assureth us of the former : therefore — so much for argument . 

Proposition 9  if a minister be in quiet possession of the place , and fit for it , the persons are bound to obey him as a minister , wi●hout knowing that he was justly ordained or called . Argum. 1.  We must obey a magistrate without assurance of his call and title , rom. 13. therefore a minister . 2.  Christ commanded hearing and obeying them that were not called as God appointed : because they were priests , or sat in Moses chair , and taught the truth , Luke 16.29 . matth. 23.2 . Luke 5.14 . matth. 8.4 . Mark 1.44 . 3.  Else the persons are put upon impossibilities : can all the poor persons tell before they submit to minister , what is essential to his call , and whether he have all that is so , and whether his orders be true or forged , and whether they that ordained him were truly ordained , or chosen themselves ? Not one of twenty thousand knows all this by their pastors . 

Proposition 10.  the ordinances are valid to the persons when the minister is uncalled and unordained , if they know it not : he that hath no just call , shall answer for what he doth as an intruder ; but the persons shall have for all that the fruit of his ministration ; and preaching , and baptism , and other acts shall not be null to them . 1.  The Papists themselves confess this . 2.  Else scarce a man could tell whether he be baptised , or May use any ordinance because he cannot have an exact account of the ministers call , no nor know that he is indeed a Christian , i knew divers in the Bishop's days that forged themselves orders , and acted long before it was discovered . 3.  It is the office which is God's ordinance , that is blessed , and valid to the persons , and not his call only . 4.  It is he that sinneth that must suffer , and not the innocent ; therefore his sin depriveth them not of their due . 5.  As an usurping magistrate oweth us protection , though he shall answer for his usurpation : so an usurping minister oweth us his labour ; so that the persons are bound to hear and obey men , when they are uncertain of their due call , if they possess the place : and shall have the blessing of such administrations . For we are sure the office and work is of God . 

Proposition 11.  the truth of our doctrine depends not on our calling . were we no ministers , we can prove the gospel true which we deliver . And any man must be believed , that brings a truth that concerneth our peace . Therefore let Quakers , and seekers , and Papists first disprove our doctrine if they can : and not cheat the persons by persuading them that our calling must first be proved ; as a prophets must be . 

Object . but you have your learning only from books , and universities : and so have not true ministers . Answ . we have it from God in the use of his means , even by prayer , reading , study , & learning his works & word of our teachers , whether at universities or elsewhere . And we are commanded to study and meditate on these things , and give ourselves wholly to them , and to meditate on God's law day and night , psal. 1.2 . 2 tim 2.15 1 tim. 4.13 , 15.  Christ's ministers must be teachers or tutors to others , and commit the things which they have heard to faithful men , who shall be able to teach others also , 2 tim. 2.2 . good ministers of Christ are nourished up in the words of faith and good doctrine , and so attain to it , 1 tim. 4.6 . All should learn according to their time of teaching , heb. 5.11 , 12 , 14.  We study nothing but the word , and works of God : and is not that a wretch and not a man that will reproach us as no ministers , for doing that which we have our reason for , and which must be the work of our lives ! Poor Christians , as you love God and your souls , and would not cast off Christ and heaven , let not deceivers draw you to cast off the ministry , scripture , or the ordinances of God . 

octob. 23. 1657.  

Finis . 

