A sermon of iudgement preached at Pauls before the Honourable Lord Maior and aldermen of the city of London, Dec. 17, 1654 and now enlarged / Rich. Baxter. / Baxter, Richard, 1615-1691. (Printed by R.W. for Nevil Simmons ...,London :1655.)

A sermon of judgement , preached at Paul's before the honourable Lord mayor and aldermen of the city of London , dec. 17. 1654.  And now enlarged 

by rich. Baxter . 

rom. 14.12 . Every one of you shall give account of himself to God . 

John 5.28 , 29.  The hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice , and shall come forth : they that have done good , to the resurrection of life , and they that have done evil , to the resurrection of damnation . 

London , printed by r.w. for Nevil Simmons bookseller in Kidderminster , 1655 

To the right honourable Christopher Pack , Lord mayor of London ; with the right worshipful aldermen . Right honourable 

Being desired to preach before you at Paul's , i was fain to preach a sermon , which i had preached once before to a poor ignorant congregation in the country , having little leisure for study in London . i was glad to see that the more curious stomaches of the citizens did not nauseate our plain country doctrine , which i seemed to discern in the diligent attention of the greatest congregation that ever i saw met for such a work : but i little expected that you should have so far esteemed that discourse , as to have thought it meet for the view of the world , as i understood by a message from you , desiring it May be printed . I readily obey your will , when it gives me the least intimation of the will of God . it 's possible some others May afford it the like favourable acceptance and entertainment . I am sure the subject is as necessa●y as common ; and the plainness makes it the fit for the ignorant , who are the far greatest number , and have the greatest need . I have added the 9 , 10 , 11 , and 12.  heads or common-places , which i did not deliver to you for want of time , and because the rest are too briefly touched ( As contrived for an hours work ) i have enlarged these ; though making them somewhat unsuitable to the rest , yet suitable to the use of those that they are now intended for : the directions also in the end are added . 

Blessed be the father of lights , who hath set up so many burning and shining lights in your city , and hath watered you so plenteously with the rivers of his sanctuary , that you have frequent opportunities for the refreshment of your souls , to the joy of your friends , the grief of your enemies , and the glory of that providence which hath hitherto maintained them , in despite of persecution , heresies and hell ! It was not always so in London : it is not so in all other places , or famous cities in the world : nor are you sure that it will be always so with you . It doth me good to remember what blessed lights have shined among you , that now are more gloriously shining in a higher sphere : Preston , Sibbes , Stoughton , tayl●r , stock , Randal , Gouge , Gataker , with multitudes more that are now with Christ ! It did me good to read in the preface to Mr.  Gataker's funeral sermon , by one of your reverend and faithful guides , what a number of sound and unanimous labourers are yet close at work in that part of Christ's vineyard ! And it did me good in that short experience and observation while i was there , to hear and see so much of their prudence , unity and fidelity . 

Believe it , it is the gospel of Christ that is your glory : and if London be more honourable than other great and famous cities of the earth , it is the light of God's face , and the plenty and power of his ordinances and spirit that doth advance and honour it . Oh know then the day of you visitation ! 

Three things i shall take leave to propound to your consideration , which i am certain God requireth at your hands . The first is , that you grow in knowledge , humility , heavenlyness and unity , according to the blessed means that you enjoy . In my eyes ▪ it is the greatest shame to a persons in the world , and a sign of barbarousness , or blockishness , when we can hear and read what famous , learned powerful minister such a place , or such a place had , and yet see as much ignorance , ungodliness , unruliness , and sensuality , as if the gospel had scarce ever been there . I hope it is not thus with you : but i have found it so in too many places in England : we that never saw the faces of their ministers , but have only read their holy labours , have been ready to think , sure there are but few ignorant or ungodly ones in such a congregation ! Sure they are a persons rich in grace , and eminently qualified above their brethren , who have lived undersuch teaching as this ! At least , sure there can be none left that have an enmity to the fear of God but when we have come to the towns where such men spent their lives , and laid out their labours , we have found ignorant , sott●sh worldlings , unprofitable or giddy unstable professors , and some haters of godliness among them . Oh what a shame is this to them in the eyes of wise men ! and what a confounding aggravation of the●r sin before God thrive therefore and be fruitful in the vineyard of the Lord , that it May not repent him that he hath planted and watered you . 

The second is this ; improve your interest to the utmost , for the continuance of a faithful ministry among you : and when any places are void , do what you can to get a supply of the most able men . Your city is the heart of the nation : you cannot be sick but we shall all feel it . If you be infected with false doctrines , the countries will ere long receive the contagion . You have a very great influence on all the land , for good or evil ! And do you think the undermining enemies of the church have not a special design upon you in this point ? and will not promote it as far as is in their power ? Could they but get in popish or dividing teachers among you , they know how many advantages they should gain at once ! They would have some to grieve and trouble your faithful guides ▪ and hinder them in the work , and lessen that estimation which by their unity they would obtain : and every deceiver will hope to catch some fish , that casteth his net among such store . We beseech you , if there be learned , holy , judicious men in England , that can be had for supply on such occasions , let them be yours ; that you May be fed with the best , and guided by the wisest , and we May have all recourse to you for advice : and where there are most opposers and seducers , there May be the most powerful , convincing helps at hand : let us in the country have the honest raw young preachers , and see that you have the chief fatherspunc ; and pillars in the church . I speak it not for your sakes alone , but because we have all dependence on you . 

The third thing which i humbly crave , is , that you will know them which labour among you , and are over you in the Lord , and admonish you , and to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake ; and be at peace among yourselves . 1 thes. 5.12 , 13.  and that you will instead of grieving or rejecting your guides , obey them that have the rule over you , and submit yourselves ; for they watch for your souls as they that must give account , that they May do it with joy , and not with grief , for that is unprofitable for you . heb. 13.17.7 . encourage your teachers , for their work is great , their spirits are weak they are but frail men ; the enemy is more industrious against them than any men ; & their discouragements are very many , and the difficulties which they must encounter are very great . Especially , obey , submit and encourage them in the work of government and exercise of Christ's discipline , and managing the keys of the kingdom which he hath put into their hands . Do you not perceive what a strait your teachers are in ! The Lord Jesus requireth them to exercise his discipline faithfully and impartially : he giveth them not empty titles of rule , but lays upon them the burden of ruling : it is his work , more than their honour that he intends : and if they will have the honour , it must be by the work . the work is , as to teach the ignorant , and convince the unbelieving and gainsaying , so to admonish the disorderly and scandalous , and to reject and cast out of the communion of the church the obstinate and impenitent ; and to set by the leprous , that they infect not the rest ; and to separate thus the precious from the vile , by Christ's discipline , that dividing separations , and soul-destroying transgressions May be prevented or cured . This work Christ hath charged upon them , and will have it done whoever is against it . If they obey him and do it , what a tumult , what clamours and discontents will they raise ! How many will be ready to rise up against them with hatred and scorn ! though it be the undoubted work of Christ , which even under persecution was performed by the church-guides . When they do but keep a scandalous untractable sinner from the communion of the church in the Lord's supper , what repinings doth it raise ! But , alas , this is a small part of the discipline : if all the apparently obstinate and impenitent were cast out , what a stir would they make ! And if Christ be not obeyed , what a stir will conscience make ? And it is not only between Christ and men , but between men and men , that your guides are put upon such straits . The separatists reproach them for suffering the impenitent to continue members of their churches , and make it the pretence of their separation from them ; having little to say of any moment against the authorised way of government ; but only against our slackness in the execution . And if we should set to the close exercise of it , as is meet , how would city and country ring of it , and what indignation should we raise in the multitude against us ! Oh what need have your guides of your encouragement and best assistance in this straight ! God hath set them on a work so ungrateful and displeasing to flesh and blood , that they cannot be faithful in it , but twenty to one they will draw a world of hatred upon themselves , if not men's fists about their ears . Festered sores will not be launched and search with ease : corrupted members are unwilling to be cut off , and cast aside : especially if any of the great ones fall under the censure , who are big in the eyes of the world and in their own . And yet our sovereign Lord must be obeyed ; and his house must be swept , and the filth cast out , by what names or titles soever it be dignified with men : he must be pleased , if all be displeased by it . Withdraw not your help then from this needful work . It is by the word , spirit and ministry , that Christ the King of his church doth govern it : not separatedly , but jointly , by all three : to disobey these , is to disobey Christ : and subjection to Christ is essential to our Christianity . This well thought on Might do much to recover the unruly that are recoverable . You May conjecture by the strange opposition that church-government meets with from all sorts of carnal and corrupted minds , that there is somewhat in it that is eminently of God . I sha●l say no more but this , that it is an able , judicious , godly , faithful ministry , not barely heard and applauded , but humbly and piously submitted to , and obeyed in the Lord , that musst be your truest present glory , and the means of your everlasting peace and joy . 

So testifieth from the Lord , your servant in the faith of Christ . Rich. Baxter . 

To the ignorant , or careless reader . Seeing the providence of God hath commanded forth this plain discourse , i shall hope ( Upon experience of his dealing in the like cases , with me ) that he hath some work for it to do in the world . Who knows but it was intended for the saving of thy soul by opening thine eyes and awaking thee from thy sin , who art now in reading of it ! Be it known to thee , it is the certain truth of God , and of high concernment to thy soul that it treateth of ; and therefore requireth thy most sober consideration . Thou hast in it ( How weakly soever it is managed by me ) an advantage put into thy hand from God , to help thee in the greatest work in the world , even to prepare for the great approaching judgement . In the name of Go● , i require thee , cast not away this advantage : turn no away thine ears or heart from this warning that is sent to thee from the living God seeing all the world cannot keep thee from judgement , nor save thee in judgement : let not all the world be able to keep thee from a speedy and serious preparation for it . Do it presently , lest God come before thou are ready ! Do it seriously , lest the temepter overreach thee , and thou shouldst be found among the foolish self-deceivers , when it is too late to do it bttter . I entreat this of thee on the behalf of thy soul , and as thou tenderest thy everlasting peace with God , that thou wouldst afford these matters thy deepest consideration . Think on them , whether they are not true , and weighty : think of them lying down and rising up . And seeing this small book is fallen into thy hands , all that i would beg of thee concerning it , is , that thou wouldst bestow now and then an hour to read it , and read it to thy family or friends as well as to thyself : and as you go ▪ consider what you read , and pray the Lord to help it to thy heart , and to assist thee in the practice , that it May not rise up in judgement against thee . If thou have not leisure at other , take now and then an hour on the Lord's days , or at a night to that purpose , and if any passage through brevity ( Specially near the beginning ) seem dark to thee , read it again , and again , and ask the help of an instructor , that thou Mayest unders●and it . May it but help thee out of the snares of sin , and promote the saving of thy immortal soul , and thy comfortable appearance at the great day of Christ , i have the thing which i intended and desired . The Lord open thy heart , and accompany his truth with the blessing of his spirit ! Amen . 

A sermon of judgement , preached at Paul's before the honourable Lord mayor and aldermen of the city London , dec. 17. 1654. 2 cor. 5.10 , 11.  For we must all appear before the judgement seat of Christ , that every one May receive the things done in his body ; according to that he hath done , whether it be good or bad . Knowing therefore the terrors of the Lord we persuade men . 

It is not unlikely , that some of those wits that are taken more with things new then with things necessary , will marvel that i choose so common a subject , and tell me that they all know this already ▪ but i do it purposely upon these following considerations . 1.  Because i well know , that it is these common truths that are the great and necessary things which men's everlasting happiness or misery doth most depend upon . You May be ignorant of many controversies and inferior points , without the danger of your souls , but so you cannot of these fundamentals . 2.  Because its apparent by the lives of men , that few know these common truths savingly , that think they know them . 3.  Because there are several degrees of knowing the same truths , and the best are imperfect in degree . The principal growth in knowledge that we should look after , is not to know more matters than we kne● before , but to know that better , and with a clearer light and firmer apprehension , which we darkly and slightly knew before . You May more safely be without any knowledge at all of many lower truths , then without some further degree of the knowledge of those which you already know . 4.  Besides it is known by sad experience , that many perish who know the truth , for want of the consideration of it , and making use of what they know , and so their knowledge doth but condemn them . We have as much need therefore , to teach and help you to get these truths which you know into your hearts and lives , as to tell you more . 5.  And indeed , it is the impression of these great and master-truths , wherein the vitals and essentials of God's image upon the soul of man doth consist : and it is these truths that are the very instruments of the great works that are to be done upon the heart , by the spirit and ourselves . In the right use of these it is , that the principal part of the skill and holy wisdom of a Christian doth consist : and in the diligent and constant use of these lieth the life and trade of Christianity . There is nothing amiss in men's hearts or lives , but it is for want of sound knowing and believing , or well using these fundamentals . 6.  And moreover , methinks , in this choice of my subject , i May expect this advantage with the hearers , that i May spare that labour that else would be necessary for the proof of my doctrine : and that i May also have easier access to your hearts , and have a fuller stroke at them , and with less resistance . If i came to tell you of any thing not common , i know not how far i Might expect belief from you . You Might say , these things are uncertain to us , or all men are not of this mind : but when every hearer confesseth the truth of my doctrine , & no man can deny it , without denying Christianity itself , i hope i May expect that your hearts should the sooner receive the impression of this doctrine , and the sooner yield to the duties which it directs you to ; and the easier let go the sins which from so certain a truth shall be discovered . 

The words of my text , are the reason which the apostle giveth both of his persuading other men to the fear of God , and his care to approve to God his own heart and life . They contain the assertion and description of the great judgement , and one use which he makes of it . It assureth us , that judged we must be ; and who must be so judged , and by whom , and about what , and on what terms , and to what end . 

The meaning of the words , so far as is necessary , i shall give you briefly . we all , both we apostles that preach the gospel , and you that hear it , must , willing or unwilling , there is no avoiding it , appear , stand forth or make our appearance , and there have our hearts and ways laid open , and appear as well as we . before the judgement seat of Christ ; i.e. before the redeemer of the world , to be judged by him as our rightful Lord . that every one , even of all mankind which are , were , or shall be , without exception ; May receive , that is , May receive his sentence adjudging him to his due ; and then May receive the execution of the sentence ; and May go away from the bar with that reward or punishment that is his due according to the law by which he is judged . the things done in his body , that is , the due reward of the works done in his body : or as some copies read it , the things proper to the body , i.e. due to the man , even body as well as soul . according to what he hath done , whether it be good or bad : i. ▪ e.  This is the cause to be tried and judged , whether men have done well or ill while they were in the flesh , and what is due to them according to their deeds . knowing therefore , &c. i.e. being certain therefore that these things are so , and that such a terrible judgement of Christ will come , we persuade men to become Christians and live as such , that they May then speed well when others shall shall be destroyed : or as others , knowing the fear of the Lord , that is , the true religion , we persuade men . 

doct. 1.  There will be a judgement . doct. 2.  Christ will be the judge . doct. 3.  All men shall there appear . doct. 4.  Men shall be then judged according to the works that they did in the flesh , whether good or evil . doct. 5.  The end of judgement is , that men May receive their final due by sentence and execution . doct. 6.  The knowledge and consideration of the terrible judgement of God , should move us to persuade , and men to be persuaded to careful preparation . 

The ordinary method for the handling of this subject of judgement should be this . 1.  To show you what judgement is in the general , and what it doth contain : and that is , 1.  The persons . 2.  The cause . 3.  The actions . 1.  The parties are , 1. the accuser . 2. the defendant . 3.  Sometime assistants . 4.  The judge . 2.  The cause contains , 1. the accusation . 2. the defence . 3.  With the evidence of both . 4. and the merit . The merit of the cause is , as it agreeth with the law and equity . 3.  The judicial actions are , i. introductory . 1.  Citation . 2.  Compulsion if need be . 3.  Appearance of the accused . Ii of the essence of judgement , 1.  Debate by  the accuser , 2.  Defendant , called the disceptation of the cause . 2.  By the judge .  . Ex : ploration . 2.  Sentence . 3.  To see to the execution : but because the method is less suitable to your capacities ; and hath something human , i will reduce all to these following heads . 

1.  I will show what judgement is . 

2.  Who is the judge ; and why . 

3.  Who must be judged . 

4.  Who is the accuser . 

5.  How the citation , constraint and appearance will be . 

6.  What is the law by which men shall be judged . 

7.  What will be the cause of the day : what the accusation , and what must be the just defence . 

8.  What will be the evidence . 

9  What are those frivolous insufficient excuses by which the unrighteous May think to escape . 

10.  What will be the sentence : who shall die and shall live ; and what the reward and punishment is . 

11.  What are the properties of the sentence . 

12.  What and by whom the execution will be . In these particular heads we contain the whole doctrine of this judgement , and in thi● more familiar method shall handle it . 

1.  For the first , judgement as taken largely , comprehendeth all the forementioned particulars ; as taken more strictly for the act of the judge , it is the trial of a controverted case . in our case not these things following . 

1.  God's judgement is not intended for any discovery to himself of what he knows not already : he knoweth already what all men are ; and what they have done ; and what is their due . But it is to discover to others and to men themselves the ground of his sentence , that so his judgement May attain its end ; for the glorifying his grace on the righteous , and for the convincing the wicked of their sin and de●ert , and to show to all the world the righteousness of the judge , and of his sentence and execution , rom. 3.4.26 . and rom. 2.2 . 

2.  It is not a controversy therefore undecided in the mind of God that is there to be decided ; but only one that is undecided , as to the knowledge and mind of creatures . 

3.  Yet is not this judgement a bare declaration , but a decision , and so a declaration thereupon : the cause will be then put out of controversy , and all further expectation of decision be at an end ; and with the justified there will be no more accusation , and with the condemned no more hope for ever . 

Ii for the second thing , who shall be the judge , i answer , the judge is God himself by Jesus Christ . 

1.  Principally , God as creator . 

2.  As also , God as redeemer ; the human nature of Jesus Christ having a derived subordinate power . God lost not his right to his creature either by man's fall , or the redemption by Christ , but by the latter hath a new and further right : but it is in and by Christ that God judgeth : for as mere creator of innocent man , God judgeth none , but hath committed all judgement to the son , who hath procured this right by the redeeming of fallen man , John 5.22 . But as the son only doth it in the nearest sense , so the father as creator doth it remotely and principally . 

1.  In that the power of the son is derived from the father , and so standeth in subordination to him as fountain or efficient . 

2.  In that the judgement of the son ( As also his whole mediatorship ) to bring men to God their maker as their ultimate end , and recover them to him from whom they are fallen , and so as a means to that end , the judgement of the son is subordinate to the father . 

From hence you May see these following truths worthy your consideration . 

1.  That all men are God's creatures , and none are the workmanship of themselves or any other ; or else the creator should not judge them on that right . 

2.  That Christ died for all , and is the redeemer of the world , and a sacrifice for all ; or else he should not judge them on that right . For he will not judge wicked men as he will do the devils , as the mere enemies of his redeemed ones , but as being themselves his subjects' in the world , and being bought by him , and therefore become his own , who ought to have glorified him that bought them , 2 cor. 5.14 , 15. 2 pet. 2.1 . 1 cor. 6. ●9 , 20. 1 ioh. 2.2 . heb. 2.9 . 1 tim. 2.6 , 7.  

3.  Hence it appeareth that all men were under some law of grace , and did partake of some of the redeemer's mercy . Though the gospel came not to all , yet all had that mercy which could come from no other fountain but his blood , and which should have brought them nearer to Christ than they were , ( Though it were not sufficient to bring them to believe : ) and which should have led them to repentance . rom. 2.4 . For the neglecting of which they justly perish ; and not merely for sinning against the law that was given man in innocency : were that so , Christ would not judge them as redeemer , and that for the abuse or not-improvement of his talents , as he tells us he will do , mat. 25. per totum . 

4.  If God will be the judge , than none can expect by any shifts or indirect means scape at that day . For how should it be ? 

1.  It is not possible that any should keep out of sight , or hide their sin and the evil of their actions , and so delude the judge : God will not be mocked now , nor deceived then , gal. 6.7 . they grossly deceive themselves that imagine any such thing : God must be omniscient and all-seeing , or he cannot be God . Should you hide your cause from men and from devils , and be ignorant of it yourselves , yet cannot you hide it from God . Never did there a thought pass thy a heart , or a word pass thy mouth , which God was not acquainted with : and as he knows them , so he doth observe them . He is not as imperfect man , taken up with other business , so that he cannot mind all . as easy is it with him to observe every thought , or word , or action of thine , as if he had but that one in the world to observe : and as easy to observe each particular sinner , as if he had not another creature to look after in the world . He is a fool indeed that thinks now that God takes no notice of him , ezek. 8.12 . and 9.9 . or , that thinketh then to escape in the crowd : he that found out one guest that had not on a wedding garment , mat. 22.12 . will then find out every unholy soul , and give him so sad a salvation as shall make him speechless , Job 11.11 . for he noweth vain man ; he seeth wickedness also , and will he not consider it ? 

2.  It is not possible that any should scape at that day by any tricks of with and false reasoning in their own defence . God knoweth a sound answer from an unsound , and a truth from a lie . Righteousness May be perverted here on earth , by out-witting the judge ; but so will it not be then : to hope any of this , is to hope that God will not be God . It is in vain then for the unholy man to say he is holy ; or extenuate his sin : to bring forth the counterfeit of any grace , and plead with God any shells of hypocritical performances , and to think to prove a title to heaven by any thing short of God's condition ; all these will be vain attempts . 

3.  And as impossible will it prove by fraud or flattery , by persuasion or bribery , or by any other means , to pervert justice , by turning the mind of God who is the judge : fraud and flattery , bribery and importunity May do much with weak men ; but with God they will do nothing : were he changeable and partial , he were not God . 

4.  If God be judge , you May see the cavils of infidels are foolish , when they ask , how long will God be in trying and judging so many persons , and taking an account of so many words , and thoughts , and deeds ? Sure it will be a long time , and a difficult work . as if God were as man , that knoweth not things till he seek out their evidence by particular signs . Let these fools understand , if they have any understanding , that the infinite God can show to every man at once , all the thoughts , and words , and actions that ever he hath been guilty of . And in the twink of an eye , even at one view , can make all the world to see their ways and their deservings . Causing their consciences and memories to present them all before them in such a sort , as shall be equivalent to a verbal debate , psal. 50.21 , 22. he will set them in order before them . 

5.  If Jesus Christ be the judge , than what a comfort must it needs be to his members , that he shall be judge that loved them to the death , and whom they loved above their lives : and he who was their rock of hope and strength , and the desire and delight of their souls ! 

6.  And if Jesus Christ must be the judge , what confusion will it bring to the faces of his enemies , and of all that set light by him in the day of their visitation ? to see mercy turned against them , and he that died for them , now ready to condemn them : and that blood and grace which did aggravate their sin , to be pleaded against them to the increase of their misery , how sad will this be ! 

7.  If the god of love , and grace , and truth be judge , than no man need to fear any wrong . No subtlety of the accuser , nor darkness of evidence : no prejudice , or partiality , or whatsoever else May be imagined , can there appear to the wrong of your cause . Get a good cause and fear nothing ; and if your cause be bad , nothing can deliver you . 

Iii for the third point , who are they that must be judged ? 

answ. all the rational creatures in this lower world . And it seems , angels also , either all or some : but because their case is more darkly made known to us , and less concerns us , we will pass it by . Every man that hath been made or born on earth ( Except Christ , who is God and man , and is the judge ) must be judged . If any foolish infidel shall say , where shall so great a number stand ? i answer him ; that he knoweth not the things invisible : either the nature of spirits , and spiritual bodies : nor what place containeth them , or how ; but easily he May know , that he that gave them all a being , can sustain them all , and have room for them all , and can at once disclose the thoughts of all , as i said before . 

The first in order to bejudged , are , the saints , mat. 25. and then with Christ they shall judge the rest of the world , 1 cor. 6.2 , 3. not in an equal authority and commission with Christ , but as the present approvers of his righteous judgement . The Princes of the earth shall stand then before Christ , even as the peasants ; and the honourable as the base ; the rich and the poor shall meet together , and the Lord shall judge them all , prov. 22.2 . No man shall be excused from standing at that bar , and giving up their account , and receiving their doom . Learned and unlearned ; young and old ; godly and ungodly ; all must stand there . I know some have vainly imagined , that the righteous shall not have any of their sins mentioned , but their graces and duties only ; but they consider not , that things will not then be transacted by words as we do now but by clear discoveries by the infinite light ; and that if God should not discover to them their sins , he would not discover the riches of his grace in the pardon of all these sins : even than must they be humbled in themselves , that they May be glorified ; and for ever cry , not unto us Lord , but unto thy name be the glory . 

Iv. for the fourth particular ; who will be the accuser ? 

answ. 1.  Satan is called in scripture the accuser of the brethren , rev. 12.10 . and we find in Job 1. and other places , that now he doth practice it even before God , and therefore we judge it probable that he will do so then . But we would determine of nothing that scripture hath not clearly determined . 

2.  Conscience will be an accuser , though especially of the wicked , yet in some sense of the righteous : for it will tell the truth to all : and therefore so far as men are faulty , it will tell them of their faults . The wicked it will accuse of unpardoned sin , and of sin unrepented of ; the godly only of sin repent of and pardoned . It will be a glass wherein every man May see the face of his heart and former life , rom. 1.15 . 

3.  The judge himself will be the principal accuser ; for it is he that is wronged , and he that prosecutes the cause , and will do justice on the wicked ; God judgeth even the righteous themselves to be sinners , or else they could not be pardoned sinners ; but he judgeth the wicked to be impenitent , unbelieving , unconverted sinners . Remember what i said before , that it is not a verbal accusation , but an opening of the truth of the cause to the view of ourselves and others , that God will then perform . 

Nor can any think it unworthy of God to be men's accuser by such a disclosure , it being no dishonour to the purest light to reveal a dunghill , or to the greatest Prince to accuse a traitor . Nor is it unmeet that God should be both accuser and judge ; seeing he is both absolute Lord , and so far beyond all suspicion of injustice . His law also doth virtually accuse , John 5.45 . but of this by itself . 

V. for the fifth particular , how will the sinners be called to the bar ? 

answ. God will not stand to send them a citation , nor require him to make his voluntary appearance ; but willing or unwilling he will bring them in . 

1.  Before each man's particular judgement , he sendeth death to call away his soul : a surly sergeant , that will have no nay ; how dear so ever this world May be to men , and how loathe soever they are to depart , away they must , and come before the Lord that made them ; death will not be bribed . Every man that was set in the vineyard in the morning of their lives , must be called out at evening to receive according to what he hath done ; then must the naked soul alone appear before , its judge , and be accomptible for all that was done in the body ; and be sent before till the final judgement , to remain in happiness or misery , till the body be raised again and joined to it . 

In this appearance of the soul before God , it seemeth by scripture , that there is some ministry of angels ; for luk. 16.22 . it is said , that the angels carried Lazarus , that is , his soul , into Abraham's bosom : what local motion there is , or situation of souls , is no fit matter for the enquiry of mortals ; and what it is in this that the angels will do , we cannot clearly understand as yet ; but most certain it is , that as soon as ever the soul is out of the body , it comes to its account before the god of spirits . 

2.  At the end of the world the bodies of all men sha●l be raised from the earth , and jo●ned again to their souls ; and the soul and body shall be judged to their endless state ; and this is the great and general judgement , where all men shall at once appear . The same power of God that made men of nothing , will as easily then new make them by a resurrection ; by which he will add much more perfection , even to the wicked in their naturals , which will make them capable of the greater misery ; even they shall have immortal and incorruptible bodies , which May be the subjects of immortal woe , 1 cor. 15.53 John 5.28 , 29.  

Of this resurrection , and our appearance at judgement , the angels will be some way the ministers : as they shall come with Christ to judgement , so they shall sound his trumpet , 1 thes. 4.16 . and they shall gather the wicked out of God's kingdom ; and they shall gather the tares to burn them , mat. 13.39 ▪ 40 , 41. in the end of the world the angels shall come forth and sever the wicked from among the just , and shall cast them into the furnace of fire , mat. 17.49 , 50.  

For the sixth particular , what law is it that men shall be judged by ? 

answ. that which was given them to live by : God's law is but the sign of his will , to teach us what shall be due from us and to us : before we fell he gave us such a law as was suitable to our perfection : when we had sinned and turned from him , as we ceased not to be his creatures , nor he to be our Lord , so he destroyed not his law , nor discharged or absolved us from the duty of our obedience . But because we stood condemned by that law , and could not be justified by it , having once transgressed it , he was pleased to make a law of grace , even a new remedying law , by which we Might be saved from the deserved punishment of the old. so we shall be tried at judgement upon both these laws , but ultimatly upon the last . The first law commanded perfect obedience , and threatened death to us if ever we disobeyed ; the second law finding us under the gild of sin against the first , doth command us to repent and believe in Christ , and so to return to God by him ▪ and promiseth us pardon of all our sins upon that condition , and also if we persevere , everlasting glory . So that in judgement , though it must first be evinced that we are sinners , and have deserved death according to the law of pure nature ; yet that is not the upshot of the judgement . For the enquiry will be next , whether we have accepted the remedy , and so obeyed the law of grace , and performed its condition for pardon and salvation ; and upon this our life or death will depend . It is both these laws that condemn the wicked , but it is only the law of grace that justifieth the righteous . 

Obj. but how shall heathens be judged by the law of grace , that never did receive it ? 

answ. the express gospel some of them had not , and therefore shall not directly be judged by it ; but much of the redeemer's mercy they did enjoy , which should have led them to repent and seek out after recovery from their misery , and to come nearer Christ , and for the neglect and abuse of this , they shall be judged ; and not merely for sinning against the law that was given us in pure innocency : so that Christ as redeemer shall judge them as well as others : though they had but one talon , yet must they give an account of that to the redeemer , from whom they received it . But if any be unsatisfied in this , let them remember , that as God hath left the state of such more dark to us , and the terms on which he will judge them ; so doth it much more concern us to look to the terms of our own judgement . 

Obj. but how shall infants be judged by the gospel , that were uncapable of it ? 

answ. for aught i find in scripture , they stand or fall with their parents , &c. on the same terms ; but i leave each to their own thoughts . 

Vii . For the seventh head , what will be the cause of the day to be enquired after ? What the accusation , and what the defence ? 

answ. this May be gathered from what was last said . The great cause of the day will be to inquire and determine , who shall die and who shall live ; who ought to go to heaven , and who to hell for ever , according to the law by which they must then be judged . 

1.  As there is a twofold law by which they must be judged , so will there then be a twofold accusation . The first will be , that they were sinners , and so having violated the law of God , they deserve everlasting death according to that law ; if no defence could be made , this one accusation would condemn all the wo●ld ; for it is most certain that all are sinners , and as certain that all sin deserveth death . The only defence against this accusation lieth in this plea : confessing the charge , we must plead that Christ hath satisfied for sins , and upon that consideration God hath forgiven us ; and therefore being forgiven , we ought not to be punished ; to prove this we must show the pardon under God's hand in the gospel . But because this pardoning act of the gospel doth forgive none but those that repent and believe , and so return to God , and to sincere obedience for the time to come ; therefore the next accusation will be , that we did not perform these conditions of forgiveness ; and therefore being unbelievers , impenitent and rebels against the redeemer we have no right to pardon , but by the sentence of the gospel , are liable to a greater punishment , for this contempt of Christ and grace . this accusation is either true or false ; where it is true , God and conscience who speak the truth May well be said to be the accusers : where it is false , it can be only the work of Satan the malicious adversary ; who , as we May see in jobs case , will not stick to bring a false accusation . 

If any think that the accuser will not do so vain a work , at least they May see that potentially , this is the accusation that lieth against us and which we must be justified against . For all justification implieth an actual or potential accusation . 

He that is truly accused of final impenitency , or unbelief , or rebellion , hath no other defence to make , but must needs be condemned . 

He that is falsely accused of such non-performance of the condition of grace ▪ must deny the accusation , and plead his own personal righteousness as against that accusation , and produce that faith , repentance and sincere obedience and perseverance by which he fulfilled that condition , and so is evangelically righteous in himself , and therefore hath part in the blood of Christ which is instead of a legal righteousness to him ▪ in all things else , as having procured him a pardon of all his sin , and a right to everlasting glory . 

And thus we must then be justified by Christ's satisfaction only , against the accusation of being sinners in general , and of deserveing God's wrath for the breach of the law of works : but we must be justified by our faith , repentance and sincere obedience itself , against the accusation of being impenitent , unbelievers , and rebels against Christ , and having not performed the condition of the promise , and so having no part in Christ and his benefits . 

So that in sum you see , that the cause of the day will be to inquire , whether being all known sinners , we have accepted of Christ upon his terms , and so have right in him and his benefits , or not ? Whether they have forsaken this vain world for him , and loved him so faithfully , that they have manifested it , in parting with these things at his command . And this is the meaning of mat. 25.  Where the enquiry is made to be , whether they have fed and visited him in his members , or not ? That is , whether they have so far loved him as their redeemer , and God by him , as that they have manifested this to his members according to opportunity ▪ though it cost them the hazard or loss of all : seeing danger , and labour , and cost , are fit to express love by , then empty compliments and bare professions . 

Whether it be particularly enquired after , or only taken for granted that men are sinners , and have deserved death according to the law of works , and that Christ hath satisfied by his death , is all one as to the matter in hand , seeing God's enquiry is but the discovery and conviction of us . But the last question which must decide the controversy will be , whether we have performed the condition of the gospel ? 

I have the rather also said all this , to show you in what sense These words are taken in the text , that every man shall be judged according to what he hath done in the flesh , whether it be good or bad . though every man be judged worthy of death for sinning , yet every man shall not be judged to die for it : and no man shall be judged worthy of life for his good works : it is therefore according to the gospel , as the rule of judgement , that this is meant . They that have repent and believed , and returned to true , though imperfect obedience , shall be judged to everlasting life , according to these works ; not because these works deserve it , but because the free gift in the gospel , through the blood of Christ , doth make these things the condition of our possessing it : they that have lived and died impenitent , unbelievers and rebels against Christ , shall be judged to everlasting punishment , because they have deserved it , both by their sin in general against the law , and by these sins in special against the gospel . This is called the merit of the cause , that is , what is a man's due according to the true meaning of the law ; though the due May be by free gift . And thus you see what will be the cavil of the day , and the matter to be enquired after and decided , as to our life or death . 

Viii . The next point in our method , is , to show you , what will be the evidence of the cause ? 

answ. there is a five fold evidence among men ▪ 1.  When the fact is notorious . 2.  The knowledge of an unsuspected competent judge . 3.  The party's confession . 4.  Witness . 5.  Instruments and visible effects of the action . All these evidences will be at hand , and any one of them sufficient for the conviction of the guilty person at that day . 

1.  As the sins of all men ; so the impenitency and rebellion of the wicked was notorious , or at least will be then . For though some play the hypocrites and hide the matter from the world and themselves , yet God shall open their hearts and former lives to themselves , and to the view of all the world . He shall set their sins in order before them so , that it shall be utterly in vain to deny or excuse them ▪ if any men will then think to make their cause as good to God as they can now do to us , that are not able to see their hearts ▪ they will be foully mistaken . Now they can say they have as good hearts as the best : then God will bring them out in the light ; and show them to themselves and all the world , whether they were good or bad . Now they will face us down that they do truly repent , and they obey God as well as they can , but God that knoweth the deceivers , will then undeceive them . We cannot now make men acquainted with their own unsanctified hearts , nor convince them that have not true faith , repentance or obedience ; but God will convince them of it ; they can find shifts and false answers to put off a minister with ; but God will not so be shifted off . Let us preach as plainly to them as we can and do all that ever we are able to acquaint them with the impenitency and unholyness of their own heart , and the necessity of a new heart and life , yet we cannot do it ; but they will believe whether we will or not , that the old heart will serve the turn ; but how easily will God make them know the contrary ? we plead with them in the dark ; for though we have the candle of the gospel in our hands when we come to show them their corruption , yet they shut their eyes , and are wilfully blind . But God will open their eyes whether they will or not , not by holy illumination , but by forced conviction ; and then he will plead with them as in the open light . see here thy own unholy soul , canst thou now say thou didst love me above all ? canst thou deny but thou didst love this world before me ? and serve thy flesh and lusts , though i told thee if thou didst so thou shouldst die ? Look upon thy own heart now , and see whether it be a holy or an unholy heart ; a spiritual or a fleshly heart ; a heavenly or an earthly heart ? Look now upon all the course of thy life , and see whether thou didst live to me , or to the world and thy flesh ? oh how easily will God convince men then of the very sins of their thoughts , and in their secret closets , when they thought that no witness could have disclosed them ! Therefore it 's said , that the books shall be opened , and the dead judged out of the books , rev. 20.12 . dan. 7.10 . 

The second evidence will be the knowledge of the judge . if the sinner would not be convinced , yet it is sufficient that the judge knoweth the cause ; God needeth no further witness ; he saw thee committing adultery in secret , lying , stealing , forswearing in secret . If thou do not know thy own heart to be unholy , it is enough that God knoweth it . If you have the face to say , Lord , when did we see thee hungry ? &c. mat. 25.44 . yet God will make good the charge against thee , and there needeth no more testimony than his own . Can foolish sinners think to lie hide or escape at that day , that will now sin wilfully before their judge ? that know every day that their judge is looking on them while they forget him , and give up themselves to the world , and yet go on even under his eye , as if to his face they dared him to punish them ? 

3.  The third evidence will be , the sinner's confession . God will force their own consciences to witness against them , and their own tongues to confess the accusation . If they do at first excuse it , he will leave them speechless , yea and condemning themselves before they have done . 

Oh what a difference between their language now and then ! now we cannot tell them of their sin and misery , but they either tell us of our own faults , or bid us look to ourselves , or deny or excuse their fault , or make light of it ; but then their own tongues shall confess them , and cry out of the wilful folly that they committed , and lay a heavier charge upon them than we can now do . now if we tell them that we are afraid they are unregenerate , and least their hearts are not truly set upon God ; they will tell us they hope to be saved with such hearts as they have ; but then , oh how they will confess the folly and falseness of their own hearts ! You May see a little of their case even in despairing sinners on earth , how far they are from denying or excusing their sins . Judas cries out . i have sinned in betraying innocent blood , mat. 27.4 . out of their own mouth shall they be judged . That very tongue that now excuseth their sin , will in their torments be their great accuser . For God will have it so to be . 

4.  The fourth evididence will be the witness of others . oh how many thousand witnesses Might there be produced , were there need , to convince the guilty soul at that day ! 

1.  All the ministers of Christ that ever preached to them , or warned them , will be sufficient witnesses against them : we must needs testify that we preached to them the truth of the gospel , and they would not believe it . We preached to them the goodness of God , yet they set not their hearts upon him ▪ we showed them their sin , and they were not humbled . We told them of the danger of an unregenerate state , and they did not regard us : we acquainted them with the absolute necessity of holiness , but they made light of all : we let them know the deceitfulness of their hearts , and the need of a close and faithful examination , but they would not bestow an hour in such a work ; nor scarce once be afraid of being mistaken and miscarrying . We let them know the vanity of this world , and yet they would not forsake it , no not for Christ and the hopes of glory : we told them of the everlasting felicity they Might attain , but they would not set themselves to seek it . 

What we shall think of it then , the Lord knows ; but surely it seemeth now to us a matter of very sad consideration , that we must be brought in as witnesses against the souls of our neighbours and friends in the flesh . Those whom we now unfeignedly love , and would do any thing that we were able to do for their good , whose well fare is dearer to us then all worldly enjoyments : alas , that we must be forced to testify to their faces for their condemnation ! Ah Lord , with what a heart must a poor minister study , when he considereth this , that all the words that he is studying must be brought in for a witness against many of his hearers ! with what a heart must a minister preach , when he remembreth that all the words that he is speaking must condemn many , if not most of his hearers ! Do we desire this sad fruit of our labours ? No : we May say with the prophet , jer. 17.16 . i have not desired the woeful day , thou knowest : no , if we desired it , we would not do so much to prevent it : we would not study , and preach , and pray , and entreat men , that if it were possible we Might not be put on such a task ▪ and doubtless it should make every honest minister study hard , and pray hard , and entreat hard , and stoop low to men , and be earnest with men in season and out of season , that if it May be , they May not be the condemners of their people's souls . But if men will not hear , and there be no remedy , who can help it ? Christ himself came not into the world to condemn men , but to save them , and yet he will condemn those that will not yield to his saving work : ●od takes no pleasure in the death of a sinner , but rather that he repent , and return , and live , ezek. 18.23.32 . and yet he will rejoice over those to do them hurt , and destroy them that will not return , deut. 28.63 . And if we must be put on such work , he will make us ; like-minded . The holy ghost tells us , that the saints shall judge the world , 1 cor. 6.2 , 3. and if they must judge , they will judge as God judgeth ; you cannot blame us for it sinners : we now warn you of it before hand , and if you will not prevent it blame not us , but yourselves . Alas ! we are not our own Masters . As we now speak not to you in our own names , so than we May not do what we list ourselves , or if we Might , our wills will be as God's will . God will make us judge you , & witness against you : can we absolve you , when the righteous God will condemn you ? when God is against you , whose side would you have us be of ? We must be either against God or you . and can you think that we should be for any one against our maker and redeemer ? We must either condemn the sentence of Jesus Christ , or condemn you : and is not there more reason to condemn you then him ? can we have any mercy on you , when he that made you will not save you , and he that form you , will show you no mercy ? isa. 27.11 . Yea when he that died for you , will condemn you , shall we be more merciful than God ? But alas ▪ if we should be so foolish and unjust , what good would it do you ? If we would be false witnesses and partial judges , it would not save you ; we are not justified if we absolve ourselves , 1 cor. 4.4 . how unable then shall we be against God's sentence to justify you ? If all the world should say , you were holy and penitent , when God knows you were unholy and impenitent ; it will do you no good . You pray every day that his will May be done , and it will be done : it will be done upon you , because it was not done by you . What would you have us say , if God ask us , did you tell this sinner of the need of Christ , of the glory of the world to come , and the vanity of this ? should we lie , and say we did not ? what should we say if he ask us , did not you tell them the misery of their natural state ; and what would become of them if they were not made new ? would you have us lie to God , and say we did not ? Why if we did not , your blood will be required at our hands , ezek. 33.6 . and 3.18 . and would you have us bring your blood upon our own heads by a lie ? Yea , and to do you no good , when we know that lies will not prevail with God ? No , no , sinners ; we must unavoidably , testify to the confusion of your faces . If ●od ask us , we must bear witness against you , and say ; Lord , we did what we could according to our weak abilities , to reclaim them : indeed our own thoughts of everlasting things were so low , and our own hearts so dull ; that we must confess we did not follow them so close , nor speak so earnestly as we should have done : we did not cry so loud , nor lift up our voice as a trumpet to awaken them , ( Isa 58.1 . ) we confess we did not speak to them with such melting compassion , and with such streams of tears beseech them to regard , as a matter of such great concernment should have been spoken with ; we did not fall on our knees to them , and so earnestly beg of them for the Lord's sake , to have mercy upon their own souls ▪ as we should have done . But yet we told them the message of God : and we studied to speak it to them as plainly and as piercingly as we could . Fain we would have convinced them of their sin and misery , but we could not : fain we would have drawn them to the admiration of Christ , but they made light of it , mat. 22.5 . we would fain have brought them to the contempt of this vain world , and to set their mind on the world to come . but we could not : some compassion thou knowest Lord we had to their souls ▪ many a weeping or groaning hour we have had in secret , because they would not hear & obey ; and some sad complaints we have made over them in public : we told them that they must shortly die and come to judgement , and that this world would deceive them , and leave them in the dust ; we told them that the time was at hand when nothing but Christ would do them good , and nothing but the favour of God would he sufficient for their happiness ; but we could never get them to lay it to heart . Many a time did we entreat them to think soberly of this life , and the life to come , and to compare them together with the faith ▪ of Christians , and the reason of men ; but they would not do it : many a time did we entreat them , but to take now and then an hour in secret to consider who made them , and for what he made them , and why they were sent into this world ; and what their business here is ; and whether they are going , and how it will go with them at their latter end ; but we could never get most of them to spend one hour in serious thoughts of these weighty matters . Many a time did we entreat them to try whether they were regenerate or not ? whether Christ and his spirit were in them , or not ? Whether their souls were brought back to God by sanctification ? but they would not try : we did beseech them to make sure work ▪ and not leave such a matter as everlasting joy or torment to a bold and mad adventure : but we could not prevail : we entreated them to lay all other businesses aside a little while in the world , and to inquire by the direction of the word of God , what would become of them in the world to come ; and to judge themselves before God came to judge them , seeing they had the law and the rule of judgement before them : but their minds were blinded , and their hearts were hardened and the profit , and pleasure , and honour of this world did e●ther stop their ears , or quickly steal away their hearts , so that we could never get them to a sober consideration , nor ever win their hearts to God . 

This will be the witness that many a hundred ministers of the gospel must give in against the souls of their persons at that day . Alas , that ever you should cast this upon us ! For the Lord's sake , Sirs , pity your poor teachers , if you pity not yourselves . We had rather go a 1000 miles for you ; we had rather be scorned and abused for your sakes : we had rather lay our hands under your fe●t , and beseech you on our knees with tears were we able , then be put on such a work as this . It is you that will do it if it be done ▪ we had rather follow you from house to house , and teach and exhort you , if you will but hear us , and accept of our exhortation . Your soul's a●e precious in our eyes , for we know they were so in the eyes of Christ , and therefore we are loathe to see this day ; we were once in your case , and therefore know what it is to be blind , and careless ▪ and carnal as you are , and therefore would fain obtain your deliverance . But if you will not hear , but we must accuse you and we must condemn you ; the Lord judge between you and us ; for he can witness that it was full sore against our wills . We have been ▪ faulty indeed in doing no more for you , and not following you with restless importunity ; ( The good Lord forgive us ; ) but yet we have not betrayed you by silence . 

2.  All those that fear God , that have lived among ungodly men , will also be sufficient witnesses against them . Alas ! they must be put upon that same work which is very unpleasant to their thoughts , as ministers are : they must witness before the Lord , that they did as friends and neighbours admonish them : that they gave them a good example , and endeavoured to walk in holiness before them ; but alas ! the most did but mock them , and call them Puritans and precise fools , and thought they made more ado than needs for their salvation : they must be forced to testify , [ Lord we would fain have drawn them with us to hear the word , and to read it , and to pray in their families , and to sanctify thy holy day , and take such happy opportunities for their souls ; but we could not get them to it ; we did in our places what we were able , to give them the example of a godly conversation , and they did but deride us ; they were readier to mark every slip of our lives , and to observe all our infirmities , and catch at any accusation that was against us ▪ then to follow us in any work of holy obedience , or care for our everlasting peace ; ] the ●ord knows it is a most heavy thing to consider now , that poor neighbours must be fain to come in against those that they love so dearly and by their testimony to judge them to perdition ▪ oh heavy case to think of , that a Master must witness against his own servant . Yea a husband against his own wife , and a wife against her husband ; yea parents against their own children , and say , [ Lord , i taught them thy word , but they would not learn . I told them what would come on it , if they returned not to thee ; i brought them to sermons , and i prayed with them and for them . I frequently ▪ minded them of these everlasting things ▪ and of this dreadful day ▪ which now they see . But youthful lusts and the temptations of the flesh and the devil led them away , and i could never get them thoroughly and soundly to lay it to their hearts ▪ ] oh you that are parents , and friends , and neighbours , in the fear of God bestir you now ▪ that you May not be put to this at the day of judgement ▪ oh give them no rest take no nay of them till you have persuaded their heart from this ▪ world to God , lest you be put to be their condemners : it must be now that you must prevent it , or else never ; now while you are with them , while you and they are in the flesh together , which will be but a little while : can you but now prevail with them , all will be well , and you May ▪ meet them joyfully before the Lord . 

3.  Another witness that will testify against the ungodly at that day , will be their sinful companions ; those that drew them into sin , or were drawn by them , or joined with them in it . Oh little do poor drunkards think , when they sit merrily in an alehouse , that one of them must bear witness against another , and condemn one another ▪ if they thought of this , methinks it should make them have less delight in that company : those that now join with you in wickedness , shall then be forced to witness , [ i confess Lord i did hear him swear and curse ; i heard him deride those that feared the Lord , and make a jest of a holy life : i saw him in the alehouse when he should be hearing the word of God , or reading , or calling upon God , and preparing for this day : i joined with him in fleshly delights , in abusing thy creature and our own bodies . ] Sinners ; look your companions in the face the next time you are with them , and remember this that i now say ; that those men shall give in evidence against you , that now are your associates in all your mirth : little thinketh the fornicator and lustful wanton , that their sinful mates must then bear witness of that which they thought the dark had concealed , and tell their shame before all the world . But this must be the fruit of sin . it 's meet that they who encouraged one another in sin , should condemn one another for it . And marvel not at it ; for they shall be forced to it whether they will or no ; light will not then be hide : they May think to have some ease to their consciences , by accusing and condemning others . When Adam is questioned for his sin , he presently accuseth the woman , gen. 3.12 . when Judas his conscience was awakened , he runs to the Pharisees with the money that drew him to it , and they cast it back in his own face , and say , see thou to it , what is that to us ? Mat. ●7 . 4 , 5 , 6.  Oh the cold comfort that sinners will have in one another at that day ! and the little pleasure that they will find in remembering their evil ways ! now when a fornicator or a worldling , or a merry voluptuous man is grown old , and cannot act all his sin again , he takes pleasure in rem●mbring and telling others of his former folly ; what he once was ; and what he did ; and the merry hours that he had ; but then when sinners are come to themselves a little more , they will remember and tell one another of these things with another heart . Oh that they did but know now how these things will then affect them ▪ 

4.  Another witness that will then rise up against them , will be the very devils that tempted them : they that did purposely draw them to sin , that they Might draw them to torment for sin : they can witness that you hearkened to their temptations , when you would not hearken to God's exhortations ; they can witness that you obeyed them in working iniquity . But because you May think the accusers testimony is not to be taken , i will not stand on this . Though it is not nothing , where God knoweth it to be true . 

5.  The very angels of God also May be witnesses against the wicked : therefore are we advised in scripture , not to sin before them , eccl. 5.6 . 1 cor. 11.10 . 1 tim. 5.21 . I charge thee before the elect angels , &c.  they can testify that they would have been ministering spirits for their good , when the wicked rather chose to be slaves to the spirit of maliciousness . The holy angels of God do many a time stand by you when ▪ you are sinning ▪ they see you , when you see not them . They are employed by God in some sort for your good , as well as we : and as it is the grief of ministers , that their labors succeed not , so May we suppose that according to their state and nature it is theirs . for they that rejoice in heaven at the conversion of one sinner , May be said to sorrow , or to lose those joys , when you refuse to be converted . These noble spirits , these holy and glorious attendants of Christ , that shall wait upon him to judgement , will be witnesses against rebellious sinners , to their confu●ion . Sirs , you have all in you naturally a fear of spirits , and invisible powers : fear them aright : least harkening to the deceiving spirits , and refusing the help of the angels of God , and wilfully sinning before their faces , you should cause them at that day , to the terror of your souls , to stand forth as witnesses against you , to your condemnation . 

6.  Conscience itself will be a most effectual witness against the wicked at that day . I before told you it will be a discerner , and force them to a confession : but a further office it hath , even to witness against them . If none else in the world had known of their secret sins , conscience will say , i was acquainted with them . 

7.  The spirit of Christ can witness against the ungodly , that he oft moved them to repent and return , and they rejected his motions : that he spoke to their hearts in secret , and oft set in with the minister , and often minded them of their case , and persuaded them to God ; but they resisted , quenched and grieved the spirit , act. 7.51 . As the spirit witnesseth with the spirits of the righteous that they are the children of God , rom. 8.16 . so doth he witness with the conscience of the wicked , that they were children of rebellion , and therefore are justly children of wrath . This spirit will not always strive with men ; at last being vexed , it will prove their enemy , and rise up against them , gen. 6.3 . isa. 63.10 . If you will needs grieve it now , it will grieve you then . Were it not a spirit of grace , and were it not free mercy that it came to offer you , the repulse would not have been so condemning ▪ nor the witness of this spirit against you so heavy at the last . But it was the spirit of Jesus , that came with recovering grace , which you resisted : and though the wages of every sin is death , yet you will find that it will cost you somewhat more to reject this salvation , than to break the creator's law of works kindness , and such kindness , will not be rejected at easy rates . 

Many a good motion is now made by the spirit to the heart of a sinner , which he doth not ●o much as once obse●ve ; and therefore doth not now remember them . But than they shall be brought to his remembrance with a witness . Many a thousand secret motions to repentance , to faith , to a holy life , will be then set before the eyes of the poor , unpardoned , trembling sinner , which he had quite forgotten : and the spirit of God shall testify to his confusion , [ at such a sermon i persuaded thy heart to repent , and thou wouldst not ; at such a time i showed thee the evil of thy sin , and persuaded thee to have forsaken it , but thou wouldst not ; i minded thee in thy secret thoughts , of the nearness of judgement , and the certainty and weight of everlasting things , of the need of Christ , and faith , and holiness , and of the danger of sinning : but thou didst drown all my motions in the cares and pleasures of the world ▪ thou harkenedst rather to the devil than to me : the sensual inclinations of thy flesh did prevail against the strongest arguments that i used : though i showed thee reasons , undeniable reasons , from thy creator , from thy redeemer , from nature , from grace , from heaven , and from hell , yet all would not so much as stop thee , much less turn thee , but thou wouldst go on ; thou wouldst follow thy flesh , and now let it pay thee the wages of thy folly ; thou wouldst be thy own guide , and take thine own course ▪ and now take what thou gettest by it . ] 

Poor sinners , i beseech you in the fear of God , the next time you have any such motions from the spirit of God , to repent , and believe , and break off your sins , and the occasions of them , consider then what a mercy is set before you ; and how it will confound you at the day of judgement , to have all these motions brought in against you , and that the spirit of grace itself should be your condemner ! Alas , that men should choose their own destruction , and wilfully choose it ! and that the foreknowledge of these things should not move them to relent . 

So much concerning the witness that will be brought in against the sinner . 

5.  The fifth evidence that will be given in against the sinner , will be , the instruments and effects . you know among men , if a man be found murdered by the highway , and you are found standing by him with a bloody sword in your hand ; especially if there were a former dissension between you , it will be an evidence that will prove a strong presumption , that you were the murderer : but if the fact be certain by other evidence , than many such things May be brought for aggravation of the fault . 

So a twofold evidence will be brought against the sinner from these things . One to prove him guilty of the fact : the other to aggravate the fault , and prove that his sin was very great . 

For the former . 1.  The very creatures which sinners abused to sin , May be brought in against them to their conviction and condemnation . For though these creatures shall be consumed with the last destroying fire , which shall consume all the world , yet they shall have a being in the memory of the sinner ( An esse cognitum . ) The very wine or ale , or other liquor which was abused to drunkenness , May witness aga●nst the drunkard . The sweet morsels by which the glutton did please his appetite , and all the good creatures of God which he luxuriously devou●ed , May witness against him , Luke 16.19 , 25.  He that fared deliciously every day in this life , was told by abrah●m when he was dead , and his soul in hell , [ remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things , and likewise Lazarus evil things : but now he is comforted , and thou art tormented . ] Though their sweet morsels and cups are past , and gone , yet must they be remembered at judgement and in hell . [ remember , son ] saith Abraham : yea , and remember he must , whether he will or no : long was the glutton in sinning , and many a pleasant bit did he taste : and so many evidences of his sin will lie against him , and the sweetness will then be turned into gall . 

The very clothing , and ornaments by which proud persons did manifest their pride , will be sufficient evidence against them ▪ as his being clothed in purple and fine linen , is mentioned , luk. 16.19 . 

The very lands , and goods and houses of worldlings , will be an evidence against them : their gold and silver , which the covetous do now prefer before the everlasting riches with Christ , will be an evidence against them , jam. 5.1 , 2 , 3 , 4.  go to now , ye rich men , weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you . Your riches are corrupted , and your garments moth-eaten ; your gold and silver is cankered , and the rust of them shall be a witness against you , and shall eat your flesh , as it were fire ; ye have heaped treasure together for the last days . Behold the hire of the labourers , which have reaped down your fields , which is of you kept back by fraud , cryeth ; and the cries of them which have reaped , are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth . Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth , and been wanton ; ye have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter . oh that worldlings would well consid●r this one text ; and therein observe , whether a life of earthly pleasure , and fullness , of worldly glory , and gallantry , be as desirable as they imagine ▪ and to what time , and purpose they now lay up their treasures ; and how they must hear of these things hereafter ; and what effect the review of their jovial days will have upon their miserable condemned souls . 

2.  The very circumstances of time , place , and the like , May evidence against a sinner to his condemnation . The drunkard shall remember , in such an alehouse i was so oft drunk , and in such a tavern i wasted my time ; the adulterer and fornicator shall remember the very time , the place , the room , the bed , where they committed wickedness . The thief and deceiver will remember the time , place , the persons they wronged , and the things which they robbed or deceived them of . The worldling will remember the business which he preferred before the service of God ; the worldly matters which had more of his heart than his maker and redeemer had : the work which he was doing when he should have been praying , or reading , or catechising his family , or thinking soberly of his latter end . A thousand of these will then come into his mind , and be as so many evidences against him to his condemnation . 

3.  The very effects also of men's sins will be an evidence against them . The wife and children of a drunkard are impoverished by his sin : his family and the neighbourhood is disquieted by him . These will be so many evidences against him . So will the abuse of his own reason : the enticing of others to the same sin , and hardening them by his example . 

One covetous unmerciful landlord doth keep a hundred , or many hundred persons or families in so great necessities , and care and labour , that they are tempted by it to overpass the service of God , as having scarce time for it , or any room for it in their troubled thoughts ; all these miserable families , and persons , and all the souls that are undone by this temptation , will be so many evidences against such oppressors . 

Yea , the poor whom they have neglected to relieve , when they Might ; the sick whom they have neglected to visit , when they Might , will all witness then against the unmerciful , matth. 25.  

The many ignorant , worldly , careless sinners ▪ , that have perished under an idle , unfaithful minister , will be so many witnesses against him to his condemnation ! They May then cry out against him to his face , [ i was ignorant Lord , and he never did so much as teach me , catechise me , nor tell me of these things ; i was careless , and minded he world , and he let me go on quietly , and was as careless and worldly as i , and never plainly and faithfully warned me , to waken me from my security . ] And so their blood will be required at his hands , though themselves also shall perish in their sin , ezek. 33.7 , 8.  

2.  And as these evidences will convince men of sin , so there are many more which will convince them of the greatness of their sin . And these are so many that it would too much lengthen my discourse to stand on them . A few i shall briefly touch . 

1.  The very mercy of God in creating men , in giving and continuing their being to them , will be an evidence for the aggravation of their sin against him . What ? will you abuse him , by whom it is that you are men ? will you speak to his dishonour , that giveth you your speech ? will will you live to his dishonour who giveth you your lives ? will you wrong him by his own creatures ? and neglect him without whom you cannot subsist ? 

2.  The redemption of men by the Lord Jesus Christ , will be an evidence to the exceeding aggravation of their sins . You sinned against the Lord that bought you ▪ 2 pet. 2.1 . When the feast was prepared , and all things were ready , you made light of it , and found excuses , and would not come , mat. 22.4 , 5 , 6.  luk. 14.17 , 18.  Must Christ redeem you by so dear a price from sin and misery , and yet will you continue the servants of sin , and prefer your slavery before your freedom , and choose to be Satan's drudges , rather than to be the servants of God ? The sorrows and sufferings that Christ underwent for you , will then prove the increase of your own sorrows . As a neglected redeemer , it is that he will condemn you . And then you would be glad that it were but true doctrine , that Christ never died for you , that you Might not be condemned for refusing a redeemer , and sinning against him that shed his blood for you . How deeply will his wounds then wound your consciences ! You will then remember , that to this end he both died , rose , and revived , that he Might be Lord both of the dead and the living ? And that he therefore died for all , that they which live , should not henceforth live to themselves , but to him that died for them , and rose again ; rom. 14.9 . 2 cor. 5.14 , 15.  matth. 28.18 , 19 , 20. 1 pet. 1.17 , 18.  You will then understand that you were not your own , but were bought with a price , and therefore should have glorified him that bought you , with your bodies and spirits , because they were his , 1 cor. 6.19 , 20.  This one aggravation of your sin will make you doubly and remedilessly miserable , that you trod under foot the son of God , and Counted the blood of the covenant , wherewith you were sanctified , an unholy thing , heb. 10.26 , 27 , 28 , 29. and crucified to yourselves the son of God a fresh , and put him to open shame , heb. 6.5 , 6.  

3.  Moreover ; all the personal mercies which they received , will be so many evidences for the condemnation of the ungodly . The very earth that bore them , and yielded them its fruits , while they themselves were unfruitful to God : the air which they breathed in : the food which nourished them ▪ the clothes which covered them , the houses which they dwelled in , the beasts that laboured for them , and all the creatures that died for their use : all these May rise up against them to their condemnation . And the judge May thus expostulate with them , [ did all these mercies deserve no more thanks ? should you not have served him that so liberally maintained you ? God thought not all these too good for you , and did you think your hearts and services too good for him ? He served you with the weary labours of your fellow-creatures : and should you have grudged to bear his easy yoke ? They were your slaves and drudges , and you refused to be his free servants and his sons ? They suffered death to feed your bodies , and you would not suffer the short forbearance of a little forbidden fleshly pleasure , for the sake of him that made you and redeemed you . ] 

Oh how many thousand mercies of God will then be reviewed by those that neglected them to the horror of their souls , when they shall be upbraided by the judge with their base requital ! All the deliverances from sickness and from danger ; all the honours , and privileges , and other commodities , which so much contented them , will then be God's evidences to shame them and confound them . On this supposition doth the apostle reprove such , rom. 2.4 ▪ 5 , 6.  despisest thou the riches of his goodness , and forbearance , and long suffering , not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance ? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart , treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath , and revelation of the righteous judgement of God , who will render to every man according to his deeds . 

4.  Moreover , all the means which God used for the recovery of sinners in the day of their visitation , will rise up against the impenitent souls , in judgement to their condemnation . You can hear sermons carelessly and sleepily now ; but oh that you would consider , how the review of them will then awake you ! You now make light of the warnings of God and man , and of all the wholesome advice that is given you : but God will not then make light of your contempt . Oh what cutting questions will they be to the hearts of the ungodly , when all the means that were used for their good , are brought to their remembrance on one side , and the temptations that drew them to sin on the other side , and the Lord shall plead his cause with their consciences , and say , [ was i so hard a Master , or was my work so unreasonable , or was my wages so contemptible , that no persuasions could draw you into my service ? was Satan so good a Master , or was his work so honest and profitable , or was his wages so desirable , that you would be so easily persuaded to do as he would have you ? Was there more persuading reason in his allurements and deceits , then in all my holy words , and all the powerful sermons that you heard , or all the faithful admonitions you received , or all the good examples of the righteous , or in all the works of God which you beheld ? Was not a reason fetched from the love of God , from the evil of sin , the blood of Christ , the judgement to come , the glory promised , the torments threatened , as forcible with you ; and as good in your eyes , to draw you to holiness , as a reason from a little fleshly delight , or worldly gain , to draw you to be unholy ? ] 

In the name of God , sinners , i entreat you to bethink yourselves in time , how you will sufficiently answer such questions as these . You should have seen God in every creature that you beheld , and have read your duty in all his works ; what can you look upon above you , or below you , or round about you , which Might not have showed you so much of the wisdom , and goodness , and greatness of your maker , as should have convinced you that it was your duty to be devoted to his will ? And yet you have his written word that speaks plainer than all these ? And will you despise them all ? will you not see so great a light ? will you not hear so loud and constant calls ? shall God , and his ministers speak in vain ? And can you think that you shall not hear of this again , and pay for it one day ? You have the bible , and other good books by you : why do you not read them ? You have ministers at hand ▪ why do you not go to them ▪ and earnestly ask them ▪ Sir , what must i do to be saved ? and entreat them to teach you the way to life ; you have some neighbours that fear God : why do you not go to them , and take their good advice , and imitate them in the fear of God , and in a holy diligence for your souls ? Now is the time for you to bestir yourselves ; life and death are are before you . You have gales of grace to further your voyage : there are more for you then against you . God will help you : his spirit will help you : his ministers will help you : every good Christian will help you ; the angels themselves will help you , if you will but resolvedly set yourselves to the work ; and yet will you not stir ? Patience is waiting on you ; mercies are enticing you ; scourges are driving you ; judgement stayeth for you ; the lights of God stand burning by you to direct you ; and yet will you not stir , but lie in darkness ? And do you think you shall not hear of this ? Do you think this will not one day cost you dear ? 

Ix. . The ninth part of our work , is to show you , what are those frivolous excuses by which the unrighteous May then endeavour their defence ? 

Having already showed you what the defence must be , that must be sufficient to our justification . 

If any first demand , whether the evidence of their sin will not so overwhelm the sinner , that he will be speechless and past excuse ? I answ. before God hath done with him , he will be so ; but it seems , at first his dark understanding , and partial corrupted conscience will set him upon a vain defence . For mat. 7.22 , 23.  Christ telleth us , that [ many will say to me in that day , Lord , Lord , have we not prophesied in thy name , and in thy name have cast out devils , and in thy name have done many wonderful works ? And then will i profess to them , i never knew you , depart from me , ye workers of iniquity . ] And in mat. 25.11 . The foolish virgin's cry , [ Lord , Lord , open to us . ] And vers. 44.  [ then shall they also answer him , saying , Lord when saw we thee an hungered , or thirst , or a stranger , or naked , or sick ▪ or in prison , and did not minister unto thee ? ] And vers. 24 , 25.  They fear not to cast some of the cause of their neglect on God himself . [ then he which had received the one talon came and said , Lord i knew thee that thou art an hard man , reaping where thou hast not sown , and gathering where thou hast not strawed ; and i was afraid , and went and hide thy talon in the earth ; lo , there thou hast that is thine . ] 

It is clear then , that excuses they will be ready to make , and their full conviction will be in order after these excuses ( At least as in their minds , if not in words ) ; but what the particular excuses will be , we May partly know by these ▪ scriptures which recite them , and partly by hearing what the ungodly do now say for themselves . And because it is for their present benefit that i now make mention of them , that they May see the vanity of all such excuses , i will mention them as i now meet with them in the mouths of sinners in our ordinary discourse . And these excuses are of several sorts ; some by which they would justify their estate ; some excuses of particular actions ; and that either in whole , or in part ; some by which they would put by the penalty , though they confess the sin ; some by which they lay the blame on other men ; and in some they would cast it upon God himself . I must touch but some of them very briefly . 

The first excuse . i am not guilty of these things which i am accused of . I did love God above all , and my neighbour as myself ; i did use the world but for necessity , but God had my heart . 

answ. the all-seeing judge doth know the contrary ; and he will make thy conscience know it . Look back man , upon thy heart and life how seldom and how neglectfully didst thou think of God ? how coldly didst thou worship him , or make any mention of him ? how carelessly didst thou serve him ? and think much of all that thou d●dst therein ? Thou rather thoughtest that his service was making more ado than needs , and didst grudge at those that were more diligent than thyself ; but for the world , how heartily , and how constantly didst thou seek and serve it . And yet wouldst thou now persuade the judge that thou didst love God above all ? He will show thee thy naked heart , and the course of thy former life , which shall convince thee of the contrary . 

The second excuse . i lived not in any gross sin , but only in small infirmities . I was no murderer , or adulterer , or fornicator , or thief ; nor did i deceive or wrong any , or take any thing by violence . 

answ. was it not a gross sin , to love the world above God , and to neglect Christ that died for thee ? and never do him one hours hearty service , but merely to seek thy carnal self , and live to thy flesh ? God will open thine eyes then , and show thee a thousand gross sins , which thou now forgettest or makest light of . And it is not only gross sins , but all sin , great or small that deserveth the wrath of God , and will certainly bring thee under it for ever , if thou have not part in Christ to relieve thee : woe to the man that ever he was born that must answer in his own name for his smallest offences . 

The third excuse . i did it ignorantly : i knew not that there was so much required to my salvation . I thought less ado Might have served the turn : and that if i looked to my body , God would take care of my soul : and that it was better to trust him what should become of me hereafter , then to trouble my mind so much about it . Had i known better , i would have done better . 

answ. if you knew not better , who was it long of but yourself ? Did God hide these things from you ? Did he not tell them you in his word as plainly as the tongue of man can speak , that except you were regenerate and born again , you should not enter into the kingdom of God ? John 3.3 , 5.  That without holiness none should see God , heb. 12.14 . That you must strive to enter in at the strait gate ; for many shall seek to enter , and shall not be able , Luke 13.24 . That if you lived after the flesh you should die ; and if by the spirit you mortified the deeds of the body ▪ you should live , rom. 8.13 . That if any man have not the spirit of Christ , the same is none of his , rom. 8.9 . And to be carnally minded is death : but to be spiritually minded is life and peace , rom. 8.9 . That you must not lay up for yourselves a treasure on earth , where rust and moths do corrupt , and thieves break through and steal , but must lay up for yourselves a rreasure in heaven , where rust and moths do not corrupt , and thieves do not break through and steal , mat. 6.19 , 20.  That you must seek first the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof , mat 6.23 . and not labour for the food that perisheth , but for the food that endureth to everlasting life , which Christ would have given you , John 6.27 . That if you be risen with Christ , you must seek those things which are above , where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God ▪ and not the things that are on earth , col. 3.1 , 2 , 3.  Yea your very conversation should be in heaven , phil. 3.19.20 , 21.  

What say you , did not God tell you all this and much more ? and plainly tell it you ? Turn to your bibles , and see the words , and let them witness against you . 

2.  And could you think with any reason , that your souls being so much more precious than your bodies , you should yet do so much more for your bodies then your souls ? Could you think all the labour of your lives little enough for a frail body , that must he shortly in the dirt ; and that your immortal souls should be no more regarded ? Could you think with any reason , that you should do so much for a life of a few years continuance and do no more for a life that shall have no end ? 

3.  And whereas you talk of trusting God with your souls , you did not trust him : you did but on that pretence , carelessly disregard them . If you trust God , show any word of promise that ever he gave you to trust upon , that ever an impenitent , carnal , careless person shall be saved ? No : he hath told you enough to the contrary and could you think that it was the will of God , that you should mind your bodies more than your souls , and this life more than that to come ? Why , he hath bid you strive , and run , and fight , and labour , and care , and seek , and use violence , and all diligence for the safety of your souls , and for the life to come : but where hath he bid you do so for your bodies ? No , he knew that you were prone to do too much for them ; and therefore he hath bid you , [ care not , and labour not ] that is , do it as if you did it not : and let your care and labour for earthly things be none in comparison of that for heavenly things . You know God can as well maintain your lives without your care and labour , as save your souls without it : and yet you see he will not , he doth not : you must plough , and sow , and reap , and thresh , for all God's love and care of you , and not say , i will let all alone and trust God . And must you not much more use diligence in much greater things ? If you will ●rust God , you must trust him in his own way , and in the use of his own means . 

The fourth excuse . i was never brought up to learning , i cannot so much as read : nor did my parents ever teach me any of these things , but only set me about my worldly business , and provide food and raiment for me : but never once told me that i had a soul to save or lose , and an everlasting life to provide and prepare for . And therefore i could not come to the knowledge of them . 

answ. the greater is their sin , who thus neglected you ▪ but this is no sufficient excuse for you . Heaven is not prepared for the learned only : nor will Christ ask you at judgement , whether you were good scholars , or not , no nor so much as whether you could write or read . But consider well ! was not God's word so plainly written , that the unlearned Might understand it ? Did he not put it into the most familiar stile , though he knew it would be offensive to the proud scholars of the world of purpose that he Might fit it to the capacities of the ignorant ? And if you could not read , yet tell me , could not you have learned to read at 20 , or 30 years of age , if you had been but willing to bestow now and then an hour to that end ? Or at least , did you not live near some that could read ? and could you not have procured them to read to you , or to help you ? And did you not hear these things read to you in the congregation by the minister ? or Might have done if you would ? And if your parents did neglect you in your youth , yet when you came to a fuller use of reason , and heard of the matters of salvation from God's word , did it not concern you to have looked to yourselves ; and to have redeemed that time which you lost in your youth ▪ by doubling your diligence when you came to riper years ? The apostles gathered churches among heathens that never heard of Christ before ; and converted many thousand souls that were never once told of a saviour , or the way to salvation , till they had past a great part of their lives . If you loitered till the latter part of the day , it behooved you then to have bestirred yourselves the more : and not to say , through the fault of my parents , i lost the beginning of my life , and therefore i will lose all : they taught me not then , and therefore i will not learn now . Have you not seen some of your neighbours , who were as ill educated as yourselves , attain to much knowledge afterwards by their industry ? And why Might not you have done so , if you had been as industrious as they ? May not God and conscience witness , that it was because you cared not for knowledge , and would not be at the pains to get it , that you knew no more ? Speak truth , man , in the presence of thy judge , was thy heart and mind set upon it ? Didst thou pray daily for it to God ? Didst thou use all the means thou couldst to get it ? Didst thou attend diligently on the word in public , and think of what thou heardest when thou camest home ? Didst thou go to the minister , or to others that could teach thee , and entreat them to tell thee the way to salvation ? Or didst thou not rather carelessly neglect these matters ; and hear a sermon as a common tale , even when the minister was speaking of heaven or hell ? It was not then thine unavoidable ignorance , but thy negligence . 

Yea further , answer as in the presence of God : didst thou obey so far as thou d●dst know ? Or didst thou not rather sin against that knowledge which thou hadst . Thou ●newest that the soul was better than the body , and everlasting life more to be regarded , than this transitory life ? But didst thou regard it accordingly ? Thou sure knewest that god was better than the world , and heaven than earth ; at least , thou wast told of it ? But didst thou according●y value him , and love him more ? Thou knewest sure that there was no salvation without faith , and repentance , and newness of life , and yet they were neglected . In a word , many a thousand sins which were committed , and duties that were omitted , against thy own knowledge and conscience , will mar this excuse . 

The fifth excuse . i lived not under a powerful minister to tell me of these things ; but where there was no preaching at all . 

answ. and Might you not have gone where a powerful minister was with a little pains ? Yea did not the very plain word which you heard read , tell you of these things ? And Might you not have had a bible your ●elvess , and found them there ? 

The sixth excuse . i was a servant , and had no time from my labour to mind these matters : i l●ved with a hard Master , that required all his own work of me , but would allow me no time for the service of God . or else , i was a poor man , and had a great charge to look after , and with my hard labour had much ado to live , so that i had no time for heavenly things . 

answ. 1.  Who should be first served ? God or man ? what should be first sought after , heaven or earth ? Did not Christ tell thee , one thing is necessary , Luke 10.41 , 42. was it not as needful to see that you escape damnation , and get safe to heaven when this life is ended , as to see that you had food and raiment for yourselves , and yours ? 

2.  Did you spend no time in recreation , nor idleness , nor vain talking ? why Might not that at least have been spent about heavenly things ? 

3.  Could you have taken no time from your rest , or eating or at other intermissions ? Man's body will not endure so great labours as have no intermission ? And why then Might not godliness have been your ease and recreation ? 

4.  Or Might you not have minded these things , even when you were about your labour , if you had but a heart to them ? 

5.  At least you Might have spent the Lord's own day in hearing , reading , and pondering of these matters , when you were forced to forbore your worldly labours , even by the wholesome law of the land : these therefore are all but vain excuses : and God will shortly make thee speak out , and plainly confess , it was not so much for want of time , or helps , or warning , as for want of a heart to use them well . I should have found some time , though it had been when i should have slept , if my heart had been but set upon it . 

The seventh excuse . little did i think to have seen this day :  did not believe that ever God would be so severe : i thought his threatenings had been but to keep men in awe : and i suspected either that the scripture was not his word , or else i thought he would be better than his word . I thought all that i heard of another life had been uncertain ; and therefore was loathe to let go a certainty for an uncertainty , and lose my present pleasures which i had in hand , for the hopes of that which i never did see . 

answ. he that will not know his misery by believing to prevent it , shall know it by feeling to endure it ▪ you were told and told again what your unbelief would bring you to . Did God's word make heaven and earth ? Doth it support them , and secure them ▪ and is not his word sufficient security for you to have trusted your souls upon ? Did you know where was any better security to be had ? and where was any surer ground for your confidence ? And did you think so basely and blasphemously of God , that he would falsify his word , lest such as you should suffer ? and that he was fain to rule the world by a lie ? Did God make the world so easily ? and can he not govern it by true and righteous means ▪ what need God to say that which he will not do , to awe sinners ? Can he not awe them by truth ? Is it not just that those should eternally perish , that will entertain such despe●ate thoughts of God , and then by such wicked imaginations , encourage themselves in sin against him ? 

And for the truth of scripture , God did not bid you believe it without evidence . He stamped on it the image of his own purity and perfection , that you Might know it by that image and superscription , if you had eyes to see them : he sealed it by uncontrolled multitudes of miracles : he delivered it down to your hands by infallible witnesses : so that he left you no room for rational doubting . 

And you knew that the matters of this world were not only uncertain , but certainly vain and transitory , and would shortly come to nothing and leave you in distress . If it had then been uncertain whether there were a glory and misery hereafter ▪ ( As it was not ) should not reason have taught you to prefer the least probabilities of an everlasting unspeakable happiness , before that which is certainly perishing and vain ? These vain excuses will but condemn you . 

The eighth excuse . i was so enticed and persuaded by sinners to do as they did , that i could not deny them . They would never let me rest . 

answ. 1.  And were you not as earnestly persuaded by God to forsake sin and serve him , and yet that would not prevail with you ? You could not deny the devil and fools , but you could deny God and all his messengers . Were not ministers as earnest with you every week to repent and amend ? What did men entice you with ? with a little deluding fleshly pleasure for a few days ? And what did God entice you with ? with the promise of endless unconceivable felicity ! And if this were a smaller matter in your eyes then the other , than you have had your choice , be content with it , and thank yourselves . In your life time you had the good things which you chose , and preferred before heaven , and therefore cannot expect to have heaven besides . 

The ninth excuse . i lived among ungodly persons , that derided all that feared God ; so that if i had not done as they did , but had made any more ado to be saved , i should have been the very scorn of the place where i lived . 

answ. and was not heaven worth the enduring of a scorn ? Is not he worthy to go without it that thinks so basely of it ? D●d not Christ tell you , that if you were ashamed of him before men , he would be ashamed of you before his father and the angels of heaven , Mark 8.38 . He suffered more than scorns for you : and could not you suffer a scorn for him and yourselves , seeing you chose rather to endure everlasting torment , than a little derision from ignorant men , take that which you made choice of . And seeing so small a matter would drive you from heaven , and part God and you as a mock , as the wind of a man's mouth , no wonder if you be commanded , to depart from him into everlasting fire . 

The tenth excuse . i had ungodly persons to my parents , or Masters , or landlord , or governors , who threatened to undo me , if i had addicted myself to so strict a life , and if i would not believe and do as they did . 

answ. what if they threatened you with present death ? Did not God also threaten you with everlasting death , if you were not ruled by him ? And whose threatening should you have chiefly feared ? Is man more dreadful than God ? Is death more terrible than hell ? Did not Christ bid you ▪ fear not them that can kill the body , and after that can do no more ; but fear him that is able to destroy both body and soul in hell fire ; yea i say unto you , fear him . Mat. 10.28 . Luke 12.4 , 5. and isa. 51.7 . fear ye not the reproach of men , neither be afraid of their revilings : for the moth shall eat them up like a garment , and the worm shall eat them like wool : but my righteousness shall be for ever , and my salvation from generation to generation . seeing therefore you have chosen rather to suffer from God for ever for your sin , then to suffer small matters for well-doing for a moment , you must even bear your own choice . Christ told you before hand , that if you could not forsake all the world and your own lives for him , you could not be his disciple , matth. 10.37 , 38 , 39  And seeing you thought his terms too hard , and would needs seek you out a better service , even take what you have chosen and found . 

The eleventh excuse . i saw so many follow their pleasures and their worldly business , and never look after these higher things , and so few go the other way , that i thought ▪ sure God would not damn so great a part of the world ; and therefore i ventured to do as the most did . 

answ. God will make good his word upon many or few . Did you doubt of his will , or of his power ? For his will , he hath told it you in his word . For his power , he is as able to punish many as one man . What is all the world to him , but as a drop of a bucket , as the dust of the balance ; he told you before hand that the gate was strait , and the way to heaven was narrow , and few did find it , and the gate to destruction was wide , and the way was broad , and many did enter in at it , mat. 7.13 , 14.  And if you would not believe him , you must bear what your unbelief hath brought you to . What if you had twenty children , or servants , or friends : and the greater part of them should prove false to you , and seek your destruction , or prove disobedient , and turn to your enemy ? would you think it a good excuse , if the rest should do the like , because of their example ? will you therefore wrong God , because you see others wrong him ? would you spit in the face of your own father , if you saw others do so ? God warned you , that you should not follow a multitude to do evil , exod. 23.2 . And if yet you will do as most do , you must even speed as most speed . you should not so much consider , who they be , as what they do , and whether they go , and who they forsake , and what they lose , and what strength is in the reasons that move them to do this . And then you would find , it is God they forsake , it is sin they choose , it is heaven they lose , it is hell they run into , and it is no true reason , but Satan's delusion , and sensual inclinations that lead them to it . And should men be imitated , be they many or be they few , in such a course as this ? 

The twelfth excuse . i saw so many faults in those that were accounted godly , and saw so much division among them , that i thought they were as bad as others ; and among so many opinions , i knew not what religion to be of . 

answ. 1.  A spot is soonest seen in the fairest cloth . And the malicious world useth to make such far worse than they are . 

2.  But suppose all were true that malice saith of some , you could not say the like by others . 

3.  Or if you could , yet it was God's law , and not men's faults , that was made the rule for you to live by : will it excuse you that others are bad ? 

4.  And for their diverse opinions , you should have taken counsel at God's word , which was right : did you first search the scripture impartially , as willing to know the truth , that you Might obey it ? and did you pray daily that God would lead you into the truth ? and did you obey as much as you knew ? Did you join with the godly so far as they are all agreed ? They are all agreed in the fundamental articles of Christianity , and in all things absolutely necessary to a holy life , and to salvation : that all known sin is to be forsaken , and all known duty to be done . Why did you not so far then agree with them ? Alas , the imperfections of the godly , and the false accusations of the malicious world , will prove but a poor cover for your wilful ungodliness , and Christ will convince you of the vanity of these excuses . 

The thirteenth excuse . the scriptures were so dark , that i could not understand them . And i saw the wisest men differ so much in the exposition of them , that i thought it was in vain for me to trouble myself about them . If God would have had us live according to the scriptures , he would sure have written them plainly , that men Might understand them . 

answ. 1.  It is all plainly written according to the nature of the subject : but a prejudiced , disaffected , yea or but untaught , disused soul cannot at first understand the plainest teaching . The plainest Greek or Hebrew grammar that can be written , will be utterly obscure to him that is but newly entered the English school : yea after many years time that he spends in learning . Did you study hard , and pray for God's teaching , and inquire of others , and wait patiently in Christ's school , that you Might come to further knowledge by degrees ? and were you willing to know , even those truths that called you out to self denial , and that did put you on the hardest flesh displeasing duties ? Had you done thus ▪ you would have admired the light of the holy scripture , and now have rejoiced that ever you saw them , and not have quarrelled at its seeming darkness . This word Might have made you wise to salvation , as it hath done others , act. 20.32 . 2 tim. 3.15 , 16 , 17.  this law of the Lord is perfect , converting the soul ; the testimony of the Lord is sure , making wise the simple . The statutes of the Lord are right , rejoicing the heart : the commandment of the Lord is pure , enlightening the eyes , psal. 19.7 , 8.  

2.  So much as is of necessity to salvation , is as plain as you could desire . Yet if you be judged by these , you will be condemned : for you did not obey that which was most plain . What darkness is in such words as these , except ye repent , ye shall all perish , luk. 13.3 , 5.  love not the world , nor the things in the world : if any man love the world , the love of the father is not in him , 1 John 2.15 . he that will come after me , let h●m deny himself , &c.  matth. 16.24 . 

3.  If there had been nothing that seemed difficult to you , would you not have despised its simplicity , and have thought yourselves wise enough at the first reading and needed no more ? 

The fourteenth excuse . there were so many seeming contradictions in the scripture , and so many strange improbable things , that i could not believe it . 

answ. the contradictions were in your fancy , that did not understand the word which you read . Must the raw unexperienced learner despise his book or teacher , as oft as in his ignorance he thinks he meets with contradictions ? Did you think God was no wiser than you , and understood not himself , because you understood him not ? Nor could reconcile his own words , because you could not reconcile them ? You would needs be a judge of the law , instead of obeying it , and speak evil of it , rather than do it , jam. 4.11 . 

2.  And those things which you called improbable in the word , were the wonders of God , of purpose to confirm it . If it had not been confirmed by wonders , you would have thought it unproved : and yet now it is so confirmed , you will not believe the doctrine , because the witness seems incredible . And that is , because they are matters above the power of man : as if they were therefore above the power of God you shall at last have your eyes so far opened , as to see those seeming contradictions reconciled , and the certainty of those things which you accounted improbable : that you May be forced to confess the folly of your arrogancy and unbelief : and then God will judge you in righteousness , who presumed unrighteously to judge him and his word . 

The fifteenth excuse . it seemed so unlikely a thing to me , that the merciful God should damn most of that world to everlasting fire , that i could not believe it . 

answ. 1.  And did it not seem as unlikely to you , that his word should be false ? 

2.  Should it not have seemed as unlikely that the governor of the world should be unjust , and suffer his laws to be unexecuted , and the worst to speed as well as the best ! and to suffer vile sinful dust to despise his mercy , and abuse his patience , and turn all his creatures against him , without due punishment ? 

3.  Did you not feel pain and misery begin in this life ? 

4.  You saw toads and serpents which had never sinned : and you would rather live in any tolerable suffering , then to be a toad . And is it not reason , that it should go worse with contemptuous sinners , then with those creatures that never sinned ? 

5.  Could you expect that those should come to heaven , that would not believe there was such a state , but refused it , and preferred the world before it ? And to be out of heaven is to be out of all happiness ? and he that is so out of all happiness , and knows that he lost it by his own folly , must needs torment himself with such considerations , were there no other torments . And as man is capable of greater felicity than bruits , so must he needs be capable of more misery . 

The sixteenth excuse . the things which God promised in heaven , and threatened in hell , were all out of my sight : and therefore i could not heartily believe them . Had i but once seen them , or spoke with one that had seen them , i should have been sati●fied , and have contemned the things , of the world . 

answ. w●ll you not believe till you see or feel ? was not God's word sufficient evidence ? would you have believed one from the dead that had told you he had seen such things ? and would you not believe Stephen that saw them , act. 7 . 5● . Or Paul that heard and saw them , 2 cor. 12.3 , 4.  Nor Christ that came purposely from heaven to reveal them ? why flesh and blood cannot see them . You see not God : will you not therefore believe that there is a God ? Indeed , whatever you imagine , if you would not believe Moses and the prophets , Christ and his apostles , neither would you have bel●●ved though one had risen from the dead . For ●ods' word is more credible than a dead man's : and Christ did rise from the dead to attest it . Blessed are they that have not seen , and yet believed . Noah saw no rain when he was preparing the ark : but because he believed , he made ready and escaped , heb. 11.7 . when the world that would not bel●eve , did perish but seeing God's word was of no more weight with you , and no knowledge would serve ▪ your turn , but by seeing and feeling ; you shall see and feel everlastingly to your sorrow . 

The seventeenth excuse ▪ it was so strict a law that God would have ruled me by , and the way to heaven was so strait and difficult , that i could not endure it . I was not able to deny my flesh , and live such a life . 

answ. 1.  You were not able , because you were not willing . what was there but your own wicked hearts that should make such a life seem grievous to you ? Every thing is hard and grievous to him who loathes it , and whose heart is against it . The chief thing that God called you to , was to love him , and make him your delight . and are love and delight such grievous things ? It was not grievous to you to love your meat , or drink , or money : it was no hard matter to you to love a friend that loved you ▪ no nor to love your sin , which was your enemy : and what should make it seem hard to love God , but a wicked heart ? Is not he better , and more lovely than all these ? And had you but loved him , all the rest of his service would have seemed easy to you . To think of him , to speak of him , to pray to him ▪ to praise him , yea , to deny all and suffer for him , would have been sweet and pleasant to you , so far as you had loved him . It was not God therefore , but your own naughty hearts , that made his work seem grievous to you , and the way to heaven seem hard . He told you truly ▪ that his yoke was easy , and his burden light , and his commandments were not grievous ▪ mat. 11.29 . 1 joh. 5.3 . They that tried them , found them the very joy and delight of their souls , and why could not you do so ? 

2.  But what if the way to heaven had been harder than it was ? was not heaven worth your labour ? were you afraid of being a loser by it ? Could not God requite your labour or sufferings ? Doth any repent when they come to heaven ▪ that it cost them so dear to come thither ? And is not hell worse than the hardest way to heaven ? seeing you have chosen hell to save you a labour and suffering in this life , you must have your choice . And seeing you thought not everlasting life to be worth so much as God required , that is , the accepting thankfully , and minding , and seeking , and preferring it before this life , you have none to blame for the loss of it but yourselves . 

The eighteenth excuse . it was God that made me of a sensual nature : he gave me an appetite to meat , and drink , and ease , and lust ; he gave me that flesh which ruled me : how then can he condemn me , for living according to the nature which he gave me ? 

answ. he gave that appetite to be exercised moderately under the rule of reason , for the preservation and propagation of mankind . But did he not also give you reason to govern that appetite ? and the revelation of his will to guide that reason ? He gave you your flesh , to be a servant , and not a Master your beast hath fleshly appetite without reason ; and therefore God hath put him under you who have reason that you should rule him . Will you let your beast do what he list ▪ and madly run upon whom he list , and say , you do but let him live according to his nature , which ●od hath given him ? Why God that gave him such a nature did intend him to be ruled by a higher nature , even by the reason which he gave to you : and so he did also by your flesh , and sensual appetite . 

The nineteenth excuse . but i lived among so many baits , which enticed this flesh , that i could not resist them . My meat was a snare to me , my drink a snare , my clothes , my house , my land a snare , every beauty that i saw was a snare : and the better all these were the stronger was my snare . If God would not have had my heart ensnared and drawn from him , he should not have put so many baits in my way . Yea and they were so near to me , and daily with me , that though i was resolved to forbear them before , yet when they were brought to my hand , i could not forbear . 

answ. is this the thanks that God hath for his mercies ? He s●nt you all these as favours from his own hand : he wrote his own name upon them , that in them you Might see his power , and wisdom , and goodness , and so be led up to the consideration of him , that you Might fall in love with himself , who was the fountain , the life , the end of all ▪ and do you overlook God in the creature , and live as without him in the world , and dote upon that which should have drawn you to himself ▪ and then lay the blame on God ? If he send a suitor to speak to you in his name , and write you a love letter with his own hand , will you fall in love with the messenger , or the letter , and neglect the sender , and then blame him that wrote his letter on so fair a paper , or in so neat a hand , or that sent it by such a comely messenger ? Certainly , these excuses are too gross , to take with the wise and righteous God , or to seem suffi●ient to a well-informed conscience . 

2.  And whereas you speak of the power of these objects , was there not much more in God , in Christ , in the promised glory , to have drawn your heart another way ? why then did not these take as much with you as the other ? You could not choose , forsooth , but be enticed with such baits as were fitted to your sensual appetite , and such things as a dog or a swine May enjoy as well as a man ▪ but you could choose , when Christ and glory were offered you : yea you did choose to refuse the offer , and tread them under feet by your neglect ! When Satan set your cups , and your harlots , and your profits before you , on one side ; did not God set his favour and everlasting happiness on the other side ? And was it wise or equal dealing to pref●rr your lusts before that glory ? 

3.  Moreover , it was not in the power of any of those baits to force your will , or to necessitate you to chose them : they could be but baits to entice you ; and it was still in your own choice , whether you would yield to the enticement , and choose them or not . Shall every man be false to God , that hath any bait to entice him from him ? will you excuse your child or friend , if he would be false to you , upon as great enticements as these ? If a cup of drink , or a where , or a little gain , could draw him more than all your love and interest , i do not think you would hold him excused . 

4.  And whereas you speak of the ne●rness and continuance of these allurements , i would fain know , was not God as near you , and continually near you , to draw you to himself ? Faith Might have seen him , though flesh and blood cannot . Did he not stand by you when you were in your cups , and lustful pleasures ? Did he not tell you of the danger , and offer you far better things , if you would obey him and despise those baits ? But you would hearken to none of this ; you should have remembered that he stood over you , and was looking on you ; and you should have said as Joseph , gen. 39.9 . how can i do this great wickedness , and sin against God ? you had also scripture near you , and reason near you , and conscience near you , as well as the bait was near you . And therefore this is a vain excuse . 

The twentieth excuse . it was God that let loose the devil to tempt me ; and he was too subtle for me to deal with : and therefore what wonder if i sinned , and were overcome ? 

answ. 1.  He did not let loose the devil to constrain you to sin . He could but entice , and you Might choose whether you w●uld yield . The devil could neither make you sin against your will , nor yet necessitate you to be willing . 

2.  You were a sure friend to Christ that while , that would forsake him as oft as you were tempted by the devil . Is that a friend or a servant worthy to be regarded , that will disobey you , or betray you as oft as he is tempted to it ? 

3.  Will you excuse your servant , if he leave your work undone , and follow cards , or dice , or the alehouse , and say , i was tempted to it by one that was cuninger than i ? shall every murderer or thief escape hanging , because the devil was too cunning for him in his temptations ? would you have the jury or the judge to take this for a good excuse ? 

4.  And why did you not hearken to God that ent●ced you the other way ? You forget what helps he afforded you to discover the wiles of Satan , and to vanquish the temptation ? He told you it was an enemy that tempted you : and would you hearken to an enemy ? He told you it was a dream , a shadow , a painted pleasure , a guilded carcase , a lying promise , and deceitful vanity by which you were tempted ; and yet would you regard it before your God ? He told you that it was your god , your saviour , your hopes , your everlasting happiness that the tempter would begu●le you of ▪ and yet would you be beguiled ? He told you , and plainly , and often told you , that the tempter would lead you to eternal fire , and undo you everlastingly before you were aware ; and that a fatal hook was covered with that bait : and yet would you swallow it ? 

5.  It is plain by all th●s , that it was not your natural weakness of faculties that caused you to be overcome by the subtleties of the devil , as a silly child is deceived by a crafty fellow that overwits him : but it was your carelessness , inconsiderateness , your sensual inclinations , and vicious disposition , that drew you to a wilful obeying of the tempter , and rejecting the wholesome advice of Christ . This therefore is a frivolous excuse of your sin . 

The one and twentieth excuse . but i hope you will not say that all men have free will ! and if my will were not free , ●ow could i choose but sin ? 

answ. your will was not free from God's rule and government ; nor was it free from its natural inclination to good in general ; for either of these were more properly slavery . 3.  Nor was it free from the influence of a dark understanding . 4.  Nor free from its own contracted vicious inclination . 5.  Nor freed from the temptations of the flesh , the world and the devil . 

But it was 1.  Free from any natural determination to evil , or to any thing that was doubtful . 2.  And free from the coaction or violence of any . 3.  And free from an irresistible determination of any exterior cause , at least , ordinarily . So that naturally , as men , you have the power or faculty of determining your own wills , and by your wills ▪ of ruling your inferior faculties in a great measure ; yea of ruling the senses and the fantasy itself , which doth so much to dispose of our understanding . And if your wills which are naturally free , are yet so habitually vicious , that they incline you to do evil , that is not an excuse , but an aggravation of your sin . But of this more , under the next . 

The two and twentieth excuse . but i have not power of myself to do any thing that is good : what can the creature do ? without Christ we can do nothing . It is God that must give me ability , or i can have none : and if he had given it me , i had not been an unbeliever or impenitent . I can no more believe of myself , than i can fulfil the law of myself . 

answ. 1.  These are the vain cavils of learned folly , which God will easily answer in a word . The word [ power ] is taken in several senses . Sometime , and most commonly and fitly , for a faculty or strength by which a man can do his duty if he will . this physical power you have , and the worst of sinners have while they are men on earth . Were they actually willing , they Might acceptably perform sincere obedience ; and were they dispositively willing , they Might actually believe and will . And thus the ungodly have power to believe . 

2.  Sometime the word [ power ] is taken for authority , or leave ; for legal or civil power . And thus you have all not only power or liberty to believe ; but also a command , which makes it your duty , and a threatening adjoined , which will condemn you if you do not . 

3.  Sometime the word [ power ] is taken ethically and less properly , for a disposition , inclination , habit or freedom from the contrary habit or disposition . And in this sense , its true , that none but the effectually called have a power to believe . But then observe , 1.  That this is but a moral less proper , and not a physical proper impotency : and therefore Austin chooseth rather to say , that all men have power to believe , but all have not a will , or faith itself ; because we use to difference power from willingness ; and willingness actuateth the power which we had before . And therefore our divines choose rather to call grace a habit , when they speak exactly , than a power ; and dr. Twiss derides the Arminians for talking of a power subjected in a power . 2.  Note that this impotency is but the same thing with your unwillingness and wilful blindness , in another word . 3.  Note that this impotency is long of ourselves as to the original , and much more as to the not-curing and removing of it . Hath God given you no means towards the cure of this disability , which you have neglected ? 4.  Note that this impotency is no just excuse , but an aggravation of your sin . If you were willing to be the servant of Christ , and yet were not able , either because he would not accept you , or because of a want of natural faculties , or because of some other natural difficulty which the willingest mind could not overcome ; this were some excuse : but to be habitually wilful in refusing grace , is worse than to be merely actually unwilling . If a man have so accustomed himself to murder , drunkenness , stealing , or the like wickedness , so far that he cannot leave it , will you therefore forgive him , or will any judge or jury hold him excused ? Or rather think him the more unfit for mercy ? 5.  Note also that the want of a supernatural habit , no nor the presence of the contrary habit , do not efficiently determine the will to particular acts : much less take away its natural freedom . 6.  And that till habits attain an utter predominancy , ( At least ) there is a power remaining in the will to resist them , and use means against them . Though eventually the perverse inclination May hinder the use of it . 

The three and twentieth excuse . i have heard from learned men , that God doth determine all actions natural and free , as the first efficient physical immediate cause ; or else nothing could act. and then it was not long of me that i choose forbidden objects , but of him that irresistibly moved me thereto , and whose instrument i was . 

answ. this is a trick of that wisdom which is foolishness with God , and to be deceived by vain philosophy . 

1.  The very principle itself is most likely to be false , and those that tell you this , to err . Much more , i think , May be said against it then for it . 

2.  I am sure it is either false , or reconcilable with God's holiness , and man's liberty and culpability ; so that its a mad thing to deceive yourselves with such philosophical uncertainties , when the truth which you oppose by it is infallibly certain . That God is not the author of sin , but man himself , who is justly condemned for it , is undoubtedly true : and would you obscure so clear a truth , by searching into points beyond human reach , if not unsound , as you conclude them ? 

The four and twentieth excuse . but at least , those learned divines among us that doubt of this , do yet say that the will is necessarily and infallibly determined by the practical understanding , and that is as much unresistibly necessitated by objects : and therefore whatever act was done by my understanding or will , was thus necessitated , and i could not help it . They say , liberty is but the acting of the faculty agreeably to its nature : and it was God as creator that gave Adam his faculties : and God by providential dispose , that presented all objects to him , by which his understanding , and so his will were unavoidably necessitated . 

answ. this is of the same nature with the former ; uncertain , if not certainly false . Were this true , for aught we can see , it would lay all the sin and misery of the world on God , as the unresistible necessitating cause ; which because we know infallibly to be false , we have no reason to take such principles to be true , which infer it . The understanding doth not by a necessary efficiency determine the will , but morally ; or rather is regularly a condition or necessary antecedent , without which it May not determine itself . Yea the will by commanding the sense and fantasy , doth much to determine the understanding . As the eye is not necessary to my going , but to my going right , so is not the understandings guidance , necessary to my willing ( There the simple apprehension May suffice ) but to my right willing . there are other ways of determining the will . Or if the understanding did determine the will efficiently and necessarily , it is not every act of the understanding that must do it ▪ if it be so , when it saith , this must be done , & saith it importunately ; yet not when it only saith , this May be done , or you May venture on it ; which is the common part which it hath in sin . 

I am not pleased that these curious objections fall in the way , nor do i delight to put them into vulgar heads ; but finding many young scholars and others that have conversed with them , assaulted with these temptations ; i thought meet to give a touch , and and but a touch , to take them out of their way ; as Mr. Fenner hath done more fully in the preface to his hidden manna , on this last point , to which i refer you . I only add this ; 

The will of man in its very dominion doth be are God's image . It is a self determining power , though it be biased by habits , and needs a guide . as the heart and vital spirits by which it acteth , are to the rest of the body , so is it to the soul . The light of nature hath taught all the world , to carry the gild of every crime to the will of man , and there to leave it ; upon this all laws and judgements are grounded . From ignorance and intellectual weakness , men commonly fetch . Excuses for their faults ; but from the will they are aggravated . If we think it strange that man's will should be the first cause , so much as of a sinful mode , and cannot answer all occurring objections ; it May suffice that we are certain the holy majesty is not the author of sin ; and he is able to make all this as plain as the sun , and easily answer all these vain excuses , though we should be unable . And if we be much ignorant of the frame and motions of our own souls , and especially of that high self determining principle , freewill , the great spring of our actions , and the curious engine by which God doth sapientially govern the world , it is no wonder ; considering that the soul can know itself but by reflection , and God gave us a soul to use , rather than to know itself ; and to know its qualities and operations , rather than its essence . 

The five and twentieth excuse . no man can be saved , nor avoid any sin , nor believe in Christ , but those whom God hath predestinated thereto . I was under an irreversible sentence before i was born : & therefore i do nothing but what i was predestinated to do , & if God decreed not to save me , how could i help it . 

answ. 1.  God's judgements are more plain , but his decrees ▪ or secret purposes are mysterious ; and to darken certainties , by having recourse to points obscure , is no part of Christian wisdom . God told you your duty in his word , and on what terms you must be judged to life or death ; hither should you have recourse for direction , and not to the unsearchable mysteries of his mind . 

2.  God decreeth not to condemn any but for sin . Sin , i say , as the cause of that condemnation , though not of his decree . 

3.  God's decrees are acts immanent in himself and make no change on you , and therefore do not necessitate you to sin , any more than his foreknowledge doth . For both cause only a necessity of consequence , which is logical , as the divines on both sides do confess . And therefore this no more caused you to sin , then if there had been no such degree . And its a doubt whether that decree be not negative ; a willing suspending of the divine will , as to evil ; or at most ▪ a purpose to permit it . 

The six and twentieth excuse . if it be no more , yet doth it make my perdition unavoidable ; for even God's foreknowledge doth so ; for if he foreknow it , all the world cannot hinder it from coming to pass . 

answ. must God either be ignorant of what you will do , or else be the cause of it ? If you foreknow that the sun will rise tomorrow , that doth not cause it to rise . If you foreknow that one man will murder another , you are not the cause of it by foreknowing it . So is it here . 

The seven and twentieth excuse . God Might have hindered my sin and damnation if he would ▪ 

answ. and will you wilfully sin , and think to scape because God doth not hinder you ? The Prince that makes a law against murder , could lock you up , and keep you from being a murderer ! But are you excusable if he do not ? We are certain that God could have hindered all the sin and death , and confusion , and misery , that is in the world : and we are as certain that he doth not hinder it , ( But by forbidding it , and giving men means against it ) : and we are certain that he is just , and good , and wise in all ; and not bound to hinder it : and what his reasons are , you May better know hereafter : in the mean time , you had been better have looked to your own duty . 

The eight and twentieth excuse . how could i be saved if Christ did not die for me ? He died but for his elect : and none could be saved without his death . 

answ. he did die for you , and for more than his elect , though he absolutely purposed only their salvation . Your sins crucified him , and your debt lay upon him ; and he so far ransomed you , that nothing but your wilful refusal of the benefits could have condemned you . 

The nine and twentieth excuse . it was Adam's sin that brought me into this depravedness of will , which i can neither cure , nor could prevent . 

answ. 1.  If Adam cast away his holiness , he could no more convey that to us which he cast away , than a nobleman that is a traitor , can convey his lost inheritance or honours to his son . 

2.  You perish not only for your original sin , but for rejecting the recovering mercy of the redeemer : you Might have had Christ and life in him , for the accepting . 

The thirtieth excuse . God will require no more than ●e gives . He gave me not grace to repent and believe , and without his gifts i could not have it . 

answ. 1.  God will justly require more than he giveth ; that is , the improvement of his g●ftss , as mat. 25. shows . He gave Adam but a power to persevere , and not actual perseverance : yet did he justly punish him for want of the act ; even for not using by his own will , the power which he had given him . 

2.  It is long of yourself if God did not give you grace to believe : it was because you wilfully refused some preparatory grace . Christ found you at a great distance from him , and he gave you grace sufficient , to have brought you nearer to him than you were ; you had grace sufficient to have made you better than you were , and restrained many sins , and brought you to the means when you turned your back on them : though this were n●t sufficient to cause you to believe , it , was sufficient to have brought you nearer to believing ; and through your own wilfulness , became not effectual : even as Adam had sufficient grace to have stood , which was not effectual . so that you had not only Christ offered to you , if you would but accept him ; but you had daily and precious helps and means , to have cured your wills , and caused you to accept him : for neglect of which , and so for not believing , and so for all your other sins , you justly perish . 

The one and thirtieth excuse . alas man is a worm , a dry leaf , Job 13.25 a silly foolish creature : and therefore his actions be not regardable , nor deserve so great a punishment . 

answ. though he be a worm , and as nothing to God , and foolish by sin , yet is he naturally so noble a creature , that the image of God was on him , gen. 1.26 . and 5.1 . jam. 3.9 ▪ and the world made his servants , and angels his attendants heb. 1.14 . so noble , that Christ died for him , God takes special care of him ; he is capable of knowing and enjoying God ; and heaven is not thought too good for him if he will obey . And he that is capable of so great good , must be capable of as great evil , and his ways not to be so overlooked by that God that hath undertaken to be his governor : when it tendeth to infidelity , the devil will teach you to debase man , even lower than God would do . 

The two and thirtieth excuse . sin is no being : and shall men be damned for that which is nothing ? 

answ. 1.  It is such a mode as deformeth God's creature . It is a moral being , it is a relation of our actions and hearts to God's will and law . 

2.  They that say , sin is nothing , say pain and loss is nothing too . You shall therefore be paid with one nothing for another . Make light of your misery , and say , it is nothing , as you did of your sin . 

3.  Will you take this for a good excuse from your children or servants , if they abuse you ? Or from a thief or murderer ? shall he escape by telling the judge that his sin was nothing ? Or rather have death , which is nothing , as the just reward of it ? 

The three and thirtieth excuse . but sin is a transient thing . At least it doth God no harm , and therefore why should he do us so much harm for it . 

answ. 1.  It hurts not God , because he is above hurt : no thanks to you , if he be out of your reach . 2.  You May wrong him , when you cannot hurt him . And the wrong deserves as much as you can bear . If a traitor endeavour the death of the Prince , in vain , his endeavour deserves death , though he never hurt him . You despise God's law and authority ; you cause the blaspheming of his name , rom. 2.24 . He calls it a pressing him as a cart is pressed with sheaves , Amos 2.13 . and a grieving of him . 

3.  And you wrong his image , his church , the public good , and the souls of others . 

The four and thirtieth excuse . but God's nature is so good and merciful , that sure he will not damn his own creature . 

answ. 1.  A merciful judge will hang a man for a fault against man : by proportion than what is due for sin against God ? 

2.  All the death and calamity which you see in the world , comes from the anger of this merciful God : why then May not future misery come from it ? 

3.  God knoweth his own mercy better than you do ; and he hath told you how far it shall extend . 

4.  He is infinitely merciful ; but it is to the heirs of mercy : not to the final rejecters of his mercy . 

5.  Hath not God been merciful to thee , in bearing with thee so long , and offering thee grace in the blood of Christ , till thou didst wilfully reject it ? Thou wilt confess to thy everlasting woe that ●od was merciful ; had he not been so merciful , thou wouldst not have been so miserable for rejecting it . 

The five and thirtieth excuse . i would not so torment mine enemy myself . 

answ. no reason you should . Is it all one to wrong you , and to wrong the god of heaven ? God is the only judge of his own wrongs . 

The six and thirtieth excuse . all men are sinners ; and i was but a sinner . 

answ. all were not impenitent , unbelieving , rebellious sinners ; and therefore all are not unpardoned condemned sinners . All did not live after the flesh , and refuse to the last , to be converted , as you did . God will teach you better to difference between sinners and sinners . 

The seven and thirtieth excuse . but if Christ have satisfied for my sins , and died for me , then how can i justly suffer for the same sins ? will God punish one sin twice ? 

answ. 1.  Christ suffered for man in the nature of man ; but not in your person , nor you in him : it was not you that provided the price , but God himself ; Christ was not man's delegate in satisfying , and therefore received not his instructions from us , nor did it on our terms , but his own . It was not the same thing which the law threatened , that Christ underwent : for that was the damnation of the sinner himself : and not the suffering of another for him , it cannot therefore be yours , but on Christ's own terms . He died for thy sin , but with this intent , that for all that , if thou refuse him , thou shalt die thyself . It is therefore no wrong to thee to die , for it was not thou that died'st before : and Christ will take it for no wrong to him : for he will judge thee to that death . It is for refusing a Christ that died for thee , that thou must perish for ever . 

The eight and thirtieth excuse . but i did not refuse Christ . I believed a●d trusted in him to the l●st ; and repent of my sins , though i sometime was overtaken with them . 

answ. had this been true , thy sin would not have condemned thee . But there is no mocking God . He will show thee then thy naked heart , and convince thousands that thought they believed and repent , that indeed they did not . By thy works also will this be discovered , that is , by the main bent and scope of thy life , as matth. 25. throughout ; and jam. 2.  

The nine and thirtieth excuse . i did many good works ; and i hope God will set those against my evil works . 

answ. thy good works were thy sins , because indeed they were not good , being not done in sincerity of heart for God . The best man's works have some infirmity , which nothing can cleanse but the blood of Christ , which thou hast made light of , and therefore hast no part in . If all thy life had been spent in perfect works except one day , they would not make satisfaction for the sins of that day ; for they are but part of thy duty . Woe to him that hath no better a saviour at judgement , than his own good works . 

The fourtieth excuse . i lived in poverty and misery on earth , and therefore i hope i have had my suffering here , and shall not suffer in this world , and another too . 

answ. 1.  By that rule all poor men , and murderers , and thieves that are tormented and hanged , should be saved . But as godliness hath the promise of this life and that to come , so impenitency and wickedness hath the threatening of this life , and that to come . 

2.  The devils and the damned have suffered much more than you already : and yet they are never the nearer a deliverance . When thou hast , suffered ten thousand years , thy pain will be never the nearer an end . How then can a little misery on earth prevent it ? Alas poor soul , these are but the foretasts and beginnings of thy sorrow . Nothing but pardon through the blood of Christ could have prevented thy condemnation , and that thou rejectedst by infidelity and impenitency : his sufferings would have saved thee , if thou hadst not refused him : but all thine own sufferings will yield thee no relief . 

So much for the answering of the vain excuses which poor sinners are ready to make for themselves . Wherein i have been so large , as that this part i confess is disproportionable to the rest : but it was for these two reasons . 

1.  That poor careless souls Might see the vanity of such defences ; and consider , if such a worm as i can easily confute them , how easily and how terribly will they be all answered by their judge ? 

2.  I did it the rather , that godly Christians Might the better understand how to deal with these vain excuses when they meet with them ; which will be daily , if they deal with men in this sad condition . 

X. we have done with that part of the judgement which consisteth in the exploration or trial of the cause : we now come to that which is the conclusion and consummation of all : and that is , to show you , what the sentence will be , and on whom ? 

And for this , we must go strait to the word of God for our light , it being impossible for any man to have any particular knowledge of it , if Christ had not there revealed it unto us . Indeed almost all the world do acknowledge a life after this , where it shall go well with the good , and ill with the bad . But who shall be then accounted righteous , and who unrighteous , and on what terms and grounds , by whom they shall be judged , and to what condition , they know not . 

The sentence in judgement will be , 1.  Either on those that never had means to know Christ . 2.  Or on those that had . 

1.  For the former , as it less concerneth us to inquire of their case , so is it more obscurely revealed to us in the scripture . ●t is certain that they shall be judged according to their use of the means which they had , rom. 2.11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16. and the talents which they received , mat. 25.  But that it ever falleth out that he that hath but the one talon of natural helps doth improve it to salvation , or that ever they who knew not Christ , are justified and saved without that knowledge ( Being at age and use of reason ) i find not in the scriptures . I find indeed , that [ as many as have sinned without law , shall also perish without law : and as many as have sinned in the law , shall be judged by the law , rom. 2.12 . But not that any are justified by the works of nature , such as are here said to be without law . i find also , that [ they have the work of the law written in their hearts , their conscience also bearing witness , and their thoughts the mean while accusing , or else excusing one another , in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men , by Jesus Christ , according to the gospel ] rom. 2.15 , 16.  And i believe it is a just excuse , and not an unjust which is here meant . But it will be but an excuse so far as they were guiltless ▪ and that will be but in tanto , and not in toto , in part only ; and so not a full justification . A heathens conscience May excuse him from those sins which he was never guilty of ; but not from all . But no more of them . 

2.  The case of those that have had the gospel , is more plainly opened to us in God's word . Their sentence is opened in many places of scripture , but most fully in matth. 25. whence we will now collect it . 

There we find that Jesus Christ the redeemer , as King of the world , shall sit in judgement on all men at the last ; and shall separate them one from another , as a shepherd divideth the sheep from the goats , and so shall pass the final sentence . This sentence is twofold , according to the different condition of them that are judged . To them on the right hand , there is a sentence of justification , and adjudication to everlasting glory ; to them on the left hand , here is a sentence of condemnation to everlasting punishment . 

The sentence on each of these containeth , both the state which they are judged to , and the reason or cause of the judgement to that state . For as God will not judge any to life or death , without just cause , so he will publish this cause in his sentence , as it is the manner of judges to do ; if you say , Christ will not use a voice ; let it satisfy , that though we know not the manner , yet if he do it but by mental discovery , as he shows men what shall everlastingly befall them , so he will show them why it shall so befall them . 

1.  The sentence on them on the right hand , will contain , 1.  Their justification and adjudication to blessedness , and that both as generally denominated , & as particularly determined and described . 2.  And the cause of this judgement . 

1.  In general they shall be pronounced blessed . Satan would have had them cursed and miserable ; the law did curse them to misery ; many a fearful thought hath possessed their own breasts , lest they should prove at last accursed and miserable ; but now they hear the contrary from their judge . All the promises in the gospel could not perfectly overcome those their fears ; all the comfortable words of the ministers of the gospel could not perfectly subdue them ; all the tender mercies of God in Christ did not perfectly subdue them ; but now they are vanquished all for ever . He that once hath heard his redeemer in judgement call him blessed , will never fear being cursed more . For he that Christ blesseth , shall be blessed indeed . 

The description of their blessedness followeth , come inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world . and also they are called blessed of the father . here is the fountain of their blessedness ; the father , and the state of their blessedness in being the fathers : for i suppose they are called the blessed of the father , both because the father blesseth them , that is , makes them happy , and because these blessed ones are the fathers own . and so Christ will publish it to the world in judgement , that he came to glorify the father , and will proclaim him the principal efficient and ultimate end of his work of redemption , and the blessedness of his saints , and that himself is ( As mediator ) but the way to the father . It is the father that prepared the kingdom for them , and from the foundation of the world , prepared it : both for [ them ] as chosen ones , and for them as future believers , and righteous ones . it is called a kingdom , partly in respect to God the King , in whose glory we shall partake in our places : and partly metaphorically from the dignity of our condition . For so it is that ourselves are said to be made Kings , rev. 1.6 . and 5.1 . 1 pet. 2.9 . and not that we are properly Kings , for than we must have subjects who must be governed by us . 

Thus we see their blessedness in the fountain , end and state of dignity : as to the receptive act on their part , it is expressed by two words ; one signifying their first entrance on it , come : the other their possession , inheritance : that is , possess it as given by the father , and redeemed by the son , and hold it in this tenure for ever . 

The true believer was convinced in this life , that indeed there was no true blessedness , but this enjoyment of God in the kingdom of heaven . The Lord revealed this to his heart by his word and spirit : and therefore he contemned the seeming happiness on earth , and laid up for himself a treasure in heaven , and made him friends with the Mammon of unrighteousness , and ventured all his hopes in this vessel . And now he findeth the wisdom of that choice in a rich return ▪ God made him so wise a merchant as to sell all for this pearl of greatest price : and therefore now he shall find the gain . As there is no other true happiness , but God in glory ; so is there nothing more suitable and welcome to the true believer . Oh how welcome will the face of that God be , whom he loved , whom he sought , whom he longed and waited for ! How welcome will that kingdom be which he lived in hope of ! which he parted with all for ! and suffered for ▪ in the flesh ! How glad will he be to see the blessed face of his redeemer , who by his manifold grace hath brought h●m unto this ! I leave the believing soul to think of it , and to make it the daily matter of his delightful meditation . What an unconceivable joy in one moment , this sentence of Christ will fill his soul with . Undoubtedly it is now quite past our comprehension : though our imperfect fore-thoughts of it May well make our lives a continual feast . 

Were it but our justification from the accusations of Satan , who would have us condemned either as sinners in general , or as impenitent , unbelieving rebels , against him that redeemed us , in special , it would lift up the heads of the saints in that day : after all the fears of our own hearts , and the slanderous accusations of Satan and the world , that we were either impenitent infidels , or hypocrites , Christ will then justify us and pronounce us righteous . so much for the condition to which they are judged . 

2.  The reason or cause of this justification of the saints , is given us ▪ both 1.  In a general denomination , and 2.  In a particular description . 1.  In general , it is because they were righteous , as is evident , mat. 25.46 . the righteous shall go into life everlasting . and indeed it is the business of every just judge , to justify the righteous , and condemn the unrighteous . And shall not the judge of all the earth judge righteously ? gen. 18.25 . God makes men righteous , before he judges them so : and judgeth them righteous because they are so . He that abominateth that man who saith to the righteous , thou art wicked , or to the wicked , thou art righteous , who justifieth the wicked , and condemneth the righteous , will certainly never do so himself . 

Indeed he will justify them that are sinners , but not against the accusation they that are sinners : but against the accusation , that they are guilty of punishment for sin : but that is , because he first made them just ; and so justifiable , by pardoning their sin through the blood of Christ . 

And its true also , that he will justify those that were wicked , but not those that are wicked ; but judgement findeth them as death leaveth them : and he will not take them for wicked , that are sanctified and cleansed of their former wickedness . So that Christ will first pardon them , before he justify them against the charge of being sinners in general : and he will first give men faith , repentance and new obedience , before he will justify them against the charge of being impenitent , infidels or hypocrites , and consequently unpardoned , and doubly guilty of damnation . This twofold righteousness , he will first give men , and so constitute them just ; before he will declare it , and sentence them just . 

2.  The reason of the sentence , particularly described , is from their faith and ●ove to Christ , expressed in their obedience , self-denial and forsaking all for him . for i was hungry and ye fed me ; i was thirsty and ye gave me drink ; i was a stranger and ye took me in : naked and ye cloa●hed me : i was sick and ye visited me ; i was in prison and ye came to me : verily i say unto you , inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren , ye have done it unto me , mat. 25.35 . to 41.  Here is 1.  The causal conjunction for . 2.  And the cause or reason itself . 

Concerning both which , observe , 1.  How it is that man's obedience and self-denial is the reason and cause of his justification . 2.  Why it is that God will have the reason or cause thus declared in the sentence . 

For the first ; observe , that it 's one thing to give a reason of the sentence , and another thing to express the cause of the benefit , given us by the promise , and judged to us by the sentence . man's obedience was no proper cause why God did in this life give pardon of sin to us , or a right to glory : much less , of his giving Christ to die for us . And therefore as to our constitutive justification at our conversion , we must not say or think that God doth justify us , for or because of any works of our obedience , legal or evangelical . But when God hath so justified us , when he comes to give a reason of his sentence in judgement , he May and will fetch that reason , partly from our obedience , or our performance of the conditions of the new covenant . For as in this life , we had a righteousness consisting in free pardon of all sin through the blood of Christ , and a righteousness consisting in our personal performance of the conditions of the promise which giveth that pardon , and continueth it to us : so at judgement we shall accordingly be justified and as our evangelical personal righteousness , commonly called inherent , was at first only in our faith and repentance , and disposition to obey : but afterward in our actual sincere obedience , in which sense we are constitutively justified or made righteous here by our works , in James his sense , jam. 2.24 . so accordingly a double reason will be assigned of our sentential justification ; one from our pardon by Christ's blood and merits ; which will prove our right to impunity and to glory . The other from our own faith and holy obedience , which will prove our right to that pardon through Christ , and to the free gift of a right to glory : and so this last is to be pleaded in subordination to the former . For Christ is become the author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him , heb. 5 9  He therefore that will be saved , must have a Christ to save him as the author , and an obedience to that Christ , as the condition of that salvation ; and consequently both must be declared in the judgement . 

The reason why the judge doth mention our good works , rather than our believing , May be because those holy self-denying expressions of faith and love to Christ , do contain or certainly imply faith in them , as the life of the tree is in the fruit : but faith doth contain our works of obedience but only as their cause . These works also are a part of the personal righteousness which is to be enquired after , that is , we shall not be judged righteous , merely because we have believed , but also because we have added to our faith virtue ; and have improved our talents , and have loved Christ to the hazard of all or his sake . For it is not only or principally for the goodness of the work considered in itself , or the good that is done by it to the poor : but it is as these works did express our faith and love to Christ , by doing him the most costly and hazardous service ; that by faith we could see Christ in a poor beggar or a prisoner ; and could love Christ in these better than our worldly goods or liberties ; which we must part with or hazard by the works that are here mentioned . 

2.  The reasons why Christ will so publicly declare the personal righteousness of men , to be the reason or cause of his justifying sentence , it is because it is the business of that day , not only to glorify God's mere love and mercy , but eminently to glorify his remunerative justice ; and not only to express his love to the elect as such , but to express his love to them as faithful and obedient , and such as have denied all for Christ , and loved God above all ; and to show his justice to the men , and faithfulness in fulfilling all his promises , and also his holinss in the high estimation of the holiness of his persons . I shall express this in the words of a learned divine ( Dr Twiss , against Mr. Cotton , pag. 40. ) was there no more in God's intention when he elected some , than the manifestation of the riches of his glorious grace ? Did not God purpose also to manifest the glory of his remunerative justice ? Is it not undeniable that God will bestow salvation on all his elect ( of ripe years ) by way of reward and crown of righteousness , which God the righteous judge will give ? 2 tim. 4. 2 thes. 1.  it is great pity this is not considered , as usually it is not : especially for the momentous consequence thereof in my judgement . so far he . 

So much of the sentence of justification which shall be passed by Christ at judgement upon the righteous . 

2.  We are next to consider of the sentence of condemnation which shall then by Christ be passed on the unrighteous . Which is delivered to us by Christ , mat. 25. in the same order as the former . 

This sentence containeth ; 1.  The condemnation itself . 2.  The reason or cause of it . 

The condemnation expresseth the misery which they are judged to . 1.  Generally , in the denomination , cursed . 2.  Particularly by description of their cursed state . 

To be cursed , is to be a persons destinated and adjudged to utter unhappiness ; to all kind of misery without remedy . 

2.  Their cursed condition is described in the next words , depart from me into everlasting fire , prepared for the devil and his angels . 

1.  depart ! From whom ? from the god that made them in his image . From the redeemer that bought them by the price of his blood , and offered to save them freely , for all their unworthiness , and many a time entreated them to accept his offer that their souls Might live . From the holy ghost the sanctifier and comforter of the faithful , who strove with their hearts , till they quenched and expelled him . Oh sad departing ! who would not then choose rather to depart from all the friends he had in the world , and from any thing imaginable ; from his life , from himself , if it were possible , then from Christ ? depart ! from what ? why , from the presence of the judge ; from all further hopes of salvation for ever : from all possibility of ever being saved , and living in the joyful inheritance of the righteous . depart ! Not from God's essential presence , for that will be with them to their everlasting misery , but from the presence of his grace , in that measure as they enjoyed it . depart ! not from your fleshly pleasures , and honours , and profits of the world : these were all gone and past already : and there was no further need to bid them depart from these : houses and lands were gone ▪ mirth and recreations were gone . Their sweet morsels and cups were gone : all the honour that men could give them was gone , before they were set at Christ's bar to be judged . But from all expectations of ever enjoying these again , or ever tasting their former delights ; from these they must depart : not from their sin , for that will go with them : but the liberty of committing that part of it which was sweet to them , as gluttony , drunkenness , whoredom , idleness , and all voluptuousness ; from these they must depart . but this is consequential : it is Christ and the possibility of salvation , that they are sentenced to depart from . 

But whither must they depart ? 1.  Into fire . 2.  Into that fire which was prepared for the devil and his angels . 3.  Into everlasting fire . 

1.  Not into a purifying , but a tormenting fire . Whether elementary or not ; whether properly or metaphorically called sire , let us not vainly trouble ourselves to inquire . It is enough to know , that as fire is one of the most grievous tormentors of the flesh , so grievous will be those infernal torments to the whole man , soul and body . Such as is most fitly represented to us under the notion of fire , and of burning . it 's easy for a secure unbelieving soul to read and hear of it ! but wo , and ten thousand woes to them that must endure it . In this life they had their good things , when it went harder as to the flesh with better men ; but now they are tormented , when the godly are comforted , as Luke 16.25 . 

2.  But why is it called a fire prepared for the devil and his angels ? 1.  What is this devil that hath angels ? 2.  Who are his angels ? 3.  When was it prepared for them ? 4.  Was it not also prepared for wicked men ? To these in order . 

1.  It seems by many passages in scripture , that there is an order among spirits , both good and bad ; and that there is one devil that is the Prince over the rest . 

2.  It seems therefore that its the rest of the evil spirits , that are called his angels . and some think that the wicked who served him in this life , shall be numbered with his angels in the life to come . Indeed the apostle calls him , the god of this world , 2 cor. 4.4 . as is ordinarily judged by expositors : and the Prince of the power of the air , the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience , eph. 2.2 . And he calleth false seducing teachers , the ministers of Satan , 2 cor. 11.15 . But that wicked men are here meant as part of his angels , is not clear . 

3.  If it be the preparation of God's purpose that is here meant , than it was from eternity ; but if it be any commination of God as ruler of the angels , than was this fire prepared for them conditionally , from the beginning of that commination , and was due to them at their fall . 

4.  It seems that the reason why here is no mention of preparing hell-fire for the wicked , but only for the devils , is not because indeed it was not prepared also for the wicked ; but to note , that it is the torment which was first prepared for , or assigned to the devils , thereby showing the greatness of the misery of the wicked , that the devil and his angels must be their compan●onss . Though some think , as is said before , that the reason why wicked men are not mentioned here , is because they are part of the angels of the devil , and so included . And some think it is purposely to manifest gods ●eneral love to mankind , that prepared not hell for them , but they cast themselves into the hell prepared for the devils . But the first seems to be the true sense . 

And how apparently righteous are the judgements of the Lord ! that those men who would here entertain the devil into their hearts , and daily familiarity , should be then entertained by him into his place of torments , and there remain for ever in his society ! Though few entertained him into visible familiarity with their bodies as witches do , who so make him their familiar ; yet all wicked men do entertain him into more full and constant familiarity with their souls , than these witches do with their bodies , how familiar is he in their thoughts , to fill them with vanity , lust , or revenge ▪ how familiar is he in their hearts to fill them with covetousness , malice , pride or the like evils ? and to banish all thoughts of returning to God , and to quench every motion that tendeth to their recovery ? How familiar is he with them ▪ even when they seem to be worshipping God in the public assemblies ; stealing the word out of their hearts , filling them with vain and wandering thoughts , blinding their minds that they cannot understand the plainest words that we are able to speak to them , and filling them with a proud rebellion against the direction of their teachers , and an obstinate refusal to be ruled by them , b● the matter never so necessary to their own salvation ? How familiar ar● these evil spirits in their houses , filling them with ignorance , worldliness , and ungodliness , and turning out ●ods' service , so that they do not pray together once in a day , or perhaps at all ? How familiarly doth Satan use their tongues , in cursing , swearing , lying , ribaldry , backbiting , or slandering ? And is it not just with God to make these friends their familiars in torment , with whom they entertained such familiarity in sin ? As Christ with all the blessed angels and saints will make but one kingdom or family , and shall live altogether in perpetual delights : so the devil and all his he●●ish angels and wicked men shall make but one household , and shall live altogether in perpetual misery . Oh poor sinners ! you are not troubled now at his presence ▪ and power your hearts , but will you not then be troubled at his presence , and tormenting power ? As long as you do not see him , let him do what he will with you , it grieves you little or nothing at all : but what will you say when you must see him , and abide with him for ever ? Oh Sirs , his name is easily heard , but his company will be terrible to the stoutest heart alive . He showeth you a smiling face when he tempteth you , but he hath a grimmer face to show you , when temptations have conquered you , and torments must succeed ! As those that write of witches , say ▪ he appeareth at first to them in some comely tempting shape , till he have them fast tied to him ; and then he beats them , and affrights them , and seldom appears to them but in some ugly hew . Believe it , poor sinners , you do not hear or see the worst of him , when you are merry about your sinful pleasures , and rejoicing in your hopes of the commodities or preferments of the world : he hath another kind of voice which you must hear , and another face to show you , that will make you know a little better , whom you had to do with ! You would be afraid now to meet him in the dark ; what will you be to live with him in everlasting darkness ? Then you will know who it was that you entertained and obeyed , and played with in your sins . 

3.  And as the text tells us , that it is a fire prepared for the devil and his angels . so it telleth us , that is an everlasting fire . it had a beginning : but it shall have no end . If these wretches would have chosen the service of God , they would have met with no difficulty or trouble , but what would have had a speedy end : poverty and injuries would have had an end : scorns and abuses would have had an end ; fasting , humiliation sorrow for sin , watching , and fighting against our spiritual enemies , would all have had an end . But to avoid these , they chose that ease ▪ that pleasure , which hath brought them to that torment which never will have end . I have said so much of these things already in my book called the saints rest , that i will now say but this much . It is one of the wonders of the world , how men that do believe , or think they do believe this word of Christ to be true , that the wicked shall go into everlasting fire , can yet venture on sin so boldly ▪ and live in it so fearlessly , or sleep quietly till they are out of this unspeakable danger ! Only the commonness of it , and the known wickedness of man's heart , doth make this less wonderful . And were there nothing else to convince us , that sinners are mad and dead as to spiritual things , this were enough ; that ever the greatest pleasures or profits of the world , or the most enticing baits that the devil can offer them , should once prevail with them to forget these endless things and draw them to reject an everlasting glory , and cast themselves desperately into everlasting fire ; yea , and all this under daily warnings and instructions ; and when it 's told them before hand by the god of truth himself ! For the Lord's sake , Sirs , and for your souls sakes , if you care not what ministers say , or what such as i say , yet will you soberly read now and then this 25.  Chapter of Matthew , and regard what is told you by him that must be your judge ! and now and then bethink yourselves soberly whether these are matters for wise men to make light of ? and what it is to be everlastingly in heaven or in hell fire . 

2.  We have seen what is the penalty contained in the sentence against the ungodly : the next thing that the text directs us to ▪ is the cause or reason of the sentence ▪ vers. 42 , for i was hungry , and ye gave me no meat , &c.  The reason is not given expressly either for their sin against the law of works , that is , because they were sinners , and not perfectly innocent : nor yet from their unbelief , which is the great sin against the law of grace : but it is given from their not expressing their faith and love to Christ in works of mercy and self-denial . And why is this so ? 

1.  We must not suppose that these words of Christ , do express the whole judicial process in every point ; but the chief parts . It is supposed that all men are convicted of being sinners against the perfect law of the creator , and that they are guilty of death for that sin : and that there is no way but by Christ to obtain deliverance . But because all this must be acknowledged by the righteous themselves , as well as by the wicked , therefore Christ doth not mention this , but that only which is the turning point or cause in the judgement . For it is not all sinners that shall be finally condemned ▪ but all impenitent , unbelieving sinners , who have rebelled finally against their redeemer . 

2.  And the reason why faith itself is not expressed , is , 1.  Because it is clearly employed , and so is love to Christ as redeemer : in that they should have relieved Christ himself in his members : that is , as it 's expressed , matth. 10.42 . they should have received a prophet in the name of a prophet ; and a disciple in the name of a disciple ; all should be done for Christ's sake : which could not be unless they believed in him , and loved h●m . 2.  Also because that the bare act of believing is not all that Christ requireth to a man's final justification and salvation : but holy self-denying obedience must be added . And therefore this is given as the reason of their condemnation , that they did not so obey . 

We must observe also , that Christ here putteth the special for the general : that is , one way of self ▪ denying obedience , and expression of love , instead of such obedience in general ! For all men have not ability to relieve those in misery , being perhaps some of them poor themselves . But all have that love and self-denial , which will some way express itself . And all have hearts and a disposition to do thus , if they had ability ; without such a disposition , none can be saved . 

It is the fond conceit of some , that if they have any love to the godly or wish them well , it is enough to prove them happy . But Christ here purposely lets us know , that whoever doth not love him at so high a rate , as that he can part with his substance or any thing in the world , to those uses which he shall require them , even to relieve his servants in want and sufferings for the Master's sake , that man is none of Christ's disciple , nor will be owned by him at the last . 

Xi . The next point that we come to , is to show you the properties of this sentence at judgement . 

When man had broken the law of his creator at the first , he was liable to the sentence of death , and God presently sat in judgement on him , and sentenced him to some part of the punishment which he had deserved : but upon the interposition of the son , he forbore the rest , resolving on a way that Might tend to his recovery : and death is due yet to every sinner for every sin which he commits , till a pardon do acquit him . But this sentence which will pass on sinners at the last judgement , doth much differ from that which was passed on the first sin , or which is due according to the law of wor●s alone : for , 

1.  As to the penalty , called the pain of loss , the first judgement did deprive man of the favour of his ●reator ; but the second will deprive him of the favour both of the creator and redeemer : the first judgement deprived him of the benefits of innocency : the second deprived him of the benefits of redemption ; the loss of his hopes and possibility of a pardon , of the spirit , of justification and adoption , and of the benefits which conditionally were promised and offered him ; these are the punishments of the last judgement , which the law of work● did never threaten to the first man , or to any , as it stood alone . 

Also the loss of glory as recovered , is the proper penalty of the viol●ted law of grace : which is more than the first loss . As if a man should lose his purse the second time , when another hath once found it for him : or rather as if a traitor redeemed by another , and having his life and honours offered him , if he will thankfully accept it and come in , should by his refusal and obstinacy , lose this recovered life , which is offered him : which is an addition to his former penalty . 

Besides that the higher degree of glory will be lost , which Christ would bestow on him , more than was lost at first . The very work of the saints in heaven ▪ will be to praise and glorify him that redeemed them : and the father in him : which would not have been the work of man if he had been innocent . 

2.  As to the pain of sense , the last judgement by the redeemer ▪ will sentence them to a far sorer punishment than would have befallen them , if no saviour had been offered them , heb. 10.29 . The conscience of Adam if he had not been redeemed , would never have tormented him for rejecting a redeemer , nor for refusing or abusing his gracious offers , and his mercies ; nor for the forfeiting of a recovered happiness ; nor for refusing the easy terms of the gospel , which would have given him Christ and salvation for the accepting ; nor for neglecting any means that tended to recovery : no nor for refusing repentance unto life , nor for disobeying a redeemer that bought him by his blood . As all these are the penalties of the redeemer's law and judgement , so is it a sorer penalty than conscience would have inflicted merely for not being perfectly innocent ; and they will be far sorer gripings and gnawings of the never-dying worm for the abuse of these talents , than if we had been never trusted with any after our first forfeiture . Yea and God himself will accordingly proportion his punishments . So that you see that privatively and positively , or as to their loss and their feeling , the redeemer will pass on them a heavier doom then the creator did , or would have done according to the first law to perfect man . 

3.  Another property of the judgement of Christ , is , that it will be final , peremptory , and excluding all further hopes or possibilities of a remedy . so was not the first judgement of the creator upon fallen man . Though the law of pure nature knew no remedy , nor gave man any hope of a redeemer ; yet did it not exclude a remedy ; nor put in any bar against one ; but God was free to recover his creature if he p●eased . But in the law of grace he hath resolved , that there shall be no more sacrifice for sin , but a fearful looking for of judgement and fire which shall devour the adversary , heb. 10. ●6 , 27. and that the fire shall be everlasting , the worm sha●l not die , and the fire shall not be quenched , mat. 25. last , mat. 13.42 , 50.  John 5.27 . mat. 5.26 . mat. 3.12 . and Luke 3.17 . Mark . 9 . 4● , 44 , 45 , 46 , 48.  He that now breaketh that pure law that requireth perfect innocency ( As we have all done ) May fly to the promise of grace in Christ , and appeal to the law of liberty , or deliverance , to be judged by that . But he that falls under the penalty of that law which should have saved him , as all final unbelievers ; and impenitent , ungodly persons do , hath no other to appeal to . Christ would have been a sanctuary and refuge to thee from the law of works , hadst thou but come in to him : but who shall be a refuge to thee from the wrath of Christ ? The gospel would have freed thee from the curse of the law of works , if thou hadst but believed and obeyed it : but what shall free thee from the condemnation of the gospel ? Had there no accusation lain against thee , but that thou wast in general a sinner , that is , that thou wast not perfectly innocent , Christ would have answered that charge by his blood . But seeing thou art also guilty of those special sins which he never shed his blood for , who shall deliver thee from that accusation ? When Christ gave himself a ransom for sinners , it was with this resolution both in the father and himself , that none should ever be pardoned , justified or saved by that ransom , that did not in the time of this life , sincerely return to God by faith in the redeemer , and live in sincere obedience to him and persevering herein . So that he plainly excepted final infidelity , impenitency and rebellion from pardon : he never died for the final non-performance of the conditions of the new covenant . So that his judgement for these will be peremptory and remediless . If you say , why cannot god find out a remedy for this sin , as well as he did for the first ? I say , God cannot lie , tit. 1.2 . He must be true and faithful , as necessarily as he must be God , because of the absolute perfection of his nature ; and he hath said and resolved that there shall be no more remedy . 

Many other properties of God's judgement in general there are , as that righteousness , impartiality , inflexibility , and the like , which because i would not make my discourse too long , i will pass over , contenting myself with the mention of these which are proper to the judgement of the redeemer , according to his own laws in special . 

Xii . The twelfth and last thing which i promised to unfold , is , the execution of this judgement . here i should show you both the certainty of the execution , and by whom it will be , and how ; but having done all this already in the third part of the foresaid book of rest , i shall now only give this brief touch of it . 

No sooner is the dreadful sentence past , go ye cursed into everlasting fire , but away they must be gone : there is no delay ; much less any reprieve to be expected : and yet much less is there any hope of an escape . If the judge once say , take him jailor ; and if Christ say , take him devils , you that ruled and deceived him , now torment him ; all the world cannot rescue one such soul . It will be in vain to look about for help ! Alas , there is none but Christ can help you , and he will not , because you refused his help : nay we May say , he cannot : not for want of power : but because he is true and just ; and therefore will make good that word which you believed not . It is in vain then to cry to hills to fall on you and the mountains to cover you from the presence of him that sitteth on the throne . It will be in vain now to repent , and wish you had not slighted your salvation , nor sold it for a little pleasure to your flesh . It will be then in vain to cry Lord , Lord , open to us ; oh spare us ; oh pity us ; oh do not cast us into these hideous flames ! Do not turn us among devils ! do not torment thy redeemed ones in this fire ! all this will be then too late . 

Poor sinner , whoever thou art that readest or hearest these lines , i beseech thee in compassion to thy soul , consider , how fearful the case of that man will be , that is newly doomed to the everlasting fire ; and is haled to the execution without remedy ! and what mad men are those that now do no more to prevent such a misery , when they Might do it on such easy terms , and now have so fair an opportunity in their hands ? 

The time was when repentance Might have done thee good : but then all thy repentings will be in vain . now while the day of thy visitation lasteth , hadst thou but a heart to pray and cry for mercy , in faith and fervency , through Christ thou Mightest be heard . But then praying , and crying will do no good ! shouldst thou roar out in the extremity of thy horror and amazement , and beseech the Lord Jesus but to forgive thee one sin , or to send thee on earth once more , and to try thee once again in the flesh , whether thou wouldst not love him and lead a holy life , it would be all in vain . Shouldst thou beseech him by all the mercifulness of his nature by all his sufferings and bloody death , by all the merciful promises of his gospel ; it would be all in vain ▪ nay , shouldst thou beg but one day's reprival , or to stay one hour before thou were cast into those flames , it would not be heard ; it would do thee no good . How earnestly did a deceased gentleman , luk. 16.24 . beg of Abraham for one drop of water from the tip of Lazarus' finger , to cool his tongue , because he was tormented in the flame ! And what the better was he ? He was sent to remember that he had his good things in this life ; and that remembrance would torment him more . And do not wonder or think much at this , that Christ will not then be entreated by the ungodly . You shall then have a remember too , from Christ or conscience . He May soon stop thy mouth , and leave thee speechless , and say , remember , man , that i did one day send thee a message of peace , and thou wouldst not hear it . I once did stoop to beseech thee to return , and thou wouldst not hear . I besought thee by the tender mercies of God ; i besought thee by all the love that i had showed thee ; by my holy life ; by my cursed death ; by the riches of my grace ; by the offers of my glory ; and i could not get thee to forsake the world , to deny thy flesh to leave one beloved sin , for all this ! I besought thee over and over again ! I sent many a minister to thee in my name : i waited on thee many a day , and year ; and all would not do ; thou wouldst not consider , return and live : and now it is too late : my sentence is past , and cannot be recalled : away from me , thou worker of iniquity , matth. 7.22 , 23.  

Ah Sirs , what a case than is the poor desperate sinner left in ! How can i write this , or how can you that read or hear it without trembling once think of the condition that such forlorn wretches will be in ! When they look above them , and see the god that hath forsaken them , because they forsook him first ; when they look about them , and see the saints on one hand whom they despised , now sentenced unto glory ; and the wicked on the other hand , whom they accompanied and imitated , now judged with them to everlasting misery ; when they look below them , and see the flames that they must abide in , even for evermore ; and when the devils begin to hale them to the execution ; oh poor souls ! Now what would they give for a Christ , for a promise , for a time of repentance , for a sermon of mercy , which once they slept under , or made no account of ! How is the case altered now with them ! who would think that these are the same men , that made light of all this on earth , that so stoutly scorned the reproofs of the word , that would be worldly , and fleshly , and drunk , and proud , let preachers say what they would ; and perhaps hated those that did give them warning . Now they are of another mind ; but all too late . Oh were there any place for resistance , how would they draw back , and lay hold of any thing , before they would be dragged away into those flames ! But there is no resisting ; Satan's temptations Might have been resisted , but his executions cannot God's judgements Might have been prevented by faith and prayer , repentance and a holy life ; but they cannot be resisted when they are not prevented . Glad would the miserable sinner be , if he Might but turn to nothing , and cease to be ; or that he Might be any thing rather than a reasonable creature : but these wishes are all in vain . there is one time , and one way of a sinner's deliverance ; if he fail in that one , he perisheth for ever : all the world cannot help him after that , 2 cor. 6 2.  i have heard thee in a time accepted ; and in the day of salvation have i succoured thee : behold now is the accepted time : behold now is the day of salvation . now he saith , rev. 3.20 . behold , i stand at the door and knock ; if any man hear my voice and open the door , i will come in to him , and will sup with him , and he with me . but for the time to come hereafter , hear what he saith , prov. 1.24 , 25 , 26.  because i have called , and ye refused , i have stretched out my hand , and no man regarded ; but ye have set at naught all my counsel , and would none of my reproof ; i also will laugh at your calamity ; i will mock when your fear cometh : when your fear cometh as desolation , and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind ; when distress and anguish cometh upon you ; then shall they call upon me , but i will not answer ; they shall seek me early , but they shall not find me ; for that they hated knowledge , and did not choose the fear of the Lord ; they would none of my counsels ; they despised all my reproof ▪ therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way , and be filled with their own devices ; for the turning away of the simple shall slay them , and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them ; but who so hearkneth to me , shall dwell safely , and shall be quiet from fear of evil . i have recited all these words , that you May see and consider , whether i have spoke any other thing than God himself hath plainly told you of . 

Having said this much of the certainty of the execution , i should next have spoke somewhat of the manner and the instruments , and have showed how God will be for ever the principal cause , and Satan and their own consciences the instruments , in part ; and in what manner conscience will do its part , and how impossible it will be to quiet or resist it . But having spoke so much of all this already elsewhere , as is said before , i will forbear here to repeat it , leaving the reader that desireth it , there to peruse it . 

The uses . use 1.  

Beloved hearers , it was not to fill your fancies with news that God sent me hither this day ; nor to tell you of matters that nothing concern you ; nor by some terrible words to bring you to an hours amazement and no more ; but it is to tell you of things that your eyes shall see , and to foretell you of your danger while it May be prevented ; that your precious souls May be saved at the last , and you May stand before God with comfort at that day ; but because this will not be every man's case , no nor the case of most , i must in the name of Christ desire you to make this day an enquiry into your own souls , and as in the presence of God let your hearts make answer to these few questions which i shall propound and debate with you . 

qu. 1.  

do you soundly believe this doctrine which i have preached to you ? what say you Sirs ? do you verily believe it as a most certain truth , that you and i , and all the world must stand at God's bar and be judged to everlasting joy or torment ? I hope you do all in some sort believe this : but blame me not if i be jealous whether you soundly believe it , while we see in the world so little of the effect of such a belief . I confess i am forced to think that there is more infidelity than faith among us , when i see more ungodliness than godliness among us : and i can hardly believe that man that will say or swear that he believeth these things , and yet liveth as carelessly and carnally as an infidel . I know that no man can love to be damned ; yea i know that every man that hath a reasonable soul , hath naturally some love to himself , and a fear of a danger which he verily apprehendeth ; he therefore that liveth without all fear ▪ i must think liveth without all apprehension of his danger . Custom hath taught men to hold these things as the opinion of the country ; but if men soundly believed them , surely we should see stranger effects of such a faith , than in the most we do see . Doth the sleepy soul that liveth in security , and followeth this world as eagerly as if he had no greater matters to mind ; that never once trembled at the thoughts of this great day ; nor once asked his own soul in good sadness , my soul , how dost thou think then to escape ? I say , doth this man believe that he is going to this judgement ? Well , Sirs , whether you believe it or not , you will find it true ; and believe it you must before you can be safe . For if you do not believe it , you will never make ready . Let me therefore persuade you in the fear of God to consider , that it is a matter of undoubted truth . 

1.  Consider that it is the express word of the god of truth ; revealed in scripture as plainly as you can desire . So that you cannot be unbelieving without denying God's word , or giving him the lie , mat. 13.38 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 49 , 50.  mat. 25. throughout ▪ rom. 2.5 ▪ 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 16 , and 1.32 . John 5.28 , 29.  the hour is coming in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice , and shall come forth : they that have done good , unto the resurrection of life , and they that have done evil , unto the resurrection of damnation . Heb. 9.27 . it is appointed to all men once to die , and after this , the judgement . Rom. 14.9.12 . so than every one of us shall give account of himself to God . Rev. 20.12 . and i saw the dead , small and great stand before God : and the books were opened : and another book was opened , which is the book of life : and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books , according to their works . Mat. 12.36 , 37.  but i say unto you , that every idle word that men shall speak , the shall give account thereof in the day of judgement : for by thy words thou shalt be justified , and by thy words thou shalt be condemned . many more most express texts of scripture do put the truth of this judgement out of all question , to all that believe the scripture , and will understand it . There is no place left for a controversy in the point : it is made as sure to us as the word of the living God can make it : and he that will question that , what will he believe ? What say you Sirs ? Dare you doubt of this which the god of heaven hath so positively affirmed ? I hope you dare not . 

2.  Consider , it is a master-part of your faith , if you are Christians , and a fundamental article of your creed , that Christ shall come again to judge the quick and the dead . So that you must believe it , or renounce your Christianity , and then you renounce Christ and all the hopes of mercy that you have in him . it 's impossible that you should soundly believe in Christ ▪ and not believe his judgement and life everlasting ; because as he came to bring life and immortality to light in the gospel , 2 tim. 1.10 . so it was the end of his incarnation , death and resurrection , to bring you thither ; and its part of his honour and office which he purchased with his blood , to be the Lord and judge of all the world , rom. 14.9 . joh. 5.22 ▪ if therefore you believe not heartily this judgement ; deal plainly and openly , and say you are infidels and cast away the hypocritical vizor of Christianity , and let us know you , and take you as you are . 

3.  Consider that it is a truth that is known by the very light of nature ; that there shall be a happiness for the righteous , and a misery for the wicked after this life : which is evident ▪ 

1.  In that we have undeniable natural reason for it . 1.  God is the righteous governor of the world , and therefore must make a difference among his subjects , according to the nature of their ways ; which we see is not done here , where the wicked prosper , and the good are afflicted ; therefore it must be hereafter . 

2.  We see there is a necessity that God should make promises and threatenings of everlasting happiness or misery , for the right governing of the world ; for we certainly perceive that no lower things will keep men from destroying all human society , and living worse than bruit beasts ; and if there be a necessity of making such threats and promises , than there is certainly a necessity of fulfilling them . For God needeth no lie or means of deceiving , to rule the world . 

2.  And as we see it by reason , so by certain experience , that this is discernible by the light of nature ; for all the world , or almost all do believe it . Even those nations where the gospel never came , and have nothing but what they have by nature even the most barbarous Indian's acknowledge some life after this ▪ and a difference of men according as they are here : therefore you must believe thus much , or renounce your common reason and humanity , as well as your Christianity . Let me therefore persuade you all in the fear of God to confirm your souls in the belief of this , as if you had heard Christ or an angel from heaven say to you , oh man thou art hasting to judgement . 

qu. 2.  

My next question is , whether you do ever soberly consider of this great day ? Sirs , do you use when you are alone to think with yourselves ▪ how certain and how dreadful it will be ? how fast it is coming on ? and what you shall do ? and what answer you mean to make at that day ? are your minds taken up with these considerations ? Tell me , is it so , or not ? 

Alas Sirs ! Is this a matter to be forgotten ? Is not that man even worse than mad ▪ that is going to God's judgement and never thinks of it ? when if they were to be tried for their lives at the next assize , they would think of it , and think again , and cast 100 times which way to escape . Me thinks you should rather forget to go to bed at night , or to eat your meat , or do your work , then forget so great a matter as this . 

Truly i have often in my serious thoughts been ready to wonder that men can think of almost any thing else , when they have so great a thing to think of . What! forget that which you must remember for ever ! forget that which should force remembrance , yea and doth force it with some , whether they will or not ! A poor despairing soul cannot forget it : he thinks which way ever he goes he is ready to be judged . Oh therefore beloved , fix these thoughts as deep in your hearts as thoughts can go . Oh be like that holy man , that thought which way ever he went , he heard the trumpet sound , and the voice of the angel calling to the world , arise ye dead , and come to judgement , you have warning of it from God and man , to cause you to remember it ; do not then forget it . It will be a cold excuse another day , Lord , i forgot this day , or else i Might have been ready : you dare not sure trust to such excuses . 

qu. 3.  

My next question to you , is ▪ how are you affected with the consideration of this day ? Barely to think of it will not serve : to think of such a day as this with a dull and senseless heart , is a sign of fearful stupidity . Did the knees of King Belshazzar knock together with trembling , when he saw the hand-writing on the wall ? da● . 5.6 . How then should thy heart be affected that seeth the hand-writing of God as a summons to his bar ? 

When i began to preach of these things long ago , i confess the matters seemed to me so terrible , that i was afraid that persons would have run out of their wits with fear ; but a little experience showed me , that many are like a dog that is bred up in a forge or furnace ▪ that being used to it , can sleep though the hammers are beating , and the fire and hot iron flaming about him ▪ when another that had never seen it , would be amazed at the sight . When men have heard us 7 years together , yea 20 years , to talk of a day of judgement , and they see it not , nor feel any hurt ▪ they think it is but talk , and begin to make nothing of it . This is their thanks to God for his patience : because his sentence is not executed speedily therefore their hearts are set in them to do evil , eccl. 8.11 . As if God were slack of his promise , as some men account slackness , 2 pet. 3.9 . When one day with him is as a 1000 years , and a 1000 years as one day . What if we tell you 20 years together that you must die , will you not believe us , because you have lived so long and seen no death coming ? 

Three or four things there be should bring any matter to the heart . 1.  If it be a matter of exceeding weight . 2.  If it concern not others only , but ourselves . 3.  If it be certain . 4.  If near . 

All these things are here to be found , and therefore how should your hearts be moved at the consideration of this great day ! 

1.  What matter can be mentioned with the tongue of man of greater moment ? For the poor creature to stand before his maker and redeemer , to be judged to everlasting joy or torment ? Alas ! all the matters of this world are plays , and toys , and dreams to this : matters of profit or disprofit are nothing to it : matters of credit or discredit are unworthy to be named with it : matters of temporal life or death are nothing to it . We see the poor bruit beasts go every day to the slaughter , and we make no great matter of it , though their life be as dear to them as ours to us . To be judged to an everlasting death or torment ; this is the great danger , that one would think should shake the stoutest heart to consider it , and awake the dullest sinner to prevent it . 

2.  it 's a matter that concerneth every one of yourselves , and every man or woman that ever lived upon the earth , or ever shall do : i am not speaking to you of the affairs of some far country , that are nothing to you , but only to marvel at ; which you never saw , nor ever shall do : no ; it is thy own self man or woman that hearest me this day , that shalt as surely appear before the judgement-seat of Christ , as the Lord liveth , and as he is true and faithful ; and that is as sure as thou livest on this earth , or as the heaven is over thee . That man that heareth all this with the most careless blockish heart , shall be awakened and stand with the rest at that day ; that man that never thought of it , but spent his time in worldly matters , shall leave all , and there appear ; that man that will not believe these things to be true , but make a jest of them , shall see and feel what he would not believe , and he also shall be there : the godly that waited in hope for that day , as the day of their full deliverance and coronation , they shall be there . Those that have lain in the dust these 5000. years , shall rise again and all stand there . Hearer , whoever thou art , believe it , thou Mayest better think to live without meat , to see without light , to escape death , and abide for ever on earth , then to keep away from that appearance . Willing or unwilling , thou shalt be there . And should not a matter then that so concerneth thyself , go near to thy heart , and awake thee from thy security ? 

3.  That it is a matter of unquestionable certainty , i have partly showed you already , and more would do , if i were preaching to known infidels . If the careless world had any just reason to think it were uncertain , their carelessness were more excusable . Me thinks a man should be affected with that which he is certain shall come to pass , in a manner as if it were now in doing . 1 thes. 5.2 . ye perfectly know that the day of the Lord so cometh , &c. saith the apostle . 

4.  This day is not only certain , but it is near ; and therefore should affect you the more . I confess , if it were never so far of , yet seeing it will come at last , it should be carefully regarded : but when the judge is at the door , jam. 5.9 . and we are almost at the bar , and it is so short a time to this assize , what soul that is not dead will be secure ? 

Alas Sirs ! what is a little time when it is gone ? how quickly shall you and i be all in another world , and our souls receive their particular judgement , and so wait till the body be raised and judged to the same condition ? It is not a 100 years in all likelihood , till ▪ every soul of us shall be in heaven or hell : and its like , not half or a quarter of that time , but it will be so with the greater part of us : and what is a year or two , or a 100 ? how speedily is it come ? how many a soul that is now in heaven or hell , within a 1000 years dwelled in the places that you now dwell in , and sat in the seats you now sit in ? And now their time is past , what is it ? Alas ; how quickly will it be so with us : you know not when you go to bed , but you May be judged by the next morning : or when you rise , but you May be ▪ judged before night : but certainly you know that shortly it will be ; and should not this than be laid to heart ? Yea the general judgement will not be long : for certainly we live in the end of the world . 

qu. 4.  

My next question is , whether are you ready for this dreadful judgement when it comes , or not ? Seeing it is yourselves that must be tried , i ▪ think it concerns you to see that you be prepared . How often hath Christ warned us in the gospel , that we be always ready ; because we know not the day or hour of his coming , mat. 24.44.42 . and 25.13 . 1 thes. 5.6 . and told us how sad a time it will be to those that are unready , mat. 25.11 , 12.  Did men but well know what a meeting and greeting there will be between Christ and an unready soul , it would sure startle them , and make them look about them . What say you beloved hearers , are you ready for judgement , or are you not ! Me thinks a man that knoweth he shall be judged , should ask himself the question every day of his life ; am i ready to give up my account to God do not you use to ask this of your own hearts ? unless you be careless whether you be saved or damned , methinks you should ; and ask it seriously . 

Qu. but who be they that are ready ? how shall i know whether i be ready or not ? 

answ. there is a twofold readiness . 1.  When you are in a safe case . 2.  When you are in a comfortable case , in regard of that day . The latter is very desirable , but the first is of absolute necessity : this therefore is it that you must principally inquire after . 

In general , all those , and only those are ready for judgement , who shall be justified and saved , and not condemned when judgement comes ; they that have a good cause in a gospel sense . It May be known before hand who these are ; for Christ judgeth , as i told you , by his law . And therefore find out whom it is that the law of grace doth justify or condemn , and you May certainly know whom the judge will justify or condemn ; for he judgeth righteously . 

If you further ask me who these are ; remember that i told you before , that every man that is personally righteous by fulfilling the condition of salvation in the gospel , shall be saved , and he that is found unrighteous , as having not fulfilled them , shall perish at that day . 

Q1 . who are these ? 

answ. i will tell you them in a few words , lest you should forget , because it is a matter that your salvation or damnation dependeth upon . 

1.  The soul that unfeignedly repenteth of his former sinful course , and turneth from it in heart and life , and loveth the way of godliness which he hated , and hateth the way of sin which he loved , and is become thoroughly a new creature , being born again and sanctified by the spirit of Christ , shall be justified : but all others shall certainly be condemned . 

Good news to repenting converted sinners , but sad to impenitent , and him that knows not what this means . 

2.  That soul that feeling his misery under sin , and the power of Satan , and the wrath of God , doth believe what Christ hath done and suffered for man's restauration and salvation , and thankfully accepteth him as his only saviour and Lord , on the terms that he is offered in the gospel , and to those ends , even to justify him , and sanctify and guide him , and bring him at last to everlasting glory ; that soul shall be justified at judgement : and he that doth not , shall be condemned . 

Or in short , in scripture phrase , he that believeth shall be saved , and he that believeth not shall be condemned , mar. 16.16 . 

3.  The soul that hath had so much knowledge of the goodness of God , and his love to man in creation , redemption , and the following mercies , and hath had so much conviction of the vanity of all creatures , as thereupon to love God more than all things below , so that he hath the chiefest room in the heart , and is preferred before all creatures ordinarily in a time of trial : that soul shall be justified at judgement , and all others shall be condemned . 

4.  That soul that is so apprehensive of the absolute sovereignty of God as creator and redeemer , and of the righteousness of his law , and the goodness of his holy way , as that he is firmly resolved to obey him before all others , and doth accordingly give up himself to study his will , of purpose that he May obey it , and doth walk in these holy ways , and hath so far mortified the flesh , and subdued the world and the devil , that the authority and word of God can do more with him , than any other ; and doth ordinarily prevail against all the persuasion and interest of the flesh , so that the main scope and bent of the heart and life is still for God ; and when he sinneth , he riseth again by true repentance ; i say , that soul , and that only , shall be justified in judgement , and be saved . 

5.  That soul that hath such believing thoughts of the life to come , that he taketh the promised blessedness for his portion , and is resolved to venture all else upon it , and in hope of this glory , doth set light comparatively by all things in this world , and waiteth for it as the end of his life , choosing any suffering that God shall call him to , rather than to lose his hopes of that felicity , and thus persevereth to the end : i say that soul , and none but that , shall be justified in judgement , and escape damnation . 

In these five marks i have told you truly and briefly , who shall be justified and saved , and who shall be condemned at the day of judgement . And if you would have them all in five words , they are but the description of these five graces , repentance , faith , love , obedience , hope . 

But though i have laid these close together for your use , yet lest you should think that in so weighty a case i am too short in the proof of what i so determine of ▪ i will tell you in the express words of many scripture texts , who shall be justified , and who shall be condemned . 

[ John 3.3 . Except a man be born again , he cannot enter into the kingdom of God , heb. 12.14 . Without holiness none shall see God . luk. 13.3 , 5.  Except ye repent , ye shall all likewise perish . Acts 26.18 . I send thee to open their eyes , and turn them from darkness to light , and from the power of Satan unto God , that they May receive forgiveness of sins , and an inheritance among the sanctified by faith that is in me . John 3.15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19  Whoever believeth in him shall not perish , but have everlasting life : he that believeth on him , is not condemned ; he that believeth not is condemned already , because he hath not believed in the name of the only begotten son of God : and this is the condemnation , that light is come into the world , and men loved darkness rather than light , because their deeds were evil , John 5.28 , 29.  The hour is coming in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice and shall come forth , they that have done good to the resurrection of life , and they that have done evil to the resurrection of damnation . mat. 25.30 . Cast the unprofitable servant into outer darkness , there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth , Luke 19.27 . But those mine enemies , which would not that i should reign over them , bring hither , and slay them before me . mat. 22.12 , 13.  Friend , how camest ▪ thou in hither , not having on a wedding garment ? And he was speechless . Then said the King to the servants : bind him hand and foot , and take him away , and cast him into outer darkness , &c.  Mat. 5.20 . For i say unto you , that except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees , ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven . mat. 7.21 . Not every one that saith , Lord , Lord ▪ shall enter into the kingdom of heaven ; but he that doth the w●ll of my father which is in heaven . heb. 5.9 . He is become the author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him . rev. 22.14 . Blessed are they that do his commandments , that they May have right to the tree of life , and May enter in by the gate into the city rom 8.1 , 13.  There is then no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus , that walk not after the flesh , but after the spirit . For if ye live after the flesh , ye shall die : but if ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body , ye shall live . rom. 8.9 . If any man have not the spirit of Christ , he is none of his . gal. 5.18 . But if ye be led of the spirit , ye are not under the law . gal. 6.7 , 8.  Be not deceived : God is not mocked : for whatsoever a man soweth , that shall he also reap for he that soweth to the flesh , shall of the flesh reap corruption : but he that soweth to the spirit , shall of the spirit reap life everlasting . matth. 6.21 . For where your treasure is , there will your heart be also . ] Read psal. 1. and many other texts to this purpose , of which some are cited in my directions for peace of conscience : dir. 11. p. 115 , 116.  

And thus i have told you from God's word , how you May know whether you are ready for judgement ; which is the fourth thing that i would advise you to inquire after . 

Oh Sirs , what shift do you make to keep your souls from continual terrors , as long as you remain unready for judgement ? How do you keep the thoughts of it out of your mind , that they do not break your sleep , and meet you in your business , and haunt you every way you go , while judgement is so near , and you are so unready ? But i shall proceed to my next question . 

qu. 5.  

And in the last place , to those of you that are not yet ready , nor in a condition wherein you May be safe at that day ; my question is , how are you resolved to prepare for judgement for the time to come ? will you do no more than you have done hitherto ? Or will you now set yourselves with all your might , to make preparation for so great a day ? methinks you should be now past all demurs , delays , or further doubtings about such a business ; and by the consideration of what i have said already , you should be fully resolved to lose no more time , but presently to awake , and set upon the work . Me thinks you should all say , we will do any thing that the Lord shall direct us to do , rather than we will be unready for the final doom ! Oh that there were but such hearts in you , that you were truly willing to follow the gracious guidance of the Lord , and to use but those sweet and reasonable means which he hath prescribed you in his word , that you May be ready for that day ! Alas , it is no hard matter for me to tell you , or myself , what it is that we must do , if we will be happy ; and it is no very hard matter to do it , so far as we are truly willing ; but the difficulty is , to be truly and thoroughly willing to this work . If i shall tell you what you must do for preparation , shall i not lose my labour ? Will you resolve and promise in the strength of grace , that you will faithfully and speedily endeavour to practise it , whoever shall gainsay it ? Upon hope of this i will set you down some brief directions , which you must follow , if ever you will with comfort look the Lord Jesus in the face at the hour of death , or in the day of judgement . 

The first direction is this , see that your souls be sincerely established in the belief of this judgement and everlasting life : for if you do not soundly believe it , you will not seriously prepare for it . If you have the judgement and belief of an infidel , you cannot have the heart or the life of a Christian . Unbelief shuts out the most of the world from heaven , see that it do not so by you ! If you say , you cannot believe what you would : i answer , feed not your unbelief by wilfulness , or unreasonableness ; use God's means to overcome it , and shut not your eyes against the light , and then try the issue , heb. 3.12 , 13 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19  

The second direction . labour diligently to have a sound understanding of the nature of the laws and judgement of God . on what terms it is that he dealeth with mankind : and on what terms he will judge them to life or death : and what the reward and punishment is ▪ for if you know not the law by which you must be judged ▪ you cannot know how to prepare for the judgement . Study the scripture therefore , and mark who they be that God promiseth to save , and who they be that he threateneth to condemn . For according to that word will the judgement pass . 

The third direction . see that you take it as the very business of your lives , to make ready for that day . understand that you have no other business in this world , but what doth necessarily depend on this . What else have you to do , but to provide for everlasting ? and to use means to sustain your own bodies and others , of purpose for this work , till it be happily done ? Live therefore as men that make this the main scope and care of their lives : and let all things else come in but on the by . Remember every morning when you awake , that you must spend that day in preparation for your account , and that God doth give it you for that end . When you go to bed , examine your hearts , what you have done that day in preparation for your last day : and take that time as lost which doth nothing to this end . 

The fourth direction . use frequently to think of the certainty , nearness and dreadfulness of that day , to keep life in your affections and endeavours ; lest by inconsiderateness your souls grow stupid and negligent . otherwise , because it is out of sight , the heart will be apt to grow hardened and secure . And do not think of it slightly as a common thing , but purposely set yourselves to think of it , that it May rouse you up to such affections and endeavours as in some measure are answerable to the nature of the thing . 

The fifth direction . labour to have a lively feeling on thy heart , of the evil and weight of that sin which thou art guilty of , and of the misery into which it hath brought thee , and would further bring thee if thou be not delivered , and so to feel the need of a deliverer . this must prepare thee to partake of Christ now : and if thou partake not of him now ▪ thou canst not be saved by him then. . It is these souls that now make light of their sin and misery , that must then feel them so heavy , as to be pressed by them into the infernal flames . And those that now feel little need of a saviour , they shall then have none to save them , when they feel their need . 

The sixth direction . understand and believe the sufficiency of that ransom and satisfaction to justice , which Christ hath made for thy sins and for the world , and how freely and universally it is offered in the gospel . thy sin is not uncurable or unpardonable , nor thy misery remediless : God hath provided a remedy in his son Christ , and brought it so near thy hands , that nothing but thy neglecting , or wilful refusing it , can deprive thee of the benefit . Settle thy soul in this belief . 

The seventh direction . understand and believe that for all Christ's satisfaction , there is an absolute necessity of sound faith and repentance to be in thy own self , before thou canst be a member of him , or be pardoned , adopted , or justified by his blood . he died not for final infidelity and impenitency as predominant in any soul . As the law of his father which occasioned his suffering , required perfect obedience , or suffering : so his own law , which he hath made for the conveyance of his benefits , doth require yet true faith and repentance of men themselves , before they shall be pardoned by him ; and sincere obedience and perseverance before they shall be glorified . 

The eighth direction . rest not therefore in an unrenewed , unsanctified state ; that is , till this faith and repentance be wrought on thy own soul , and thou be truly broken off from thy former sinful course , and from all things in this world : and art dedicated , devoted , and resigned unto God . seeing this change must be made , and these graces must be had , or thou must certainly perish : in the fear of God , see that thou give no ease to thy mind till thou art thus changed . Be content with nothing till this be done . Delay not another day . How canst thou live merrily , or sleep quietly in such a condition , as if thou shouldst die in it , thou shouldst perish for ever ? Especially when thou art every hour uncertain whether thou shalt see another hour , and not be presently snatch away by death ? Me thinks while thou a●t in so sad a case , which way ever thou art going , or what ever thou art doing , it should still come into thy thoughts , oh what if i should die , before i be regenerate , and have part in Christ ! 

The ninth direction . let it be the daily care of thy soul , to mortify thy fleshly desires , and overcome this world ; and live as in a continual conflict with Satan , which will not be ended till thy life do end . if any thing destroy thee by drawing away thy heart from God , it will be thy carnal self , thy fleshly desires , and the allurements of this world , which is the matter that they fed upon . This therefore must be the earnest work of thy life , to subdue this flesh and set light by this world , and resist the devil , that by these would destroy thee . It is the common case of miserable hypocrites , that at first they list themselves under Christ as for a fight , but they presently forget their state and work ; and when they are once in their own conceit regenerate , they think themselves so safe , that there is no further danger ; and thereupon do lay down their arms , and take that which they miscall their Christian liberty , and indulge and please that flesh , which they promised to mortify , and close with the world which they promised to contemn , and so give up themselves to the devil whom they promised to fight against . If once you apprehend that all your religion lieth in mere believing that all shall go well with you , and that the bitterness of death is past , and in a forbearance of some disgraceful sins , and being much in the exercise of your gifts , and in external ways of duty , and giving God a cheap and plausible obedience in those things only which the flesh can spare ; you are then fallen into that deceitful hypocrisy , which will as surely condemn you , as open profaneness , if you get not out of it . You must live as in a fight , or you cannot overcome . You must live loose from all things in this world , if you will be ready for another . you must not live after the flesh , but mortify it by the spirit , if you would not die but live for ever . rom. 8.13 . These things are not indifferent , but of flat necessity . 

The tenth direction . do all your works as men that must be judged for them . it is not enough ( At least in point of duty and comfort ) that you judge this preparation in general to be the main business of your lives , but you should also order your particular actions by these thoughts , and measure them by their respects to this approaching day . Before you venture on them , inquire whether they will bear weight in judgement , and be sweet or bitter when they are brought to trial ? Both for matter and manner , this must be observed . Oh that you would remember this when temptations are upon you . When you are tempted to give up your minds to the world , and drown yourselves in earthly cares , will you bethink you soberly whether you would hear of this at judgement ? and whether the world will be then as sweet as now ? and whether this be the best preparation for your trial ? When you are tempted to be drunk or to spend your precious time in alehouses , or vain unprofitable company , or at cards or dice , or any sinful or needless sports ; bethink you then , whether this will be comfortable at the reckoning ? and whether time be no more worth to one that is so near eternity , and must make so strict an account of his hours ? and whether there be not many better works before you , in which you Might spend your time to your greater advantage , and to your greater comfort when it comes to a review ? When you are tempted to wantonness , fornication , or any other fleshly intemperance , bethink you soberly , with what face these actions will appear at judgement , and whether they will be then pleasant or displeasant to you● ? So when you are tempted to neglect the daily worshipping of God in your families , and the catechising and teaching of your children or servants , especially on the Lord's day , bethink yourselves then , what account you will give of this to Christ ? when he that entrusted you with the care of your children and servants , shall call you to a reckoning for the performance of that trust ? 

The like must be remembered in the very manner of our duties ; how diligently should a minister study ? how earnestly should he persuade ? how unweariedly should he bear all oppositions and ungrateful returns ? and how carefully should he watch over each particular soul of his charge ( As far as is possible ) when he remembers that he must shortly be accountable for all in judgement ? And how importunate should we all be with sinners for their conversion , when we consider that themselves also must shortly be judged ? Can a man be cold and dead in prayer , that hath any true apprehension of that judgement upon his mind , where he must be accountable for all his prayers and performances ? Oh remember , and seriously remember , when you stand before the minister to hear the word , and when you are on your knees to God in prayer , in what a manner that same person , even yourselves must shortly stand at the bar of the dreadful God did these thoughts get thoroughly to men's hearts , they would waken them out of their sleepy devotions , and acquaint them that it is a serious business to be a Christian . How careful should we be of our thoughts and words ▪ if we believingly remembered that we must be accountable for them all ! How carefully should we consider what we do with our riches , and with all that God giveth us , and how much more largely should we expend it for his service , in works of piety and charity , if we believingly remembered that we must be judged according to what we have done , and give account of every talon that we receive ? Certainly the believing consideration of judgement , Might make us all better Christians than we are , and keep our lives in a more innocent and profitable frame . 

The eleventh direction . as you will certainly renew your failings in this life , so be sure that you daily renew your repentance , and fly daily to Christ for a renewed pardon , that no sin May leave its sting in your souls . it is not your first pardon that will serve the turn for your latter sins . Not that you must purpose to sin , and purpose to repent when you have done as a remedy : for that is an hypocritical and wicked purpose of repenting , which is made a means to maintain us in our sins : but sin must be avoided as far as we can ; and repentance and faith in the blood of Christ must remedy that which we could not avoid . The righteousness of pardon in Christ's ▪ blood , is useful to us only so far as we are sinners ; and cometh in where our imperfect inherent righteousness doth come short ; but must not be purposely chosen before innocency : i mean , we must rather choose as far as we can , to obey and be innocent , than to sin and be pardoned , if we were sure of pardon . 

The twelfth direction . In this vigilant , obedient , penitent course , with confidence upon God as a father , rest upon the promise of acceptance and remission through the merits and intercession of him that redeemed you : look up in hope to the glory that is before you , and believe that God will make good his word , and the patient expectation of the righteous shall not be in vain : cheerfully hold on in the work that you have begun : and as you serve a better Master than you did before your change , so serve him with more willingness , gladness and delight . Do not entertain hard thoughts of him or of his service , but rejoice in your unspeakable happiness of being admitted into his family and favour through Christ . Do not serve him in drooping dejection and discouragement , but with love , and joy , and filial fear . Keep in the communion of his saints , where he is cheerfully and faithfully praised and honoured , and where is the greatest visible similitude of heaven upon earth ; especially in the celebration of the sacrament of Christ's supper , where he seals up a renewed pardon in his blood , and where unanimously we keep the remembrance of his death until he come . Do not cast yourselves out of the communion of the saints , from whom to be cast out by just censure and exclusion , is a dreadful emblem and forerunner of the judgement to come , where the ungodly shall be cast of the presence of Christ and his saints for ever . 

I have now finished the directions , which i tender to you for your preparation for the day of the Lord : and withal my whole discourse on this weighty point . What effect all this shall have upon your hearts , the Lord knows ; it is not in my power to determine if you are so far blinded and hardened by sin and Satan , as to make light of all this , or coldly to commend the doctrine , while you go on to the end in your carnal worldly condition as before ; i can say no more , but tell thee again , that judgement is ne●r , when thou wilt bitterly bewail all this too late . And among all the rest of the evidence that comes in against thee , this book will be one , which shall testify to thy face before angels and men , that thou wast told of that day , and entreated to prepare . 

But if the Lord shall show thee so much mercy as to open thy eyes , and break in upon thy heart , and by sober consideration turn it to himself , and cause thee faithfully to take the warning that hath here been given thee , and to obey these directions , i dare assure thee from the word of the Lord , that this judgement which will be so dreadful to the ungodly , and the beginning of their endless terror and misery , will be as joyful to thee , and the beginning of thy glory . The saviour that thou hast believed in and sincerely obeyed , will not condemn thee . psal. 1.5 , 6.  rom. 8.1 . John 3.16 . It is part of his business to justify thee before the world , and to glorify his merits , his kingly power , his holiness , and his rewarding justice in thy absolution and salvation . He will account it a righteous thing to recompense tribulation to thy troublers , and rest to thyself ; when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels , in flaming fire , taking vengeance on them that know not God , and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ ; who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord , and from the glory of his power ; even than shall he come to be glorified in his saints , and to be admired in all them that believe , in that day ; even because his servant's testimony , and his spirits among them was believed , 2 thes. 1.6 , 7 ▪ 8 , 9 , 10.  That day will be the great marriage of the lamb , and the reception of thee and all the saints into the glory of thy beloved , to which they had a right at their first consent and contract upon earth : and when the bridegroom comes , thou who art ready shalt go in to the marriage : when the door shall be shut against the sleepy negligent world ; and though they cry , Lord , Lord , open to us , they shall be repulsed with a verily i know you not , mat. 25.10 , 11 , 12 , 13.  For this day which others fear , Mayst thou long , and hope , and pray , and wait , and comfort thyself in all troubles with the remembrance of it . 1 cor. 15.55 , 56 , 57 , 58. 1 thes. 4.17 , 18.  If thou were ready to be offered to death for Christ , or when the time of thy departing is at hand , thou mais● look back on the good fight which thou ha●t fought , and on the course which thou hast finished , and on the faith which thou hast kept , and mai●t confidently conclude that henceforth there is laid up for thee a crown of righteousness , which the Lord the righteous judge shall give thee at that day : and not to thee only , but unto all them also that love his appearing . 2 tim. 4.6 , 7 , 8.  even so , come Lord Jesus . rev. 22.20 . 

Finis . 

