The tyranny of Satan , discovered by the tears of a converted sinner , in a sermon preached in Paul's church , on the 28 of August , 1642.  

By Thomas Gage , formerly a Romish priest , for the space of 38 years , and now truly reconciled to the church of England . 

London , printed by tho. Badgor , for Humphrey Mosley , at the Prince's arms in Paul's churchyard . M.dc.xlii . 

To the right honourable , Isaac Pennington Lord major of the city of London , together with the right worshipful the sheriffs , and aldermen of the same city . 

Sirs , 

May it please you , Saul that great persecutor of the new beginning church of Christ , that enemy who breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the disciple of the Lord , after he was cast down from his horse , and his pride was quelled by the might and power of Christ , he was by the Lord's order committed to the care of Ananias , Acts 9 11.  True it is , Ananias answered the Lord , that he was jealous and fearful of Saul , because he had heard by many , how much evil he had done to the saints at Jerusalem , 13. v.  but the Lord replied no more unto him , but that he should not fear nor mistrust him , because he had turned his heart , and made him a chosen vessel to bear his name before the gentiles , and Kings , and children of Israel , & that he would teach him how great things he should suffer for his name's sake . Let it please your honour and worships to behold here my own case deciphered ; for if Saul persecuted the church of Christ ; i myself have persecuted the same church , by opposing the doctrine of it , by preaching and teaching contrary to it , by procuring to seduce souls from it , by writing against it . But now it hath pleased that mighty and powerful Lord ; against whom there is no resistance , to cast me down upon the ground , to quell my pride , to lighten me round about with the beams and light of his mercies , to make me know how hard a thing it is to kick against the will & calling of God , and with trembling and fear to make me say , Lord what wilt thou have me to do ? if Saul was sent to Damascus to Ananias , a chief and zealous follower of Christ , that by him he Might be protected from the Jews and enemies of the Lord , who doubtless hearing of his change and conversion would have cruelly torn and slaughtered him if they could have found him . So i myself by a secret and inward order , which i have found by God delivered to my soul , have judged it meet and fit to search out in this city some zealous Ananias , some religious follower of Christ's pure doctrine , that i May be safely sheltered & protected from the violent attempts of the Lord's enemies the Papists , who i know will endeavour to do me all the mischief they can . Therefore let it please your honour and wps. who are well known to be as Ananias in Damascus , zealous and truly religious followers of Christ's own doctrine , and favourers of the pure word of the Lord , to cast your eyes upon me a new converted Saul , to shelter and protect me from those that plot my mischief . Oh when surest they are to hinder my perseverance in the truth , by plotting and studying my destruction , let them find me hovering under the wings of your protection . Oh fear not ! nor say what Ananias said , i have heard by many of this man , how much evil he hath done to thy saints , but praise the work of the Lord in me , who hath opened now my eyes , who hath brought me now out of Babylon , who hath made me confess my sins and iniquities with a sorrowful and contrite heart . And as it pleased the Lord to show Saul , as soon as he was converted how great things he should suffer for his name's sake ; even so be you confident , as i myself am that this my calling & conversion is purely & merely from above and from the Lord ; from whom i have received this testimony , that he hath showed me already how great things i must suffer for his name's sake ; for i must for him suffer many injuries and calumniations from the Papists , i must suffer the loss of all my kindred , i must suffer the loss of that maintenance , which i was wont to receive from them , i must suffer want and poverty . But for whom ? For the Lord's sake ; for the teaching and preaching the precise rule of the word of the Lord , for abjuring all popish errors , for renouncing all supertitions , for abhorring all idolatries . Let these my sufferings serve to your honour and worships for a true testimony of my conversion ; let these my sufferings remove from you all fears and jealousies of my perseverance , that thus with your favourable protection i May rejoice in my calling , i May freely teach the pure word of the Lord , i May oppose all Antichristian doctrine , and by my example May draw many wand'ring souls to the true faith & church of Christ . And i shall always pray to the Lord to keep your honour and worships in grace , and that you May so rule & govern this city by your conscionable and upright actions before God and men , that you May truly here be called zelotes of the honour of the Lord , and afterwards you May have your seats above in the triumphant city of Jerusalem . 

Your hon. and wor. humble and faithful servant , in the things of God , and Christ . Thomas Gage . 

To the right worshipful Sir Samuel Owfield , a worthy member of the house of Commons , now assembled in parliament . 

Sir , 

If my boldness May reach so far upon your patience , i shall briefly touch what John in the fift chap. of his gospel writeth of a pool which was in Jerusalem called Bethesda : about this pool were wont to lie a great multitude of impotent folk , blind , lame , and withered , waiting for the moving of the water , which was done by an angel , who went down at a certain time into the pool and troubled the water , and than whosoever stepped in , was cured of whatsoever disease he had . But one lying there 38 years , who in all this time could never be cured , because being of himself impotent ( As he answered to our saviour ) he had no man , when the water was troubled , to help him or to put him into the pool . I will not stand to moralize this holy story unto you at large , least you Might justly say that i abuse to much your patience , by confounding the stile of an epistle , which ought to be brief , with the division , parts and order of a sermon . Only i beg your patience so far as to peruse this my ensuing sermon , and in it you shall find an impotent man , not only blind , but deaf and dumb , and truelly beaten by Satan , and by him expulsed out of the church of Christ , and as i May truly say ) lying in this misery near 3• years . The discourse of my ensuing sermon will inform you that i myself have been this impotent man . Many times my conscience hath been moved and troubled from above with good and heavenly inspirations ( Which God hath been pleased to send into my soul ) by my considered aberration from the true church , for which the waters of my tears and inward sobs from my heart have been also moved with the troubles of my soul . So that i would many times full fain have stepped and entered into the true church of England , where all diseases of the soul are most surely healed . But alas ! mine own impotency and weakness joined with my long blindness , hindered the execution of my good resolutions ; temporal respects and fears kept back my steps . Many times i feared i should want a man and a friend ( As the cripple at Bethesda did ) to help me , to encourage me , and to further my good desires . I feared the high assembly of parliament would rather mistrust him , that so many years hath been an enemy to the state of this kingdom , than now in these times approve his penitency and contrition , which Might rather have seemed unto them a feigned hypocrisy . All these fears kept back for a time the forwardness of my will and heart . Until at last i resolved to disclose and discover unto your worship , these troubles of my heart , these diseases of my soul , even the want of a man to help me . God whom i sought too pleased , with my request ; i found that assistance from you , that i so earnestly desired , for , i found a man , i found a friend , i found a comforter , i found an advocate to plead for my pardon before that high court now assembled . For by your means i have been quietly brought into the church ; by your means also , i hope , i shall be henceforth protected against all slanderers , who will whet their tongues against me and seek to trouble me , and grudge at my good , as the Jews excepted against the cripple and impotent man , who was cured by our saviour . I shall always be ready to render due thanks to God , and next to you , for your blessed help towards my conversion , and first fruits of my vocation , which in this humble . Work of mine , i have endeavoured to make known to the world , remitting my further expressions to better occasions . And in the mean time praying to God , that he will be pleased with his powerful hand to supply to you , and yours what my heart can wish , but never will be able to perform according to the full measure of so glorious a work , which truly next to God the beginner and author of all goodness , by your means hath been accomplished . 

Your worships humble and ever obliged servant in Christ Thomas Gage . 

The tyranny of Satan , discovered by the tears of a converted sinner , in a sermon preached in Paul's church , on the 28 of August , 1642.  

Luke 22. 31 , 32.  

and the Lord said , Simon , Simon , behold Satan hath desired to have you , that he May sift you as wheat . But i have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not . And when thou art converted , strengthen thy brethren . 

Dearly beloved ; these words i have chosen to declare unto you this day , as most fit to lay open before your eyes my own most wretched estate ( Wherein i have continue almost 40 years ) the tyranny of Satan over my miserable and afflicted soul , as also by the sight of so hideous a sinner , as i have been , and by the knowledge of the slavery wherein a sinner groans under the power of the devil , to terrify you all that here are present from yielding to his crafty and subtle assaults . 

And secondly , to cherish and comfort all those that find themselves seduced by this mortal enemy of all man kind , with the mercies of a most loving and merciful father above , who not desiring the eternal death and destruction of a sinner , but rather that he May turn from his wickedness and live ; when poorest we are and most in want , than doth he show and discover unto us the riches of his mercy for his great love wherewith he loveth us , as Paul witnesseth in the 2 to the ephes. 3 , 4. ver. when most dejected and comfortless we are , than doth he comfort us , and show himself a god of comfort ; as also Paul doth teach us in the 2 cor. 4.  Who finally when he seeth us most in darkness and in the night of sin , than doth he dissolve those mists of blindness and ignorance from the eyes of our understanding , an• shineth into our inward hearts , with the rays and light of his grace and mercy . 

Blessed and praised be thy name , oh heavenly father , that hast vouchsafed this day to lighten me in the horrid darkness of my sins , that hast visited me in my Egyptian slavery , and hast brought me out of that thraldom of popery , into a land of milk and honey , abounding with the sweetness of thy grace and mercies . Continue , oh Lord , these thy favours towards me so , that i May by my conversion be an example to all sinners to forsake their wickedness , by laying open unto them this day two principal and essential points , to wit , the danger and horridness of sin , and thy unspeakable mercies , that thus i May perform what thou commandedst Peter ; and that myself being converted , i May strengthen my brethren , calling them from sin , and strongly settling them in the true , ancient , and Apostolic faith . 

Dearly beloved , the first point which is to be observed in the words of my text , is the tyranny , which the devil practiseth over a Christian soul , contained in those words of Christ our saviour spoken to Peter , behold Satan hath desired to have you , that he May sift you as wheat . 



The desire of Satan is not any way to do us good , but all the mischief he can . As soon as he hath got us into his claws , he produceth ( As far as lieth in his power ) , sentence of damnation against us , he prepareth us , and putteth us in readiness for the fire of hell . 

The first preparation which he maketh for our souls to burn everlastaingly , is the same which shall happen unto every damned , and cursed soul at the day of the last and dreadful judgement , when the angels shall separate the wicked from the good , as Christ our saviour foretold us by s. Matthew , in the 13 chap. in the parable of the seed , in the 41 ver. saying , the son of man shall send forth , his angels , and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend and them which do iniquity . as a so in the same chap. of mat•h . we read in the parable of the net cast into the sea , and gathering of every kind , which when it was full , they drew to shore , and sat down and gathered the good into vessels , but cast the bad away . so ( Saith our saviour verse 49 ) shall it be at the end of the world ; the angels shall come forth , and sever the wicked from the just , and shall cast them into the furnace of fire . behold how the nearest preparation for the fire of hell is the separation of the wicked from the just . 

And after this followeth immediately that dreadful sentence of damnation , which ye shall find in matth. 25. 41.  Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire , prepared for the devil and his angels . if this be a horrid thing to consider , and which ought to make our hair stand upright , and our flesh to tremble ; let not us laugh , but fear and tremble to fall into Satan's hands , hearing out of the words of my text , that his only desire is to sever us from the elect and godly , to prepare us for the final sentence of judgement , to make us ready for the curse of God and everlasting fire of hell . For what can more plainly be understood by these words of our saviour to Peter ? Satan hath desired to have you , that he May sift you as wheat . 



What doth the husbandman , when he sifteth his wheat , but with the help of the wind separate the chaff from the good grain ? Even so the devil striveth and endeavoureth to sift us as wheat ; which is as much as to say , to separate us from the elect and chosen persons of the Lord , from the good laws of God , from the good and wholesome doctrine of the church . This was the only endeavour of Satan the night of the passion of our Lord , to sever and separate not only Peter , but the rest of the disciple from the company of their Master like chaff from the true grain : who said of himself , that he was the grain that was to be buried in the earth , that afterwards he Might spring up again with great increase for all his church . Oh if every Christian soul would take this point to consideration , how the devil desireth and endeavoureth to sever us like chaff , fit for nothing but for the fire , and for that dreadful sentence of damnation , depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire ; doubtless we would fear to commit the sins which daily we commit , doubtless we would tremble to yield to the power of such a tyrant ; doubtless we would take no rest in sin as we do , if we did but consider that by it we are become dry chaff separated from the heavenly grain our saviour Christ , severed from all those fruitful grains and members of the church , who standing on the right hand shall through their fruitful faith at last be laid up in that storehouse of everlasting bliss and felicity ; when the sinner like chaff already severed from the grain by the devil's endeavours , expecteth nothing but death to burn for ever . 

in the 12 chap. of judges and 6 ver. i have observed a pretty history for this purpose , where the scripture speaking of a battle fought betwixt the Gileadites and the Ephraimites saith , that the men of Gilead smote Ephraim , and put the Ephraimites to flight towards the river of Jordan , and the Gileadites took the passages of Jordan before the Ephraimites ; and it was so that when those Ephraimites which were escaped , said , let me go over , that the man of Gilead said unto him , art thou an Ephraimite ? If he said nay . Then said they unto him , say now Shibbobeth ; and he said sibboleth ; for he could not frame to pronounce it right ; then they took him and slew him at the passage of Jordan , and there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty and two thousand . 

Dearly beloved , two things i would wish you to note in this history of holy scripture . 

The first , that at the passages over Jordan these Ephraimites were examined who they were . 

Secondly , that because they could not say shibboleth , but instead of it they said sibboleth , therefore they were slain . 

shibboleth , according to the true translation signisieth an ear of corn . and sibboleth signifieth the chaff or the straw that remaineth when the corn is separated from it . So that we find that the sword killed all such as could not say shibboleth or ear of corn , but instead of it pronounced sibboleth , straw or chaff separated from the corn . 

Oh Christian and devout soul , take out of this a lesson of morality , and judge thyself a rebellious ep•raimite , always warring against thy god and maker . When thou sinnest , what dost thou but rebel against thy creator ? who at last will be too hard for thee . But when ? When he shall meet thee at the passage over Jordan , that is , when as water thou shalt slide away . omnes morimur & quasi aqua dilabimur , we do all die , and like water slide and fall away . Oh what a day will that be , when thy soul is to pass away from thy body ? When thy soul is to pass over from this world to the other yet never seen ? Oh then shall meet thee the true gileadite , against whom thou hast rebelliously fought with the sword of justice in his hand ; then shall begin thy trial for thy life or death of thy soul , then shalt thou be commanded to say shibboleth , to say if truly thou be'st an ear full of weighty and fruitful grain of fruitful faith : but if thou canst not say but sibboleth , that thou art fruitless , that thou art a light straw , a little chaff separated from the true grain Christ Jesus ; then expect the wrath of God , expect the the blood of his sword of justice , expect if he find thee among the wicked separated from the good , that this thy being sifted , this division and separation of thee from the just and righteous shall be a forerunning messenger of that final sentence of damnation , depart from me you cursed into everlasting fire . God forbid that in this congregation there be any such chaff , any such dry straw separated from the fruitful grains of the church , and fit only for the slames of hel.  I hope , the devil hath not so far prevailed with any . But of myself with shame ( I May say ) that i have been that rebellious Ephraimite , that have almost 40 years warred obstinately against my Lord and maker . I am that wicked Ephraimite , not able to pronounce since my first use of reason this word shiboleth , not able to say i had ever any fruitful faith , or have ever been a f•uitful grain , but have always pronounced sibboleth , have always been like bran sifted from the white flower , like chaff separated from the grain , fit only for the fire of hell . For what fruitful faith could be in me , that instead of worshipping only my god and Lord , have bowed my knee so often to worship for God a piece of bread , according to that damnable doctrine of the Papists ( Which now i abjure and renounce ) who teach that in their communion is no substance of bread or wine , but the true real and physical body and blood of Christ ? A thing so against scripture , which teacheth that Christ since his glorious ascension can be no more upon the earth , much less in several places and several pieces of bread , but that he must be in heaven , until that last judgement day , as ye shall find in the 3 chap. of the acts in the 20 , 21. vers. saying , and he shall sena Jesus Christ , which before was preached unto you , whom the heavens must receive until the time of restitution of all things , which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets , since the world began . 

What fruitful faith could be in me , who so often have kneeled to images , worshipped them , burned frankincense before them , and prayed unto them , so contrary to the commandments of God ? 

thou shalt not make unto thee any graved image or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above . Thou shalt not bow down unto them ? so contrary , i say , to holy scripture , which teacheth that no saints are to be called upon , no saints are to be mediators between us and God , but only Jesus Christ , as ye shall find in the 1 epistle of Paul to tim. in the 2 chap. and 5 verse , for there is one God , and one mediator between God and man , the man Christ Jesus . 

What fruitful faith hath been in me , who have believed and taught a purgatory , a place of satisfaction for sins , derogating by this most damnable doctrine from the infinity of Christ's satisfaction , who had not abundantly nor infinitely satisfied for us , if we ourselves ought in fire and torments to add satisfaction to the satisfaction made by his most precious blood . Oh good God , how do i now perceive myself to have been sequestered from thy just and righteous believers ! to have been sequestered from thy true Apostolic and primitive church , to have been sifted like bran from the flower , like chaff from the corn . Oh most merciful father , if in these 40 years , i had met with thee at the passage of Jordan , at the passage of my soul from my body , not being able to say shibboleth , what could i have expected but to feel the smart of thy sword , to receive the wound of everlasting death , to hear that dreadful curse of thine , depart from me you cursed into everlasting fire ? 

But think not , dearly beloved , that Satan's cruelty is satisfied with thus separating a sinner like chaff from the corn , by making him ready for hell fire ; oh yet his cruelty goeth forward , yet he sifteth further a soul . Though properly to sift in our English tongue , be to sift the flower from the bran ; yet this word sifting , in Greek is more emphatical , for the true word , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , in Greek , according to m. Cameron's explication , signifieth cribrare , which as he saith , containeth two things , to wit , illa concussio & agitatio , that thrashing and beating of the wheat ; and also illa divisio & separatio , that division and separation of the chaff f•om the corn . So by Satan's sifting a soul as wheat , we must know , that he is not contented to separate a soul from the church , and the fruitful grains and members of it , yet his cruelty goeth forward , for he knoweth God's mercies are great , and touch the soul of a sinner daily to bring him to repentance ; therefore he desireth our perseverance in sin , our obstinacy and hardness , that we May no way return unto our Lord . He useth yet more tyranny over us by sifting us ; he beateth us yet with blows , even as the corn is beaten with the flail ; with one blow he beateth out our eyes , that we May not see the hideous estate we are in . With another blow he striketh at our tongues , and breaketh the mouths of our hearts , that we May not call upon God for help and succour ; with another blow he shuts up our ears , that we May not hear nor give ear to the truth when it is preached . Even as a captain when he besiegeth a castle , taketh up all the high ways , whereby any maintenance or provision May come to these within the castle ; so doth this cruel enemy of ma•kind , when he hath separated a soul from the good and righteous , he shuts up all the high ways , which are the mouth of the heart , the hearing of it , the eyes of the understanding , that so no maintenance , nor spiritual food May enter into it . This was figured in Mark 9 17. 18. where it is said that one of the multitude brought unto our saviour , his son which had a dumb spirit : and he said , whersoever he taketh him , he teareth him , and he foameth , & gnasheth with his teeth and pineth away . by this dumb devil spiritually is to be understood the effect which the devil worketh in a soul , which he hath once possessed , making it dumb and speechless , that it May not cry out to the Lord , nor acknowledge its sins with one peccavi . and many of the fathers upon the explication of this dumb spirit , say that it was also deaf and blind , to signify the two other effects , which the devil worketh in a soul , which he hath once got into his power . This same destruction of a soul according to the father's exposition was signified by that deaf and dumb man , whom our saviour cured , as ye May read Mark 7. 33 , 34 , 35.  And he took him aside from the multitude ; and put his fingers into his ears , and he spit , and touched his tongue ; and looking up to heaven , he sighed , and saith unto him , ephphatha , that is , be opened . And strait way his ears were opened , & the string of his tongue was loosed , and he speak plain . in the 7 of dan 5 ver. you shall find a like figure of this cruel tyrant , where Daniel declaring a dream and vision which he had , faith , and behold another beast , a second like to a bear , and it raised up itself on one side , and it had three ribs in the mouth between the teeth of it , and they said thus unto it , arise , devore much flesh . although s. Hierom by this ugly beast doth understand the kingdom of the Persians' , and by those 3 ribs and 3 set of teeth between rib and rib , expoundeth the 3 empires of the Babylonians , Persians' and Medes ; yet richardus de sancto victore , and many fathers in a spiritual sense , declare this ugly bear to be a true portraiture of the malicious spite of the devil , who with 3 set and orders of teeth devoureth and destroyeth the three noble powers , wherewith the soul doth spiritually speak , see , and hear . 

And truly in my mind , no beast is a more proper emblem of the devil , than the bear , if we consider well what Aristotle in his 7 book de histor. animal . and 17 chap. writeth of this beast , which is that he eateth of all things ▪ of the fruits of trees , of herbs , of bees and honey , of little amits , and their eggs , yea of your shell fishes , and also of flesh . A strange quality , proper only to this beast ! For if the lion eat flesh , he eateth not hay , grass nor herbs ; and the ox that eateth hay and grass eateth not flesh , only the bear eateth of all sorts , and with this quality resembleth the devil more than any other beast . For the devil devoureth and eateth of all ; if a man be given to the flesh , there is the devil sporting also himself with those fleshy thoughts : if like an eremite one feed of herbs only ; there also will Satan be endeavouring in the wilderness to overthrow those that hide themselves there , flying from the vanities of the world , as he hath tempted and overthrown many such . If one say , he is so abstinent that he will not eat any flesh , but feed only upon fish , as some monks and friars do amongst your Papists ; oh how freely doth the devil feed also with them , and for all their boasting of their abstinence , blindeth them and maketh them commit most horrid and enormous sins of the flesh and idolatry , as mine own sight and knowledge can testify . If one like a little amit in the earth , humble himself so deeply as to confess and acknowledge himself dust and clay , and to conceit most lowly of himself ; there also will Satan feed , until he make him proud of his own low and humble conceit . If like a bee feeding upon the sweetness of honey any one be in the church feeding upon sweetness of prayer and contemplation , delighting with the sweetness of singing praise and psalms unto the Lord ; there also will this bear the devil strive to feed , until he tempts with some foolish and idle thoughts . In all like a bear feeding of all sorts , and therefore May well be compared to that bear which Daniel saw , rising up to devour much flesh . And as that bear had three set or sorts of teeth to devour the three empires of the Babylonians , Persians' and Medes ; even so hath the devil three several sorts of warlike engines to destroy and overthrow those three forts and castles of our soul , to wit , the sight , speech and hearing , that so no relief May come from God to that wretched sinner , whom he hath once possessed . 

First he maketh us dumb , that we May not open our mouths to confess and acknowledge before God the grievousness of our sins , nor cry out for help with our hearts to our only mediator Jesus Christ . Have not ye observed a wolf , when he hath seized upon a little lamb and sequestered it from the flock and shepherd ; how the first thing he doth , is to strangle it in the throat , that it May not bale nor cry out and be rescued by the shepherd ? Even so doth the devil , when he hath got a soul from the flock of Christ : the first thing he doth is to strangle it , that it May not speak , nor cry out to him that said by s. John , ego sum pastor bonus , i am the good pastor and shepherd : for he knoweth there is no better way , no surer remedy for us , than to acknowledge and confess to God our grievous sins ; as David saith in the 32 psalm and 6 verse , i said , i will confess my sins unto the Lord ; and so thou forgavest the wickedness of my sin . he knoweth that God will have a sinner accuse himself , confess his sins before him , and that this was one of the first lessons that ever God taught in this world , as ye May observe in the third chapter of genesis and 9 verse , where we read that when Adam had sinned , God came down into paradise , and called upon him , saying , where art thou ? not that God was ignorant where Adam was , nor that Adam could hide himself from the sight of God : but God called him and asked him , where he was , because he would have Adam accuse himself , confess and acknowledge his nakedness , and the sin he had fallen into ; for to teach all wretched and miserable sinners to confess and acknowledge their sins and miseries before their Lord . 

Oh this Satan knoweth to be the chief remedy , the beast ease for an afflicted soul ! therefore he striketh his first blow at the mouth of the heart , that there May sound no act of repentance , nor the sinner May have a tongue to confess and acknowledge himself to have wickedly offended his Lord and maker . 

Oh the devil knoweth that nothing endangereth more a soul in sin than dumbness and silence ! as David also testifieth in the same 32 psalm and 3 verse , saying , for while i held my tongue , my bones consumed away . 

Oh how doth a sinner pine and consume away for want of crying out to the Lord , for want of acknowledging his own wretched estate ! 

Oh dearly beloved , make use of this doctrine , and whensoever ye find yourselves to have been carried away by Satan , forget not your tongues , be not dumb , acknowledge presently your iniquities before the Lord , touch with your tongues the leper and sores of your souls , let not them fester for want of a tongue to heal them . Remember when ye are in sin , ye are as the psalmist saith , like beasts without reason . 

Oh show at least to have that small sense and reason , which many beasts and a dog hath , who when he is bitten and full of sores , with his tongue only preserveth his sores from festering . Even so do thou poor and wretched sinner , when thy soul is bitten with the first set of teeth of this cruel bear , lift up thy heart unto thy Lord , acknowledge and confess thy sins before him , with thy tongue preserve thy soul from inward festering . Remember that God will have thee confess thy iniquity and ask pardon of him . Be not therefore dumb , oh sinner i ( If any there be besides myself in this congregation ) say with David , i will confess my sins unto the Lord ; cry out with the prodigal son in the 15 chapter of Luke and 18.  Verse , father i have sinned against heaven , and before thee . remember thou hast a heavenly shepherd above , Jesus Christ : bale and cry out unto him like the little lamb , that is set upon by the ravenous wolf . Be sure thou be'st not mute nor dumb : be sure the devil take not from thee the use of thy tongue . 

Oh a man that is fallen into a deep water , hath hopes of life if the water reach but to his knees , or to his breast , or to his shoulders ; but if once it reach to enter into his mouth to choke him , eminent is the danger he is in . Even so if a sinner be plunged and drowned so deeply into the depth of sin , that it hath reached to his mouth , that it once hinder his tongue from confessing his wickedness , and from crying out to God ; great danger is he in . Fear this danger , oh beloved ; fear that the mouth of your hearts be not stopped by Satan , that by this high way which leadeth to the inward castle of your soul , all ammunition , all help and succour from above be not stopped and robbed for want of acknowledging your sins , and crying out unto your Lord for present aid and relief . And so much for this . 

The second blow which the devil striketh at a sinner , is to beat out his eyes and to blind him , that he May not see the danger he is in , nor his own wretched and miserable estate , as David affirmeth in the 38 psal. and 10. verse , saying , my heart panteth , my strength hath failed me , and the sight of mine eyes is gone from me . And again in the 40 psalm and 15 verse he saith , innumerable troubles are come about me ; my sins have taken such hold upon me , that i am not able to look up . oh the Devid knoweth very well , that if a sinner did but see the miserable and wretched estate his soul is in , he would make haste to return unto his Lord ; therefore he blindeth him that he May run headlong down to hell . He dealeth with a sinner as cruelly as Nabuchadnezzar King of Babel dealt with Zedekiah , as ye May read in the 2 of Kings , 25 chapter and 7 verse , and they slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes , and put out the eyes of Zedekiah , and bound him in chains and carried him to Babel . even so doth the devil with a sinner , he beateth out his eyes , bindeth him in chains , and so carrieth him to Babel , to a chaos of confusion . 

This a sinner will not believe , but runs forward with more and more delight in his iniquities ; he thinks , because he enjoyeth his corporal sight , that his soul is not blinded . Tell me then , if a man should be in so desperate a case , as running a long a street , and all crying out unto him and saying , oh man art thou mad , dost thou not see such an one thine enemy standing before thee with his sword drawn to kill thee ? If nevertheless and for all these cries , this man should run towards the sword ; would not we say that he is mad , or rather blind and not able to see the sword before him ? 

Oh dearly beloved ▪ this is no sporting matter ; when we offend the Lord , we are surely blind ; if we were not , how would we dare to run upon the sword which the justice of God hath drawn against us ? If we will not believe this , let us but turn to the 7 psalm of David , and read there the 12 , 13 , and 14 verses , where we shall find these words , God is a righteous judge , strong and patient , and God is provoked every day ; if a man will not turn , he will whet his sword , he hath bent his bow , and made it ready ; he hath prepared for him the instruments of death . behold a sword a whetting for us to run us thorough , a bow bent to shoot at us , other instruments prepared only for our death and destruction . And yet we will not see them , we run upon them : why ? Because we are blind , the devil hath deprived us of our spiritual sight : we are like that wicked and disobedient prophet Balaam , of whom we read in the 22 chapter of numbers and 23 verse , that he was so blind that he could not see the angel of the Lord standing in his way with a sword drawn in his hand ; the words are these , and when the ass saw the angel of the Lord stand in the way , and his sword drawn in his hand , the ass turned out of the way , and went into the field , but Balaam smote the ass to turn her into the way . lo here , how a simple and silly ass by God's permission , espyeth the sword of the Lord drawn against a sinner and wicked priest , to teach us , how those that are simple and humble in their own conceits , see the dangers that a sinner runs into by sin : but the proud and stubborn delinquent against God's laws , will not see these dangers . Because alas he is blind , the devil hath pulled out the eyes of his soul , the windows whereby the light and beams of God's mercy were wont to shine into his heart , are •ow rammed up with lime and stone ▪ that no light May come in for a sinner to see those horrid Aspids , basilisks and adders , which lie lurking and taking their repose in the close and secret chamber of his conscience . 

Oh pity ! Oh compassion ! If any be to be had , when a sinner is come to this misery . Oh dearly beloved , make good use of this doctrine , and fly from sin all your lives ; s•are to be thus blinded : pray to the Lord , that though through man's frailty ye do commit a sin : oh yet your sight May be left ye : one eye at least May remain to lift up to God , to look up to him . 

Remember how that poor and lame cripple , of whom we read in the 3 chapter of the acts , and 4 verse , received bodily health and strength , having no limb to help himself , but was daily carried and laid at the gate of the temple ; and Peter fastening his eyes upon him with John , said , look on us . nothing was demanded of him but only the use of his eyes ; for looking only up upon Peter he was cured . 

Oh dear soul , moralize this healing of this cripple and the manner of it , and take out of it a lesson how to obtain more easily the health of thy diseased soul . If with no limb thou be'st able to help thyself : look up at least to God , lift up the eyes of thy heart to thy Lord , pray daily to him that thy sight May not fail in thy inward man ; pray that the devil May not blind thee howsoever , but that thou Mayest see the enormity and hideousness of thy sin , the instruments of death which God hath prepared against thee , the sword of his justice drawn , the bow of his wrath and anger bent ; that thus having eyes left thee to see those dangers , thou Mayest like this cripple , as he looked up to Peter and John , and received bodily health : so thou also by casting an eye up to the Lord , by opening the the window of thy heart Mayest let in the light of God's mercy to shine within thee , and Mayest receive the spiritual health of thy leprous and diseased soul . And so much for this . 

The last and deadliest blow , which the devil with his heavy stayle striketh at a soul , is in the ears , wherewith he fells him quite down and lays him flat to the ground , taking his hearing quite from him , and making him deaf , that he May not hear the word of the Lord , nor hearken to any comfortable tidings of his salvation . 

Of the wretched sinner's deafness against the word of God , Paul spoke in the second epistle to Timothy in the 4 chapter and 4 verse , saying , and they shall turn away their ears from the truth and shall be turned unto fables . of this sort of sinners , an ancient father , clenent Alexandranus in his exhortation to the greeks and gentiles speaketh thus , coelum fecistis scenam , & deus factus est vobis actus : ye have made a sport and play of heaven , and God himself is become at act or comedy unto ye . 

But you will say , dearly beloved , what meaneth this ancient author by these words ? An example will declare his mind better . Have not you marked in these plays here about the city ? How sometimes one cometh out upon the stage , with a crown and kingly diadem upon his head , and with a sceptre in his hand , granting princely favours , and highly rewarding those that have been dutiful and loyal subjects unto him ? Another you shall see come out upon the same stage with a sword drawn , all bloody , with streams of blood trickling down from his head to his feet , as if he had been wounded in some fierce and desperate combat . Then you shall see sometimes over the stage the heaven's open , great glory of angels appearing , and one descending in a cloud . Sometimes you shall see from under the stage ascend a smoke of fire and brimstone , and a devil leap up in such a shape as May suffice to terrify you . At all this you laugh , you hold it but a fable . The King you see come out , you respect not , because you know he is none . The other that is wounded and all bloody , you pity not , because you know that blood is not true but painted blood . The glory you see and the angels in it , do no way entice you to it , because you know it is but feigned : the fire and brimstone , and ugly sight of devils that come upon the stage do nothing terrify you . Why ? Because you know all is self , that there is no hell , nor any true devil , but only a representation Of it : so that you sport and laugh at all . 

Now then let us apply these words and this similitude of Clement Alexandrinus to those deaf sinners , who , as Paul saith , turn away their ears from the truth , and are turned unto fables . These when they come to hear the word of the Lord , will not hear it with their hearts , but make a play sport of it . When they hear the preacher set forth the might and power of that King of Kings , and creator of all things , who will glorify his elect servants with everlasting bliss and happiness ; like atheists they laugh at it , and judge of this eternal King as of a King in a play . 

When they hear the preacher teach , how Jesus Christ was whipped , reviled , strooken , smitten and crowned with thorns , nailed with nails , pierced with a spear for their sins ; their hearts will not hear it , they make sport of it , they are not moved to love so loving a saviour and mediator who with the price of his own blood , made an abundant and copious satisfaction for our sins . 

When they hear the preacher teach the glory of heaven , the quires of angels there , that everlasting rest without any sob or tears , without any cold , hunger , or thirst , they will not hear it to believe , they judge of it , as of the glory in a play upon a stage , and like Epicureans eat , drink and riot saying , — post mortem nulla voluptas . 



They think that their souls after death like beasts shall be dissolved into the air to nothing . When they hear a preacher bring out upon the stage in the pulpit , and set before a great assembly the deep pits of hell , the legions of fierce and cruel devils there , the always burning fire and brimstone , the everlasting broiling there , the horrid gnashing of teeth , the pains and torments due to their sins , if they turn not to God ; alas they will not hear it with their heart , they think it is but a hell of a play , they are turned unto fables , they make a sport of all , they make an act or play of God , they think all feigned , they hear it with their corporal ears , but with the cares of their soul , they will not hearken unto it ; they make themselves the actors of the fool's part in this sport and play , which they make of God and heaven . Why ? Because the devil hath made them deaf . This is his chief way , he knoweth , though it be damn or blind , yet by hearing the word of the Lord with a well dis••sed heart it May receive some seed of a fruitful faith , as s. Paul taught the Romans in the 10 chap. and 17 verse . saying , so then faith cometh by hearing , and hearing by the word of God . this is the devil's fear , and therefore he shutteth up their ears , that no maintenance that way , no succour , no relief May come unto the soul . With this he maketh them groan under his yoke , with this he maketh them slaves unto him . In deut. 15. 12. you shall find that God gave a command of release , saying , and if thy brother , an Hebrew man , or an Hebrew woman be sold unto thee , and serve thee six years , then in the seventh year thou shalt let him go free from thee . and lower 16 , 17. v. God commanded thus ; and it shall be , if he say unto thee , i will not go away from thee , because he loveth thee and thine house , because he is well with thee . Then shalt thou take an awl , and thrust it through his ear unto the door , and he shall be thy servant for ever . 

In a moral and spiritual sense , learn here , dear brethren , how as God commanded a release for debts and for servants , so doubtless he expecteth that thy soul shall not be always under any other Master but himself . If therefore the devil have been thy Master for some time , think for a release , think of releasing thyself from him ; do not say , dear soul , unto the devil , i will not go away from thee , because i love thee , because i am well with thee ; which if thou dost , then will Satan make use of this law of God for himself and for his own en•ss ; then will he mark thee in the ears for a perpetual slave , with an awl he will boar thine ears thorough , and fasten them to a wall , to that wall which thy iniquities have put between thee and God ; he will keep thee for his slave , if ever he mark thee in thy ears , he will take thy hearing from thee , that thou Mayest not hear any goodness , nor make good use of any . Oh what misery is a sinner in , when he cometh to lose his hearing ! Abhor from sin , dearly beloved , least ye fall thus into slavery under the tyranny of Satan ; if ye have not found yourselves so far gone , nor so far ensnared by the devil , as he doth ensnare others , renounce him at his first assaults , least he encroach upon the mouth of your heart and soul , upon the eyes and ears of it , making ye dumb , deaf and blind . Oh take example by me , who have had experience of these 3 blows , who have been flailed , beaten and thrashed by this cruel enemy ; with one blow i have been left speechless and dumb almost 40 years ; i have not had a tongue till this day , to confess before God my iniquities , my idolatries , my superstitions , my disloyalties to my King , the Lord's anointed . Oh i have been blind , & wilfully blind , and would not see my errors , the errors of the whore of Babylon . true it is , many years ago by reading authors and the grounds of our true Protestant religion ; i did see the light of it , the truth of it , the sincere , pure and candid doctrine of it : but yet with the eyes of my soul i would not see it . I was like a foul and ugly monkey , who when he chanceth to see his foul shape , his deformed feet in a pure and crystal looking-glass , rageth , and flingeth at the glass and teareth it in pieces , because it representes unto him his own deformity . Even so have i done , dearly beloved , these many years . When i read the pure and crystal doctrine of our church , which teacheth even what Christ taught Peter and his disciple to acknowledge a supremacy next to God to Caesar , by taking money out of a fishes belly , and sending it for trib to to Caesar , a lesson for all subjects ( Yea for the Popes themselves who can be no better than Christ and Peter ) to acknowledge their duty and allegiance next to God unto their Kings , and Princes . But when i saw by this clear doctrine my ugly shape of a disloyal , disobedient and treacherous monster , nourished with the venomous and poisoned milk of the whore of Babylon , which teacheth her Popes to be above all temporal Princes , and no ways bound to pay them tribute ; oh how would i fly and fling like a monkey at the crystal glass of the Protestant doctrine , that thus represented unto me mine own monstrous shape . Oh when i used to read & study the grounds of the popish transubstantiation , and found them groundless , saying , that one body May be in 2 places , nay in a 1000  And upon that self ground proving that Christ's body May be really present in the sacrament in a thousand places at one time , & at the same time also in heaven : how clearly did i see the contrary in the crystal glass of our church's doctrine ? For if Christ's body being a natural and physical body can be at one time in several places ; then at one time also it May be subject to several and contrary accidents , it May be hot and cold at once , for it May be in a hot and cold place at one time , it May be also stabbed in one place ( As the Papists confess it hath been by Jews ) and in another place at the same time it May not be stabbed ; so than 2 contradictories simul & semel are true , and truly verified of the same body , it is stabbed and it is not stabbed . Also in one place it May be be gnawn and devoured by vermin , mice or worms : and in another place at the same time it May not be gnawn : as myself can witness , who saying mass one day in the West India's , in a town called Portabel , 6 years ago , after i had consecrate the bread or wafer host upon the altar , making a short mental prayer with mine eyes shut , which they call the memento for the dead , suddenly came upon the altar a mouse , and stole away the sacrament . I opening mine eyes , and missing it before me , began to be troubled , and looking about on one side , i saw the vermin running away with the bread . I stirred up the persons of the church , who running to me caused candles to be lighted , and with another priest searched all the holes that were in the wall behind the altar , and at last found the sacrament gnawn , and half eaten up . The half part of it the priest took out and carrying it to the altar in procession , lifted it up to be adored , with knocking of breasts by the common persons . Behold here according to the damnable doctrine of the Papists , Christs body is gnawn by a creature , and it is not gnawn ; for they say that the body of Christ is truly and really tetus in toto & totus in qualibet parte , all in all , and all and whole in every little part . Then if this be true , Christ was whole and entire in that part which was devoured , and he was also whole and entire in the part which was left ; so he was eaten and gnawn , and he was not eaten and gnawn . Here are two contradictories truly verified at one time against the light of reason and philosophy : besides the absurdity which followeth , that Christ should leave his body to be so devoured by vermin and dumb beasts all these absurdities and monstruous shapes of popish doctrine , i well perceived and viewe• in the pure crystal glass of our Protestant doctrine : and yet like a beast i would fling at this clear glass , that thus represented my popish errorus unto me ; i would spitefully oppose the true sense and figurative meaning of our saviour , when he said , this is my body . 

Yea coming into England with a purpose to conform myself to the truth , & having met here with a learned treatise of one Master Stephen Vassal against this damnable doctrine of transubstantiation , which he directed to one Mistress bury a gentlewoman , seduced and blinded by a popish priest ; i took upon me for some worldly and temporal respects to some friends , to answer his learned grounds and reasons against mine own conscience : and though in his clear doctrine i well perceived the ugly and monstruous shape of mine own idolatrous and defiled soul ; yet did i fling and fly at the glass like a monkey . Why ? Because i was blinded by Satan , the window of my soul was rammed up by the devil , that no light Might enter into it . I have been that false and disobedient priest Balaam , so blind that i would not see the dangers of my soul near 40 years : but though the sword of God's justice hath-beene drawn against me , though his bow hath been bent to kill me , and many instruments of death prepared against me , yet would i wilfully run on my ways to curse the good and elect persons of the Lord , to oppose the true , ancient and Apostolic church of England . true it is i have heard much good doctrine preached , repre•enting unto me these dangers which my soul was in ; i have heard that if wilfully , i should have died in that wretched estate , my soul would have been plunged into the deepest and bottomless pits of hell ; i have heard much pre•ching of the me eyes of God , of the glory of heaven , of the pains of hell : yet all this i have heard as a play and sport of pastime , not hearing it with my soul inwardly , but only with my outward ears . I have heard that for God we must leave all in the world , both kindred , father , mother , preferments and wealth : yet i would not hear this to any purpose : i was loath to forsake all my kin•ed , who are Papists : i was loath to forsake that means which i have had from them , and now must lose it : i was loath to see myself in want and poverty . Oh i knew , my kindred and best friends would cry out , shame upon me , and would threaten to kill me : all these worldly and temporal respects shut up my ears and made me deaf against the truth , which teacheth that it is better to live here in want and poverty , than to broil for ever in hell ; that it is better to forsake here and abandon all flesh and blood , brothers , sisters , and kindred , than to go with them to everlasting pains and torment . 

Christ himself teacheth us that we must not fear them that can hurt out bodies , but can do no harm at all unto our souls , and that we must fear only him that can cast our souls into the fire of hell . This it is , oh Lord ! which now maketh me fear ; thy might , thy power and wrath i fear : my soul it is that hencef•rth i will tender ; for this jewel i for sake this day all the world , for my soul 's sake i take my leave this day of all my kindred and dearest friends . Awake , awake my soul , and like Abraham leave now thy flesh and blood , that thou Mayst become rich and great in the sight of thy Lord . Away all fears , away all human and temporal respects , away to much love of worldly pelse . 

Oh Lord i for thy sake i hate and leave this day that means , which hither to from Papists i have received . 

Oh Lord ! I know they threaten my destruction , but into thy hands do i this day commend my spirit . Oh let that be safe i though here my body be mangled and torn into thousand pieces , do thou protect me , and i will fear no enemies ; do thou continue thy mercies to me , and i with David will sing and teach them for ever . 

Now , dearly beloved , i have disclosed unto you the miseries of a wretched sinner ; the cruelty and unsatiable tyranny of Satan over those that he sifts away from the fruitful grains of Christ's church ; i have discovered unto you the heavy blows he giveth them , and have made myself a precedent of so miserable and wretched an estate . Now give ear , i beseech you , to the second poi•t of my text , where Christ having told Peter , how Satan desired to have him , that he Might sift him as wheat , Christ comforted him presently , saying , but i have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not : 



For to teach us , that though we be never so tyrannised by Satan , never so abused and beaten , never so dumb , so blind and so deaf ; yet the mercies of God are able to relieve us : and God himself would not be merciful and omnipotent , if any miseries of ours , ( How great soever ) should prevail or exceed the power of his mercies : nay when by sin we are most wretched and most forlorn , then doth God show most the power of his sweet and comfortable mercies , and forgetteth not 40 only , but a 1000 years ill spent in sin and iniquity , as David teacheth us , psalm . 90. 3 , 4. saying , thou turnest man to destruction , again thou sayest , come again ye child en of men , for a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday . behold , though a man be turned to destruction , though a soul be quite lost , utterly defaced and spoilt : yet come again ye children of men , let but these destroyed and forlorn soul•ss turn again unto the Lord , and a thousand years ill spent in sins and iniquities shall be pardoned so easily , that they shall seem but as one day ill spent ; for God is merciful and will make the least that May be made of our sins , if from our hearts we turn unto him . Nay when most we offend him , then chiefly doth he strive with his mercies to allure us unto him . By the greatness of his mercies he striveth to show himself our god and saviour , as i have observed in that answer which he sent unto John in the 11 of mat. where John sent two of his disciple to know of him , if he were the Messiah and saviour of the world whom they expected ; to which message our saviour made no other answer , but that of the 5 verse , saying , the blind receive their sight , and the lame walk , the lepers are cleansed , and the deaf hear , the dead are raised up , and the poor have the gospel preached unto them . the only way to know that Christ is a saviour , is by seeing his works of mercy , either spiritual or corporal ; for by the blind which he corporally and spiritually cureth , by the leprous souls and bodies which he cleanseth , by the deaf to whom he restoreth corporal and spiritual hearing , by the dead in soul and body whom he raiseth up ; he is sufficiently known to be a true Messiah , a true saviour , a most loving and merciful father . And much more by using these mercies , when least we deserve them , when furthest we are from him , when most grievously we offend him ; for than it is that he striveth with the power of his mercy , to prevail against the power of Satan . In the 12 chap. of matth. 14. & 15 verses , this May casily be observed , where it is said , than the Pharisees went out , and held a council against him , how they Might destroy him . behold here wretched sinners , the instruments of the devil , united and confederate against our saviour . What doth he unto them ? Doth he destroy them ? Doth he pour down fiery darts upon them ? No . What then doth he ? Read forward the 15. verse , and ye shall see what he doth , and when Jesus knew it he withdrew himself from thence , and great multitudes , followed him , and he healed them all . when most they strive against him to offend him , than both he cure and heal their infirmities ; for to reach us that he is so merciful a father , that he holdeth it a disparagement to his great goodness , that our wickedness should be greater than his mercies , that when most we offend him , than doth he most mercifully cure and heal the lepers and diseases of our afflicted souls . So in the 32 of exodus , you shall find the mercies of God striving with the wickedness of men ; for whilst the Israelites withdraw themselves from God at the foot of the mountain , worshipping a golden calf•… God on the top of the mountain is ordering a law for them to bring them to righteousness and to the port of true salvation . In the 9 chap. of the acts there also ye shall find a strong encounter between the malice of a wicked finner and the kindne•…e and mercy of God ; for whilst Saul breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciple of the Lord goeth to the high priest and desireth of him letters to Damascus to the synagogues , that if he sound any followers of Christ , men or women , he Might bring them bound unto Jerusalem . then at that very time strives God with his mercies for the upper hand , as you May read in the 3 verse , and suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven . and God's mercies prevailing against Saul's stubbornness from a wicked sinner , from a wicked persecutor he was made an apostle , and a chosen vessel to bear the name of the Lord before the gentiles , the Kings , and the children of Israel . Oh how doth the prophet Hosea in the 2 chap. of his prophecies in the 13 and 14 ver. teach the truth of this doctrine ! saying , and i will visit upon her the days of baal•m , wherein she burned incense to them , and she decked herself with her carrings and her jewels , and she went after her lovers , and forgot me , saith the Lord . behold here a harlot , a soul most abommable , given to idolatry , burning incense before her idols , following her pleasures , the vanities of the world , decking and trimming up herself to entice and allure her gallants , following her gallants and lovers , and quite forgetting her Lord and God . But what will God do now with this lewd harlot , with this abominable soul ? Will he d•stroy her ? Will he show the strength and power of his justice against her ? Oh no! hear what followeth in the 14 verse , therefore , behold , i will allure ••r , and bring her into the wilderness and speak comfortably unto her . she shall not think that her wickedness can be greater than my mercies : when she most flies from me , then will i most allure her . Behold here , dearly beloved , the good nature of our good God , who like unto a su•er and wooer , when his Mistress most disdaineth him , wooeth her more , allureth her with fair and courteous promises . Even so doth God with a soul , when we follow most the vices of our heart , the vanities of the world , seeking to please our senses and bellies , more than the Lord , disdaining and contemning our god and maker ; then doth he woo our souls , then doth he allure them , then doth he bring them into the wilderness from all occasions of pride , of self-love , of vanities and pstimes : there when he hath got them from the worldly pleasures , doth he speak comfortably unto them . Oh soul ! saith he , why dost thou follow any lovers but me ? there is none loveth thee better than myself : i have bestowed more upon thee than any adulterous lover of thine . The beauty of thy face which thou so much esteemest , is my gift . The dainties of fowl and fish , which so voluptuously thou bestowest upon thy belly , i first bestowed them upon thee . The riches of pearls , rubies , rings and diamonds , wherewith thou showest thyself so fair an object to thy lover's eye , are all my gifts . The flowers of all sorts and best perfumes , wherewith thou delightest so much thy senses , i gave them to thee . Why then dear soul , dost thou turn from me ? Why dost thou shun me for other lovers ? They carry thee to perdition , but i to bliss and happiness ; they seek thy pains and torment , i thy rest and glory : they fall away like a flower which to day is , and to morrow will not be , but i shall remain for ever . 

Thus , oh dearly beloved , doth God speak comfortably to a soulel thus doth he allure her , thus doth he woo and entice her , thus doth he , when furthest she flies from him , discover the riches of his mercies to her . An ancient doctor called John raulinus cluniacexsis saith , what by experience we daily know , quanto magis srigus viget , tanto magis videtur coelum stellatum , the greater the frost and cold is , the m•re bright do the stars appear and show themselves in the darkness of the night . Lauretus , who borrowed his doctrine out of Thomas Aquinas and Austin , saith also of the stars in a moral explication , stellae productae in coelo designare possunt dona spiritus sanctir , that they May be a symbol or figure of the favours and gifts of the holy ghost . what then meaneth it that these stars which are symbols of God's favours , shine brightest , when the frost and cold is greatest ? Oh it signifieth , that when a heart is most cold and frozen , most void of the heat of the love of God then doth the Lord strive to shine brightest into that heart , than doth he most discover the glittering spangles of his mercy , than doth he manifest the glorious stars of his heavenly comforts ; for to teach us that none shall despair , though never so deeply plunged into sin , though never so cruelly tyrannised by the devil : for God with his mercies can and often hath changed a wicked sinner to a holy life , and of a persecut•r and e•emy hath made a holy apostle . I cannot here pass over with silence a witty observation of Chrysostom upon those words , which the angel of the Lord spoke to Joseph , mat. 2. 13. saying , arise and take the young child and his mother , and fly into Egypt , and be thou there , until i bring thee word ; for Herod will seek the young child's to destroy him . upon these words , Chrysostom groundeth great admirations , wondering that God would send his only begotten son into Egypt , a country that above all countries misused and kept under hard slavery God's own chosen persons , not suffering them to go out , till God hardened Pharaoh's heart , and Moses after many wonders showed with the hand of the Lord , took them out of bondage . Now than if this country was first so rebellious against God himself and his commands , how cometh it to pass , saith Chrysostom , that God will trust his dear and only son Jesus Christ with so perfidious and disobedient a nation ? Could not there be order given , that Christ Might be kept from the fury of Herod in any other country and not in Egypt , so stubborn an enemy to God and his elect persons ? Chrysostom answereth , oh commutatio dextrae excelsi , ut popului qui a tefuerat persecutor populi primogeniti , postea sieret custos unigeniti• o wonderful change and alteration of the right hand of the Lord , saith Chrysostom , that that persons which before had been a persecutor and enemy of the first chosen persons of God , now should be trusted with God's only son , and should be made keeper of him to descend him and protect him from the wicked plots of Herod ! what is this ? But to magnify and set out the great mercies of God , who so strangely worketh alterations in nations and in particular souls , making those his dearest friends , which were his greatest enemies and persecutors . This is the power of the mercy of God , which can prevail against all the strength of Satan , who can deliver a soul possessed by the devil and bring it to a state more happy than ever miserable it was in Satan's power . This the prophet Micah prophesied in the 4 chap. of his prophecies , and 10 ver. saying , be in pain and labour to bring forth , oh daughter of Zion ! like a woman in travel ; for vow shalt thou go forth out of the city , and thou shalt dwell in the field , & th•u shalt go even to Babylon ; there shalt thou be delivered , there the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies . what greater confusion was there ever than in Babylon ? what greater blindness than there ? What greater or crueler slavery than there ? Yet saith Micah , there shalt thou be delivered , there the Lord shall redeem 〈◊〉 from thine enemies ; for to teach us , that there is no sinner so deeply drowned into the depth of sin , so bitterly beaten by Satan , so hardly captivated and bound with the bonds and fetters of his iniquities , but yet the mercy of the Lord is able to take him out . Therefore , oh dearly beloved ! make use of this doctrine & never despair of God's savours , though ( As Christ said in my text to Peter ) Satan sift you as wheat , separating you from the white flower of the elect and chosen p•ople ; though he separate you like chaff from the corn , from the sin•…full grains and members of the church , by beating you as corn is beaten with the flail , by striking out your eyes , that you May not see , by making you dumb , that you May not speak nor cry unto the Lord ; by making you deaf , that you May not hear any goodness : yet despair not of his mercies , for out of Babylon , the place of greatest confusion , there shalt thou be delivered , saith the Lord . Let my conversion be a precedent to you of this truth , and strengthen you , that you May not despair of God's mercies . For if i who have sucked my first milk of the whore of Babylon , of the most erroneous popish doctrine , who have worshipped creatures and saints instead of my creator , who have been disloyal and treacherous to my King and country , who have believed a damnable doctrine of purgatory , derogating thereby from the infinite merits of the satisfaction of Christ's passion , who have superstitiously offered up a sacrifice of the mass for the quick & dead , as if the sacrifice which Christ himself offered of his own body upon the cross were not a sufficient sacrifice for a whole world , yea and many more worlds : if i who erroneously have believed that by my own works i Might merit de condigno , the glory of heaven , as if any human or natural works May work a thing supernatural and merit a glory , which required the means and satisfaction of Christ , not as man only , but as God and man . If i who have been almost 40 years thus blinded , who have so many years persecuted the chosen , elect and Protestant persons of the Lord , who have so many years been frozen and void of all heat of the love of God , who have so many years been in Babylon , in confusion , and slavery ; there have been delivered , there have found the mercies of God , like stars in a winter night shining most confortably into my cold and frozen soul ! Oh let none despair of the mercies of God , nor willingly fall into sin by my example , least their coming out of Babylon be as hard to them as my conversion hath been to me ; but how great soever your miseries be , trust in the Lord , that as he prayed for Peter , that his faith Might not fail , as he hath pleaded for me before his •…ernall father : so he May also be an advocate and only mediator between God and you , when deepest you are in sin , and according to man's judgement , hardest to be brought out of it . 

The last point which is plainly to be observed in my text , is a precept and command of our saviour to Peter , contained in those words ; and when thou art converted , strengthen thy brethren . 



This Peeter did , and this all they are bound to do , who are truly converted from sin and from a wicked estate to the true knowledge of God's laws . True it is Peter did fall , and did most cowardly thrice deny his Master : but after our saviour looked upon him , and with one look turned his heart , than Peter went out and wept bitterly . And he did not only weep and repent within himself , but most zealously endeavoured to strengthen his brethren , as you May observe acts 2. when having received the holy spirit himself , he preached courageously unto the Jews to convert them and strengthen them in the true faith , as you May read from the 14• . to the 38 verse , and forward , where publicly he said unto them , repent and be baptised every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ , for the remission of sins , and you shall receive the gift of the holy ghost . oh he was a true converted man , and thought he must not be contented to be himself converted only , but that he was bound to convert and strengthen others . So did Saul , who had been so great a persecutor , when he was truly converted , presently he strove to do good to others , as you May read acts 9 19 , 20. verses , and when he had received meat , he was strengthened . Then was Saul certain days with the disciple , that were at Damascus ; and strait way he preached Christ in the synagogue , that he is the son of God . and further in the 22 ver. but Saul increased the more in strength , and confounded the Jews that dwelled at Damascus , proving that this is very Christ . behold how this converted apostle is not satisfied with his own conversion , but presently burneth with an inward zeal of communicating unto others that good which he had received from God by his conversion . Your divines say , that bonum est diffusivum sui , that which is truly good in itself , is with a natural inclination to impart itself , yea prodigally to pou•e itself out to others . This doctrine also David teacheth us in his 51 psal. where he repenteth himself for the adultery which he had committed , and having begged of God , that he would create in him a clean heart and renew a right spirit within him , then saith he in the 13 verse , will i teach transgressors thy ways , and sinners shall be converted unto thee . lo how David doth not only repent himself , and manifest his conversion by words of sorrow and bitter compunction , but promiseth God , that he will strengthen others , by teaching them the ways of God , that also they May come to be converted . 

In the first chapter of the canticles ver. 4.  You shall find a few words easy in this sense , but hard to be understood in any other , where the spouse speaking to her beloved , saith , draw me , we will run after thee ; the King hath brought me into his chamber , we will be glad and rejoice in thee ; we will remember thy love . me thinks , the spouse should have said , draw me , i will run after thee , the King hath brought me into his chamber . i will be glad , i will remember thy love . If one be drawn , why do many in the plural number run ? If one be brought into the King's chamber , why be many glad and rejoice ? 

Oh dearly beloved , it is to teach us how we ought to be have ourselves , when we are truly converted . The Spouso signifieth a soul wedded by faith to God the true and heavenly bridegroom ; the chamber whereinto this foul is brought , is the true church . Therefore if one soul be drawn by God , many must run after this one , if one soul be brought into the true , ancient and Apostolic church , many must be glad and rejoice . Why ? B•cause we must not be contented to be drawn alone from our iniquities , we must not be contented to be brought alone into the church ; we must also draw others , we must make others also rejoice by strengthening them , by teaching them , by converting them by our words , works and good example . This is the command and precept of our saviour to Peter , in the words of my text , and when thou art converted , strengthen thy brethren . 



This command of Christ , i that am this day converted & brought into the heavenly Bridegroom's chamber , into his true church , must also obey . Oh i must not be contented to be drawn alone , i must be the cause that many May run after me . This , dearly beloved , i have begun to perform already , having brought one from the snares of popery , & strengthened one soul in the true Protestant & Apostolic religion of this kingdom . This by the grace of God , both by preaching , writing and printing , i will endeavour all my life to perform by discovering and laying open to the world those rocks and quick sands of popish doctrine , whereupon so many souls do run and are daily cast away by the ignorance of foolish and unskilful pilots oh dearly beloved ! never were you in greater danger than at these times ; for in Ireland you see how the Papists threaten us with their erroneous doctrines ; here at home they secretly plot to bring in their superstitions ; therefore let me warn you this day to hoist up your sails and top masts , and with the gale of that heavenly spirit , of that divine blast save your souls from being splinted upon these rocks of popish superstition from being swallowed up with the quick sands of Antichristian doctrine . Oh beloved abhor all your lives the chief and principal point of all popery , which is that false authority that supremacy which the Papists give to the Pope above all the church , oh never admit this erroneous doctrine , nor ever think that Christ left Peter or any other to be supreme head , and only head over the church , but this authority was given equally to all the apostles as ye May gather out of matth. 28. & 3 last ver. where our saviour equally and with equal authority sent all his apostles to preach and teach , saying , go ye therefore and teach all nations . and further he saith , and lo i am with you always , even unto the end of the world . behold how Christ sendeth not only Peter , but all his apostles to preach and teach : and saith he will be not only with Peter , but with all his apostles inspiring spiritually and instructing them all , and not Peter alone , to rule and govern & feed with spiritual food his flock . If this be so , dearly beloved , never believe that the authority which the Pope challengeth to himself over all the church is due unto him , who usurpeth his authority & seeketh by it to encroach upon Kings and Prince's crowns , as i shall in some other occasion more largely declare . Fly therefore dear souls from this chief and most dangerous rock of all popery ; and having once discovered the dangers of this false doctrine , abhor then all other erroneous doctrines of Rome , which come from him that usurpeth Christ's own power , and challengeth it to himself alone . Oh let my conversion be your strength and comfort ! Oh believe an experienced and skilful pilot , who hath travailed almost over all the world , and hath by experience of almost 40 years discovered all those rocks and quick sands of popish errors of Antichristian doctrines and superstitions , which threaten the loss and utter overthrow of your souls . Oh that this day i May perform what Jesus said to Peter , and when thou art converted , strengthen thy brethren . 



Oh let my example , dearly beloved , strengthen you all in the true Protestant religion , that so i May say with the spouse , draw me and we will run , that i being drawn this day unto the true faith , ye May all run more hastily and speedily to the same ; that i being brought this day into the King's chamber , that is , into the true church , ye May all be glad and rejoice , finding in your souls a new & greater strength to continue and die in this ancient and Apostolic church , that so we May all meet and rejoice together after this life in another chamber of our heavenly bridegroom , in the triumphant church of heaven . amen . 

Finis . 








































































































