TRUE RELATION OF THE TRAVAILS and most miserable Captivity of William Davies , Barber-surgion of London , under the Duke of FLORENCH . 

Wherein is truly set down the manner of his taking , the long time of his slavery , and means of his delivery , after eight years , and ten month's Captivity in the Galleys . 

Discovering many main Lands , Islands , Rivers , Cities , and towns , of the Christians and Infidels , the condition of the people , and the manner of their Country : with many more strange things , as in the Book is briefly and plainly expressed . 

By William Davies , Barber-surgion of London , and born in the City of Hereford . 

LONDON : Printed for Nicholas Bourne , and are to be sold at the South-entrance of the Royal Exchange ▪ 1614  

A Table of all those places that he hath been at , and in , since his departure , Alphabetically composed . viz.  

A 

Alexandria , A City in Turkey . 
Argier , A City in Barbary . 
Alicant , A City in Spayn● . 
A●●a●●● A River in the West Indies . 
Ar●no●h● , A River in the West Indies . 
B 

Braats , In the Main , a main land of the Turks . 
Bizert , A town in Barbary . 
Bona , A town in Barbary . 
Bay , A town in Brazile . 
Budgie , A town in Barbary . 
C 

Cici●●ia , A famous Island of the Spaniards . 
Can●se , A famous Island of the Venetians ▪ 
Cyprus , A famous Island of the Turks . 
Cirrigo , An Island of the Venetians . 
Christiana , An Island of the greeks . 
Corrune , A town of the Turks . 
Corphou , A City of the Venetians . 
Corsigo , An Island of the Genowes . 
Callary , A City upon Sardina . 
Carthageine , A town in Spain . 
Cales , A City of the Spaniards . 
Corues , An Island of the Spaniards . 
D 

Denei , A town in Castillia . 
F 

Florence , A famous City of the great Dukes . 
Famagosta , A City upon Cyprus . 
Fernandobuck , A town in Brazyle . 
Fi●lk , An Island of the Spaniards . 
Flowers , An Island of the Spaniards . 
G 

Goodz● , An Island inhabited by greeks . 
Genowey , A famous City in Italy . 
Grand Maligo . A City in Spain . 
G●●ne , A River in the West Indies . 
Gratiose , An Island of the Spaniards . 
I 

Io●a , An Island of the Turks . 
juersey , An Island of the Spaniards . 
jublatore , A town of the Spaniards . 
L 

Lilbo , An Island governed by Spaniards and Italians . 
Lisbor●e , A famous City in Portugal . 
Luca , A City in Tuskanie . 
Leghorn , A famous City of the Duke of Florence . 
M 

Malta , A famous Island . 
M●ntua , A famous City in Italy . 
M●aona , A town in Turkey . 
Maluedra , A town in Castille . 
Mayorke , An Island of the Spaniards . 
M●●●ork , An Island of the Spaniards ▪ 
Massegant , A Town in Barbary . 
Muggadore , An Island in Barbary . 
Muria , An Island in the West Indies . 
N 

Naples , A famous City in Calabria . 
Naveyrne , A town of the Turks . 
P 

Palerma , A famous City in Sicilia . 
Petras , A City in Turkey . 
Portercula , A strong town of the Spaniards . 
Pume-bien , A town of the Spaniards . 
Peza , A City in Tuscany . 
Porta Richo , An Island in the West Indies . 
Portaferare , A strange town of the Duke of Florence . 
Porta long , A town of the Spaniards . 
R 

Room , The chief City of the Pope . 
Regi , A town in Calabria . 
S 

Strumbula , A burning Island . 
Sapientia , An Island of the Turks . 
Salerna , A town in Calabria . 
Syppa de Vecchia , An ancient City . 
Sardina , A famous Island of the Spaniards . 
St. mary's , An Island of the Spaniards . 
St. Lucas , A City of the Spaniards . 
Sapphic , A town in Barbary . 
Sancta Cruse , A town in Barbary . 
Santa Lucia , An Island of the Spaniards . 
Santa Martyne , An Island of the Spaniards . 
St. Michaels , An Island of the Spaniards . 
Scanderune , In the bottom of the straits , governed by Turks . 
St. Georgis , An Island of the Spaniards . 
Scena , A City in Tuscany . 
T 

The Rhodes , held by the Turks . 
The Stravales , And Island inhabited by greeks . 
Tarrant , A Town in Calabria . 
The Geta A town of the Popes . 
Tunis , A great City in Barbary . 
Tit●an , A town in Barbary . 
Tangere , A Town in Barbary . 
The River of Amazons in the West Indies . 
Trnidado , An Island of the West Indies . 
Teneriefe , An Island of the Spaniards . 
The Grand Canaries , inhabited by Spaniards . 
v 

Valentia , A famous City in Castille . 
Uize Maligo , A town in Spain . 
Ualdeny , A town in Brachademayne . 
W 

Wiapocho , A River in the West Indies . 
Z 

Zant , An Island of the Venetians . 
Zumbula , An Island of the Turks . 
Here in this Table have I not spoken of France , nor of any part of the Low-countrieses , neither of Ireland , in all which places I have been , nor yet of England , the Garden of the world , because I count it a folly to tell the Master of the house the condition of the Servants , for every man by natural reason can discover his own home . 

Now have I thought it fit out of the former Table to select twelve principal places , in discovery whereof I shall not omit as occasion is offered to speak of the rest , and how I came to every place , with the names of Ships and Galleys , with the owners , and Masters , and how many leagues each of these twelve places are from England . 

For proof of what I have herein written , concerning my slavery and thraldom , I have procured , though not without some cost and more travel , six of the chiefest masters of ships of London , who see me , and relieved me often during my thraldom , to subscribe their hands hereunto , as also the hands of diverse Masters and Surgeons of other places in England , whose names follow , viz.  

Robert Thorneton . Master of the good ship called the Royal Merchant of London . 
Thomas Gardener . Master of the good ship called the Triumph of London . 
Robert Bradshaw . Master of the good ship called the William and Thomas of London . 
Thomas Rickman . Master of the good ship called the Mary Anne of London . 
james Davies . Master of the good ship called the Isaak of London . 
George Millard . Master of the good ship called the May-flowre of London . 
Denis Davies . Barber Surgeon of London . 
Thomas Rousley . Barber Surgeon of London . 
Charles Hearne . Barber Surgeon of Bristol . 
Richard W●ight . Barber Surgeon of Plymouth . 
Walter Matthew . Owner of the good ship called the Mathewes farm of Plymouth . 
Richard Rowe . Owner of the good ship called the Portion of Milbrook , in the county of Cornwell . 
Many others more as well Noble men , Knights , Gentlemen , as owners , Masters , and Surgeons did see , and can witness my slavery , whose hands likewise I might easily have procured , but that considering the business to be of no great importance , I held it needless to trouble either them or myself any further , and these present witnesses are sufficient . 

The twelve principal places are thus distinguished . VIZ.  

Three Cities , and three Lands of the Christians , and three Cities , and three Lands of the Infidels . 

The Christians be , the Pope , the Spaniards , and the Italian , 
The infidels be , the Turk , the Moor , and the Indian . 
The Names of the twelve places ▪ 

1 Ciuita de Vecchia , A City of the Popes . 
2 Argeir , A City of the Turks . 
3 Tunis , A great City of the Moors . 
4 Leghorn , A City of the Italians . 
5 Naples , A famous City of the Spaniards . 
6 The River of the Amazons in the West Indies . 
7 Malta , an Island of the Popes , very famous . 
8 Cyprus , A famous Island of the Turks . 
9 S●●●l●ia , A famous Island of the Spaniards . 
10 Muggadore , An Island of the Moors . 
11 Candy , A famous Island of the Italians . 
12 Morria , An Island of the Indians . 
The Travails and miserable Captivity of William Davies , Barber-surgion of LONDON . 

I Departed out of England the 28. of januarie 1597. in the good ship named the Francis of Saltash , in the county of of Cornwell , Master Tyball Gear , Owner , and William Lewellyn , Master of her , being laden with Fish , and Herring , and such like commodities , then bound for the Strayts and to arrive at Civita de Vecchia to the will and pleasure of God : where we arrived the sixth day of March ensuing , whose description followeth by me William Davies Barber-surgion of London , and born in the City of Heriford . 

I The Description of Civita de Vecchia . 

Ciuita de Vecchia is an ancient City of the Popes , lying in low ground , a day's journey from Rome by land , this City lieth close upon the Sea , very strongly fortified , and planted with Ordinance , to the East side a strong Castle , or Fort : And also the like upon the West side , in this place the Pope's Galleys lie , and shipping . For there is a harbour , and fair mould for their safety . For the Pope hath no other place for Ships or Galleys but Rome , and there none will come up but small Barks , and Boats , and such like , by reason of the shallowness of the River . In this Civita de Vecchia are altogether Romans , wholly professing the Romish Religion , saying directly that the Pope is God an earth , and that he can forgive any sin whatsoever being committed , which makes the most part of them , or all , run desperately into most deadly sins . 

For very Murder they hold it no great sin , being committed , receiving of the Pope's pardon , or else getting into some Monastery where they may be confessed , and absolved , whereby no Law can take hold of them at their coming forth , being apt and ready within a week , or fortnight after to commit the like Murder , then receiving the like pardon , or absolution , as before they had done : and thus many bloody minded men continue their life-time , for it is an easy matter for a man to have his adversary killed , or poisoned for money , although his executioner never see him till such time as he committeth this bloody deed , being hired by another . 

Also in this Country their women are very lewd and wicked , for even in that ancient City of Rome , there are many thousands of lewd living women that pay monthly unto the Pope for the sinful use of their wicked bodies : some pay six Crowns a month , and so from six Crowns to one , for they are rated according to their outward show , and for the nonpayment of this monthly pay , they shall have their goods strained and carried out of their houses , or chambers , by the Pope's officers , and kept from them till such time as satisfaction is made to the Pope . So it is lawful for any man to use any of these women as his own wife , neither shall he be molested or troubled , or otherwise endangered , so he escape secret occasions of danger , for this woman will be as dutiful unto him as his servant , always attending his pleasure for his diet or any thing else belonging unto him : he giving her content with his purse ; but she not receiving content may as lawfully arrest him , and cast him into prison till such time as she doth receive satisfaction , being recovered by Law : for they hold their livings by the Pope . 

Now as I have spoken of two deadly sins wherein they exceed , so will I speak of one thing wherein some of them are to be commended , that is this . If there be any Christian , of what Nation soever , poor and in distress , making his case known , and ask for Christ's sake , he shall be relieved , with all those necessaries whereof he is destitute , as apparel , meat , and drink , and some money , though it be but little : if he be sick , then shall he be put into an Hospital , where he shall be choicely attended upon , having good lodging , dainty diet , and comfortable Physic for the restoring of his health , whether he be Papist or Protestant : but if he be a Papist , he shall be the better used , and if he be a Protestant they will use all means they can to convert him , but force him to nothing at all . In these Countries it is dangerous for an Englishman being a Protestant to speak any thing against the Pope , or his Religion , especially unto another Englishman that is a Papist , yet this English Papist will seek all the means possible to entrap the Protestant , and will speak ill words of himself , to draw him to the like , but when he hath made him utter the secrets of his heart , then will he make it known , and more than the Protestant spoke , to some chief man of a Church , by whom he shall be forced to alter his Religion , or to be burned , or put in some secret prison where he shall be starved to death , and this is the manner and fashion in all Countries of Christendom within the Pope's Jurisdiction , not only of the treachery of the English Papists , but also of the other deadly sins which I touched before , as their murder and adultery : and in like manner of their general compassion , to a distressed Christian . What I have here written , I speak not of hearsay , nor by imaignation , but directly have seen , and of mine own knowledge you may speak it , being too long a time amongst them , against my william  

II The Description and discovery of Argeir . 

Argeir , is a marvellous strong City , and governed by the Turk , lying upon the side of an upright hill , close upon the Sea , this City is very strongly fortified with Castles , Forts , and platforms , with great store of Ordinance planted about it , also there are many Galleys belonging to this place , which do much offend the Christians , in taking of their ships , Tartanes and Satties , and other small vessels , making all the Christians that they take slaves , & selling of them in their markets like horses : for according to age and strength they are prised . This City is governed by a King , being vassal to the great Turk . Also there are great store of Janissaries in it , to the number of 20. or 30000. at one time : these janissaries are chief Soldiers , and governed by a Dane , which is a general under the great Turk . These Turks are goodly people of parson , and of a very fair complexion , but very villains in mind , for they are altogether Sodomites , and do all things contrary to a Christian . For they do never lie in a bed , nor feed upon a Table ; yet their feeding and diet is very plentiful , their bedding and apparel is very neat and costly , the manner of their lodging is thus : There is a very fair table in a room , about three yards in breadth , and as many in length standing in height one yard from the ground , and thereon they use to spread a double quilt very costly with many curious Cushions , in stead of Pillows , whereon he lieth down in his shirt , and linen breeches only , without any other covering , by reason of the heat of the country . Also in the same room he hath another Table laid after the same fashion very richly , whereon his wives do lie , but she that likes him best , he will take to accompany him for the night . A Turk may have as many wives as he pleaseth , so he be able to buy them , and by the number of his wives , most commonly his substance is known , for the richer he is , the more wives he hath , the poorer the fewer : yet never married to none of them , but only the first , but maintaining of them all . It is very dangerous for a Christian to be found in the company of any Turks woman , for being found together , he shall be forced to turn Turk , or else be put to death , and the said woman also shall be put into a sack , which being made fast , she shall be flung into the Sea , whether they commit the sin or not . These Turks are very zealous in their religion , acknowledging God ; and Mahomet a solicitor for their sins . A Turk will keep his word if he swears by his head , putting his hand upon his forehead . In this country there is great store of gold and rich Merchants ; the manner of their Churches and coming to Prayer is thus . The Church is very fair within , with many hundred of Lamps burning therein , all matted under foot , without any kind of picture , or seats , also most of them do pray upon Beads . In the morning on the top of the Church they hang out a white flag , and in the after noon a blue one for a sign of their coming to Church , then goeth eight or ten of them on the very top of the Church , and cry with a loud voice . Volla , volla hamdrulla and shalla , that is to say God , God , help us at thy pleasure , and this is their ordinary warning to come to Church , as we use Bells in Christendom , for they abhor the ringing of Bells , being contrary to their Prophet's command . 

A Turk chooseth his first wife after this manner . He never seeth his wife till she come to the Church to be married , for the match is made by their friends , neither is a Turkish woman's face to be seen , because their faces are continually covered going through the streets , both young and old : neither shall a man-child after he is ten years old ever see his mother . A Turk is Circumcised after this manner . The better Gentleman he is , the longer he stays afore he be Circumcised , but the time being come , then is he put upon a very fair white horse , being very costly attired , and before him goeth two , or three hundreth by two and two in purple coats , bearing wax candles in their hands , and after them followeth a great many playing on diffused Instruments making of a great noise , then followeth a Bull covered with very fair Arras , and his horns gilded , and next rideth he that shall be Circumcised , with all his friends following , and thus he rideth to the place of Circumcision , where they cut off the foresa●ne of his yard , naming of him Morat , Shebane , or Hosan , or some such like name : then will they take the Bull , and turn his head to to the Eastward , then cut his throat , saying , this day we have done a good deed , than they cut the Bull in yeeces , and distribute it among his friends , and kindred , and so they return home where they do feast with great joy . 

The manner of a Christian turning Turk , is thus . He is put upon a horse with his face towards the tail , and a Bow and an Arrow in his hand , than the picture of Christ is carried before him with his feet upwards , at the which he draws his Bow with the Arrow therein , and thus he rideth to the place of Circumcision , cursing his father that begat him , and and his mother that bore him , his Country , and all his kindred : then coming to the place of Circumcision , he is Circumcised , receiving a name , & denying his Christian name , so that ever after he is called a Runagado , that is , a Christian denying Christ and turned Turk : of which sort there are more in Turkey and Barbary then of natural Turks . The manner of their judgement for offending of the Law touching death , either for theft or murder , is thus : within four hours after he is taken , he is condemned by certain chief Soldiers , and presently put to death after this manner , viz. ganshed , s●aked or beaten to death . Their ganshing is after this manner : He sitteth upon a wall , being five fathoms high , within two fathoms of the top of the wall , right under the place where he sits , is a strong Iron hook fastened , being very sharp , then is he thrust off the wall upon this hook with some part of his body , and there he hangs sometimes two or three days before he dieth . Staking to death is thus : Around piece of wood three yards long , and as big as a man's leg , being sharp at one end , is taken and driven in at the fundament of the offender , and out at his shoulder , and so they let him lie till he be dead , which sometimes will not be in a day or two . The manner of beating to death is thus : They take the offender , and lay him down upon his back , being naked , and with two double ropes , two several men , one on the one side , and the other on the other side of him , beat on his belly till he is dead . But these deaths are very seldom used , because they are so fearful to the offenders , yet I have seen them all executed . 

III The Description and discovery of Tunis . 

Tvnys is a great City in Barbary , inhabited by Moors , and some Turks and Jews . This City is spacious , and lieth in low ground , eight miles from the Sea : there belongs to this City a very fair Castle , named the Galletta : This Castle is very strong of Ordnance , and governed by Turks : betwixt the City and this Castle lieth the ancient City of Carthage , sunk , by the report of all the Inhabitants thereabouts : but this did I see myself going up to Tunis in a Boat , the foundation of many houses for the space of four or five miles , the water being very clear , and in depth a fathom and a half . 

The Moors of this Country are altogether in Religion like to the Turks , and also in habit : they are very light of foot , and gallant horsemen : they cannot endure Hog's flesh , nor the drinking of Wine , for they drink water altogether , except it be sometimes Aquavitae . The manner of their living in the Country is thus : They will go five or six hundred together , Men , Women , and Children , with their Camels , Asses , and Sheep , together with all their Poultry , under the side of a Mountain , where every man pitcheth his Tent , living every man to himself , having his Wife and Children about him , with his Servants and cattle , thus many Tents are pitched together , to the bigness of a little Town , continuing there till such time as their cattle have eaten up the grass , and then being able to stay there no longer , they remove to another place , where they live as before they had done : and thus they do spend their lives . By reason the Country is continually hot , their feeding is plentiful , but their apparel poor and bare , neither have they any , but what they buy with the increase of their cattle , carrying them often to the Towns , Cities , and Market places near , where they have sale for them . These Moors are very ingenious people , cunning and treacherous . 

Now leave we Tunis in the same Ship that I came out of England in , named the Francis of Sal●ash , being bound to Syo within the Arches of Archipelago , and freighted with Turkish goods by Turks , and some Turks aboard with us , for we traded as well with the Turk as the Christian : but we had not sailed above four leagues out of our Port in the night season , but that we were most fiercely set upon by six of the Duke of Florence his Galleys , ( who being in continual war with the Turk , took us as a Turkish prize ) which spit fire like dive●ss , to our great discomfort , but at length couraging of ourselves in God's mercies , we continued fight with them , to the loss of many a man's life of each fide , but all in vain for us , for they were forty for one of us , and our Sip torn down to the water with their Ordinance , our main Mast , and missen Mast , shot by the board , the ●●e end of the Mast with all the sails lying in the Sea , the other end aboard : thus were we taken , and stripped every man stark naked , and then were we distributed , some into one Galley , and some into another ▪ where we had as many Irons knocked upon us , and more , than then we were able to bear . Our Ship presently sent to Leghorn , being mended as well as they could , but we in the Galleys , continued a month before we came thither , to the loss of many of our lives : but at length coming thither ▪ as many of us as were left alive were thus entertained . We w●re all shaved both head and beard , and every man had given him a red coat , and a red cap , telling of us that the Duke had made us all Slaves , to our great woe and grief : where I continued eight years and ten months in this slavery , as in the next discovery shall be truly spoken of . 

FOUR The Description and discovery of Leghorn . 

Ligorne is a City of the Duke of Florence , and lieth in low ground , having many towers without it , standing in the Sea , also to this Town doth belong a wild road , and two very fair moulds for the safety of the Duke's Galleys . In the entrance of these moulds is a very strong Castle with great store of Ordnance planted : also the Town is very strongly fortified , for it is the chief garrison of the great Dukes , where is continually great store of Soldiers in pay . Which Soldiers are always employed in his shipping or Galleys , wherewith he doth more offend the Turk then all Christendom , for they do take Galleys and Carmizals and Brigantéens , and Towns of the Turks and Moors : possessing of Men , Women , and Children , and selling them in Markets , like to Horses , Cowes , or Sheep , reserving the strongest for his own flavery : In this place I lived eight years , and ten months : three years of this time I lived in this manner , from Sun rising to Sun set , chained in a Cart like a horse , receiving more blows then any Carthorse in England , our diet being Bread and Water , and not so much Bread in three days as we might have eaten at once , thus we were used to go forty or fifty Carts together , being all slaves : our lading would be Sand , or Lyme , or Brick , or some such like , and to draw it whither the Officers appointed us , for their buildings . These Italians are very deceitful people , for when they laugh in a man's face , they will seek to kill him , yet they are very cowards being natural Italians : their women are altogether wicked and lewd . Three years being spent in this manner : all we English ▪ man were called as many as were left alive , making choice of the ablest of us to go into the Galleys , of which I was one chosen , then did my misery increase manifold , for than I was made a Galley ▪ slave to row at an Oar , where our former diet lessened ▪ but blows increased , to the loss of many of our lives . We were shaved Head and Beard every eight or tenth day , being always naked , but only a pair of linen breeches and chains continually . In this time I was at the taking of many a Town and Galley of the Turks , though sore against my will , seeing of many Cities , Lands , and main Lands in the time of my slavery , where I continued six years a Galleyslave , finding in all this time much comfort and relief from English Merchants that were protestants , and also from many English Masters and owners of Ships . But from English men being Papists none at all . The misery of the Galleys doth surpass any man's judgement or imagination , neither would any man think that such torture , or torment were used in the world , but only they that feel it , the extremity of misery causeth many a slave to kill themselves , or else seek to kill their Officers ; but we were not suffered to have so much as a knife about us , yea if we had gotten one by any extraordinary means , and offered any violence to any Officer , we should presently have lost our nose and ears , and received a hundred blows en our bare back , and a hundred on our belly with a double rope , or a Bull's pis●e , continuing a slave still : But I entreated the Almighty God to grant me grace that I might endure it patiently , that feeling that extremity in body in this world , how far would the torments of hell have surpassed and exceeded it , if I had in this my earthly torture been accessary to mine own death , as many were . But at length God of his great goodness and mercy , delivered me ( according to my hope ) in this manner . The great Duke fitted a ship ▪ a Tartane and a Frigate , being very well appointed and victualled , dispesing of them into the West Indies , and chiefly for the Kiver of the Amazons , appointing Captain Robert Thornton , an Englishman to be chief Commander of the Ship , the Tartane and the Frigate : so likewise was every other Officer appointed by the Duke himself ; insomuch as speaking of the placing of a Physician , a Surgeon , and a Surgeon's mate , Captain Thornton standing by , said , your Highness may do well to deliver a poor Englishman that hath continued a great while in your Galleys : he is well experimanted in P●●sicka , and Surgery , by reason of his long practice both by Sea an Land : he is hardened to the Sea , and able to discharge the place better than the three before mentioned : for in the Galleys he doth your Highness but the labour of one slave : whereupon the Duke demanded my name . Captain Thornton answered , and said , William Davies : whereto the Duke replied , I have often been spoken to for that fellow , whose liberty now I give upon thy good report , Thornton , but yet I doubt his usage hath been so hard in my Country , that as soon as he is out of chains , he will give me the slip and not go the voyage into the Indieses with thee . But if he can give five hundred Crowns security to go the voyage , he shall be released presently out of chains : neither shall he want any thing that is needful for the voyage , ●or the good of all the Company , or for his own body , and this let him understand as soon as may be : which news came within two days unto me , to my great rejoicing & comfort , but as soon as I heard it , I suddenly sat down , being at my ol● profession , carrying of dirt , and stone , and such like in a basket , and would work no longer , neither suffer the slave to work that was chained unto me , but as soon as I was espied , one of the Masters of the work came to me , and said thou Lutheran Dog : Why workest thou not ? and with that strake me with a Cudgel , whereto the slave that was chained with me , replied . The Duke hath given him his liberty : then said he that had strooken me , Master , I beseech you forgive me , and excuse my rashness , doubting that I should have remembered his former courtesies being at liberty . And within a short time after Captain Thorneton came from Florence to Leghorn , where I was , who then told me the Duke's disposition to the full , and upon what security I should be delivered : which security I did suddenly procure by an English Merchant , whose name was Master William Mellyn , of Bristol , who passed his Band for five hundred Crowns to the Duke , for the performance of the voyage by me : Whereupon I was suddenly released out of chains , to my great rejoicing , giving God thanks for his blessings . then was I presently well apparelled by Captain Thorneton , and this Merchant , wanting nothing whereof I was destitute : But within two or three days after I was sent for , by the great Duke , to come unto him to Archemeyne , where then he continued , whither suddenly I repaired , and coming to the Duke's presence , doing my duty , he said unto me , be of good comfort I have given thee grace , with thy liberty , neither shalt thou want any thing for the fitting of thy voyage , or needful for thy own body , therefore speak boldly , and demand any thing that shall be necessary , and I will have thee well fitted : for the great Duke of Florence wants no money . then he demanded of me further what I was in mine own Country , whither I was a Gentleman or no. I answered his highness I was : then he asked me how ? I told him my father was a Gentleman , and for my part I had served my Queen by Lano and by Sea , against the adversaries of my Queen and Country , and had lost mine own blood , and spilt my enemy's blood : and next that I was a Gentleman by Art then the Duke answered and said : thou art a worthy fellow , for thou hast endured much misery in this world . But tell me , quoth he , with what substance of wealth camest thou out of thy Country : I answered with two purses full : Full said he , of what ? I said of Silver and Gold , which I lost when I was taken by his Highness' Galleys , and the other full of Patience , which doth continue full still : then said the Duke to one that stood by , give him a hundred Crowns to spend to strengthen himself , and bring himself to courage ; thus did the Duke take delight in discoursing with me , in respect I spoke the Italian tongue very perfectly , for I bought it dear , with many a drop of my blood , in the time of my slavery . then receiving this hundred Crowns , which the Duke had given me , I left his Court , coming presently to Leghorn , where the Ship lay , indeavoring of myself , by my labour , and industry , for the fitting of all things necessary for the good of the Uoyage , upon the Duke's charge , besides this hundred Crowns : for they were given me to spend at my own pleasure , which I did , to the comfort of many Englishmen that lay in chains , that were taken with me : they wanted neither meat nor drink as long as my money lasted , as many of them as were left alive , for of seven and thirty of us that were taken at the first , there remained then but thirtéene , whereof ten continued in chains , and two were delivered with me . By this time all things were prepared and made ready for the performance of our pretended Uoyage , now being bound to serve in the good Ship called the Santa Lucia , with a Frigate , and a Tartane , well victualled , and well manned , and chiefly bound to the River of Amazons , with other several Rivers , the which the Duke would have inhabited , hoping for great store of gain of Gold , but the Countries did afford no such thing , as hereafter shall be spoken of . Upon this Uoyage we were fouretéene months , making little gain , or benefit for the Duke , for there was nothing to be gained . Now are we homewards bound , and recovering the straits again , & being within three or four day's sail of our own Port , Leghorn : in the night season we met with an English Pirate , who would have taken us , but was not able , yet held us fight all the whole night , and killed us a man , and hurt other two : whereof one was an Englishman , who died within two days after we recovered Leghorn , and being dead I went to the Captain and demanded of him where he should be buried , but he ●ad him go ask of one father Sherwood an Englishman , so he told me that if he were a Roman Catholic they would bury him in the Church , but if he were not , I should bury him out in the fields : But yet for my better assurance I went and asked of the Friars of the Misericordia , who also gave their advice , and counsel that he should be buried in the fields , because he was no Roman Catholic , whereupon I buried him in this manner . 

I entreated the company of many Englishmen that were protestants to help me to shrowded him , and also to accompany me to the burying of him , which they did in this manner . We put him upon a Bear , being shrouded with a covering over him , and carried by four men , many Englishmen that were protestants followed him , bearing every man a branch of Rosemary in his hand to the place where we buried him , reading Prayers over him after the English manner . His name that was buried was Erasmus Lucas , and born in Southwark near unto London . Two days being spent after his burial , & was sought for by an Italian Friar , who finding of me , demanded of me my name , which presently I told him , than he replied , thou art he that I look for , for thou hast buried a good Christian , and a Roman Catholic out in the fields , like to a Dog and a Lutheran as thou art thyself : therefore I charge thee in the Duke's name to go along with me , which command I durst not deny , but went with him , where he brought me before three or four aged Friars of the Inquisition , & they asked of me whether I were that Lutheran that buried a good Christian in the fields , for he was a Roman Catholic , and confessed , and received the Sacrament like to a good Christian , and therefore thou shalt be burned , for thou hast done contrary to the Law of Rome . I answered that I had buried a good Christian , but not a Roman Catholic , neither was he confessed , nor received the Sacrament : they replied , if this be not true which thou hast said thou shalt surely die for it . Therefore take him , and put him into the secret , whither unto I was brought , which is a prison in this manner : Many double doors being opened , I passed through two or three outward prisons then coming to the door of the secret , whereinto I was thrust , it was so dark that I could see no part of my body , then feeling round about me with my hands , I found it to be very short in length , & less in breadth , but of height I know not how high , because I could neither see nor feel the top . In this place I was almost over shoes in the filth of other men that had died there before , who never lived above eight or ten days there at the most : then wrapping one arm within another , and leaning against the wall , calling to mind jobs miseries and Daniels afflictions amid the Lions , and encouraging myself in God's mercy , sung a Psalm very cheerfully to the praise and glory of God , wherein I was greatly comforted . then did I draw off my shoes and stockings , & with my bare feet swept all the trash and filth into one corner . In this manner I lived forty hours before any sleep possessed me , and then being desirous of sleep , I sat down and leaned my head against the wall , and slept very sound , being altogether comforted with a lively hope in the Almighty God , that he would deliver me ( according to my trust ) as he had done before . And when most extremes would oppress me , than would I be most joyful , finding always an inward motion , saying , be of good comfort , the Lord will deliver thee : In this manner I lived sixtéene days , my food being bread & water , and my lodging upon the cold stones , and being yet alive , they held it a miracle that I should live there so long , saying , this Lutherane hath a Lion's heart , for we never knew any to live above ten days , wherefore let us have him forth to be examined . then was I brought before the high Inquisitioner , who demanded of me , whether he that I buried had received the Sacrament & confessed , according to the Roman order or no , I answered no ; he was a good Christian , but received not the Sacrament , nor was not confessed , after the order of Rome : then he said that he was , by a Friar of the Mesericordia , & therefore thou shalt be burned . then I entreated that I might but speak , and he said speak on : then I asked them this , whether the Friar that confessed him could speak any English or no , he answered that he could speak none : then tell me quoth I , how an Italian Friar ( can confess an Englishman speaking no English , nor the Englishman speaking no Italian , nor other language but his mother tongue ? for you know well there must be no interpreter in confession , & if the Sacrament were ministered unto him , the house where he died can justify it . then the Inquisitioner hearing this , scratched his head , saying , this fellow hath spoken the truth , wherefore take him and put him out into a large prison , whether I was brought , where I lived ten weeks being well , and often relieved by English protestants , who rejoiced much to see me alive . These malicious Friars , there reason wherefore they sought my life was , because they would have the dead man's pay to themselves , which if he had been a Roman Catholic had been their due , & in respect he was not , they missed of the pay , & of their wicked pretence against me , ( God I give him thanks ) by reason I could speak the Italian tongue , for if I had had an interpreter in this , though my cause was just , yet I had surely died . Ten weeks being spent in this prison , it was the fortune of one M. Richard Row of Milbrooke , in the county of Cornwell , to arrive at Leghorn , in the good ship called the Portion he being owner & Merchant of the said ship , & one day coming to the Prison grate demanded of me what Countryman I was , I told him I was born in the City of Hereford . He asked my name : I answered William Davies . Said he , know you one Master Davies in Plymmouth . I said I was an unfortunate brother of his . With that he was very sorely grieved , in respect he knew my brother very well , and loved him directly , and told me if all the means that he could use could deliver me , he would : therefore said he , think with yourself , how I may deliver you , and I will be back again with you within these two or three hours : whereupon he delivered me six Crowns , and bid me spare for no money , for he knew my brother would repay it again : then leaving me , I sat down and leaned my head upon my hand , setting my elbow upon my knee , entreating my Almighty God , to show me some direct course whereby I should be delivered . then presently came into my head , to send for a Frenchman , in whose house I had always laid before , who presently came unto me , unto whom I imparted my mind , telling of him that if he would feign a matter of debt against me , I would give him ten Crowns for his labour , though I ought him nothing : but he answered and said it was dangerous , for it was a Gally-matter , but I viewed it should never be made known by me : Whereupon he gave consent , and went to the Governor and told him , that in the Prison where debtors are , there is an Englishman who oweth me money , and we were agreed , then said the Commissary if thou art content , let him pay the charge of the house , and be gone : which charge I paid presently , and was freed , departing away with the Frenchman , and brought him to Master Hunt's house , the English Counsel , where I gave him his ten Crowns . So leaving one another , I went presently aboard of Master Rows Ship , being then bound for Naples , unto which place we came , whose description followeth . 

v. The Description and discovery of Naples . 

Naples is a famous and most worthy City very spacious , standing close upon the Sea , marvellous strongly fortified and planted with Ordnance , in many several Castles , Bulwarks , Forts , and such like : Also to this City doth belong many Galleys , and very good shipping , and continually great store of shipping rides before it , this City lies in the Land of Calabria , and is governed by a Viceroy , under the King of Spain : also there are many Soldiers in Garrison , being all Spaniards . The King of Spain maintains many Pensioners there . In this City they speak several Christian languages , because there are of all Nations in Christendom but principally Italians , and Spaniards . The Neopolitans are very proud , and of a leftie spirit , being for the most part very rich , and costly attired , and most commonly well furnished inwardly with their Country disease . They are altogether Papists , and their women very audacious , especially in the sinful use of their bodies , by reason they have as well their pardon as privilege from Rome . In this City it is very dangerous to walk by night , for a man may suddenly be killed for the clothes on his back , whither he be poor or rich . In this place are always great store of Merchants and Lidgers of several Countries , as specially English , Dutch , greeks , Italians , Uenetians , French , Spaniard , Jew , with many other Christian Nations . The chief commodity that these Merchant's deal in , is ●aw ▪ Silk , or Silk wrought , either into Satins , Taffities , Grograms , and diverse other silk stuffs , Silk stockings , Laces of all sorts , & Garters of several sorts . In this place I have been diverse times , and never found any thing noteworthy , but only one , which was this . A mine underneath a great Mountain about a mile or thereabouts in length . This vault was digged by the industry of men for a passage from the City to an Island called N●●●ta , where all shipping doth stop before they come to the City ; The reason wherefore this passage was invented , is because the mountain over it is so sleep that there was no passage over it , except they would go twenty miles about , but now Coaches , Wagons Carts , horse or foot may pass as smoothly through as in a plain way , continually hanging within it great store of Lamps : this vault is in height about five fadame , and four in breadth , it is named the Grout , & by common report one Virgil a learned man was the Author of it , whose Tomb is aloft in each end of it , having a Lamp hanging continually before it : Through this place I have oft and many times passed : and therefore upon my own knowledge I can assure what I have written . 

v. The Description and discovery of the River of Amazons . 

The River of the Amazons lieth in the highest part of the West Indies , beyond the Equinoctial line ; to fall with this River forty leagues from Land you shall have eight , six , and seven fathom water , and you shall see the Sea change to a ruddy colour , the water shall grow fresh , by these signs you may run in boldly your course , and coming near the River's mouth , the depth of your water shall increase , than you shall make discovery of the trees before the land , by reason the land is very low , and not higher in one place then another three ●oote , being at a spring tide almost all over flown , God knows how many hundred leagues . It flows much water there with a very forcible tide . In this River I continued ten weeks , seeing the fashion of the people and country there : This Country is a together full of woods , with all sorts of wild beasts , as Lions , Bears , Wolves , Leopards , Baboons , ●range Boars , Apes , Monkeys , Martyns , Sanguins , Marmosets with diverse other strange beasts : also these woods are ●ull of wildfowl of all sorts , and Parats more plentiful than Pigeons in England , and as good meat , for I have often eaten of them . Also this Country is very full of Rivers , having a King over every River . In this place is continual tempests as lightning , thunder , and rain , and so extreme , that it continues most commonly sixtéene or eighteen hour's i● four and twenty . There are many standing ●●terss in this Country , which be full of Aligators , G●●●eses , with many other several water Serpents , and great store of fresh fish , of strange fashions . This Country is full of Muskitas , which is a small Fl●e , which much offends a stranger coming newly into the Country . The manner , fashion , and nature of the people is this : They are altogether naked , both men and women , having not so much as one three● about them to cover any part of their nakedness , the man taketh a round Cane as big as a penny candle , and two inches in length , through the which he pulls the foreskin of his yard , tying the skin with a piece of the rind of a tree about the bigness of a small packethréed , then making of it fast about his middle , he continueth thus till he have occasion to use him . In each ear he weareth a Réed or Cane , which he boreas through it , about the bigness of a Swans quill , and in length half an inch , and the like through the midst of the lower lip : also at the bridge of the nose he hangs in a Reed a small glass Bede or Button , which hanging directly afore his mouth , fly's too and from still as he speaks , wherein he takes great pride and pleasure . He wears his hair long , being rounded below to the nether part of his ear , and cut short , or rather as I judged plucked bald on the crown like a Friar . But their women use no fashion at all to set forth themselves , but stark naked as they were born , with hair long of their heads , also their breasts hang very low , by reason they are never laced or braced vy : they do use to anoint their bodies , both men and women , with a kind of red earth , because the Muskitas or Flies shall not offend them . These people are very ingenious , crafty ▪ and treacherous , very light of foot , and good Bowemen , whose like I have never seen , for they do ordinarily kill their own food , as Beasts , Fowl , and Fish , the manner of their Bow and Arrows is this . The Bow is about two yards in length , the Arrow seven foot . His Bow is made of Brazill wood very curious , his string of the rind of a Tree , lying close to the Bow , without any bent , his Arrow made of a Réed , and the head of it is a fish bone , he kills a beast in this manner : standing behind a Tree , he takes his mark at the beast , and wounding him , he follows him like a Bloodhound till he fall , oftentimes seconding his shoot : then for any fowl be he never so little , he never misses him : as for the first , he walks by the water side , and when he hath spied a fish in the water , he presently strikes him with his Arrow , and suddenly throwing down his Bow , he leaps into the water , swimming to his Arrow which he draws aland with the fish fastened to it , then having each killed his own sood , as well flesh , and fowl , as fish , they meet together , to the number of fifty or si●tie in a company , then make a fire after this fashion : They take two sticks of wood , rubbing one hard against another , till such time as they be fired , then making of a great fire every man is his own Cook to broil that which he hath gotten , and thus they feed without Bread or Salt , or any kind of drink but Water and Tobacco , neither do they know what it means : In these Countries we could find neither Gold nor Silver Dare , but great store of Hens . For I have bought a couple for a Jews Harp , when they would refuse ten shillings in mo●ey . This Country is full of delicious fruit , as ●yness , Plantins , Euaves , and Potato roots , of which fruits and roots I would have bought a man's burden for a glass Button or Bead. The manner of their lodging is this : they have a kind of net made of the rind of a Tree which they ●●ll Haemic , being three fathom in length , and two in breadth ▪ and gathered at both ends at length , then fastening either end to a Tree , to the full length about a yard and half from the ground , when he hath desire to sleep , he creeps unto it The King of every River is known by this manner . He wear●s upon his head a Crown of Parats feathers , of seve●al●●●o●●ss , having either about his middle , or about his neck ● chain of Lion's teeth or claws , or of some other strange ●●a●● , having a woo●●en sword in his hand , and hereby is he known to be the King : Oftentimes one King wars against another in their Canowes' , which are Boats cut out of a whole Tree , and sometimes taking one another the Conquerors eats the Captines . By this time ten weeks were spent , and being homewards bound , but not the same way that we came , for we sailed unto the River before the wind , because it blows there continually one way , which forces all ships that come thither to returns by a contrary way . 

VII . The Description and discovery of Malta . 

Malta is a small Island , very famous , having two Cities upon it called Terra-nova , and Terra-vecha being situate very near one another . This Island is governed by a great Master , who acknowledgeth no Superior upon earth , but the Pope to be Supreme head of the Church . The great Master lives in Terra-nova , which is a great City , lying close upon the Sea , marvelous strongly fortified and planted with Ordnance the like is not in Christendom , for the Turk hath oftentimes sought to take it , with two or three hundred sail of Galleys at a time , but yet was never able to take any part of it . To this Island doth there belong Galleys , though they be but few , to the number of six or eight sail , and also shipping , wherewith they do much offend the Turk , taking of them very often , and making them slaves : In this Island they hold the Romish Religion , both men and women , their women are altogether lascivious and lewdly given , but there men are valiant , Gentlemen , and worthy men at arms : they are of all Nations of Christendom , speaking generally all languages , also they have an ancient order of Knighthood , sworn by the Cross of Saint john , which is a forked white Cross which they wear upon their breasts to be known to be Cavaliers and Knights of Malta . The manner of their ▪ Oath of Knighthood is this : that they shall never marry , by reason they shall never have Children legitimate : for there are many Lords and Noble men sent thither by their Uncles to be Knighted , because they shall never marry , whereby after his death his lands shall come to his Uncle's issue , yet they are suffered to have as many whores as they william Another part of their oath is this . A Knight of Malta is sworn not to stand in place where two , three , or four are upon one in fight , but to take the weaker part , & to fight to the last . They are all of bold courage , being to the number of five thousand or there about's , in Malta and other Christian places : another part of their oaths is this , by Land or Sea , whether it be in ship or Galley , they are sworn to encounter their adversaries , though they be three to one , and never to yield or slip away , for they are sworn to fight it to the last man's death : The which oath they perform very courageously , for they are Gentlemen of very great respect , neither will they ever fall out amongst themselves , being forbidden by another part of their oath . As for their maintenance , the poorer sort have a pension from the great master , which maintains him very gallant , and the richer sort live upon their own charge . One thing there is strange in that Island , those that are born without the cities speak altogether the Morisco tongue , being altogether like Moors . This Island is very plentiful and fruitful of all things , especially , Wine , Corn , Fish , Flesh , and Fruits . These Knights are very merciful , having their adversary's prostrate , greatly regarding their Oath . 

VIII . The Description and discovery of Cyprus . 

Cyprus' is a famous Island of the Turks , having two Cities and many Towns upon it ; The chiefest City upon it is Famagosta : this City lies close upon the Sea , in low ground , being very strongly fortified & walled about , and governed by Turks , holding their own Religion , believing and confessing God the Father , and their Prophet Mahomet , doing all things contrary to a Christian , yet though they do not acknowledge Christ to be the Son of God , and a God , yet they say he is the breath of God , and by the Jews put to death , but they do not believe that he is risen again . They hate a Jew above any nation even as they do the devil , neither do they care to kill him , no more than they do a dog , oftentimes kill them in the very streets upon the least occasion , if it be but for touching his garment as he passeth by him : yet their lives many Jews in all parts of the Turks dominions , but in this manner . They will suffer neither man , woman , nor child to pluck up their shoes on their heel , if they be Jews , but go always slipshod and barelegd , wearing a black cap upon his head , and carrying of a buckram sack upon his shoulders empty , to show that he is a Jew , & a slave to the world . In this Island of Cyprus , without the Cities and Towns , the Country is inhabited by Greeks , living vassals to the Turks , paying to the Turk the tenth of all that they possess , even to the tenth of their children , if they amount to that number , and that tenth child is Circumciled and made a Turk , receiving an Osper a day from the great Turk for the first years , and for the second two , and for the third three , per diem , and so his pay increaseth an Osper yearly as he groweth in years , for he is chosen from his infancy to be a Soldier of the great Turks , and so shall all his male children receive the like pay , and be Soldiers to the Turk : their garments being welted about the neck with a welt of purple silk , whereby they are known from others . This Osper is the eleveuth of a shilling English . So that at twenty years of age he serves in the field , his pay being worth ninteen pence a day , and so increasing with his years . This Island of Cyprus is very fruitful , having great store of silk worms , which yieldeth them abundance of Silk . Also this Island yields great store of fruits of all sorts , and store of cattle of all sorts : Three sorts of Beasts this Island yields , which differ far from ours in England , that is to say , a Bu●fella differs from an Ore , their Camels from our Horses , and their Sheep from ours . The Bu●fella is a Beast after the manner of an Ore , but that he is bigger , and not so high , nor so long as the tallest of our Oxen , yet one of them is as strong as three of our Oxen , for two of them do the labour of six Oxen : their horns are flat , and at midday when they use to rest them , they take them , and turn them into a water , where they will stand for the space of two hours covered quite over the backs in water , then will they yoke them and work them as fresh till night , as they did in the Morning , without any baiting at all . Their Camels is a marvellous tall beast , having a neck twice as long as a Horse , and a great bunch growing about the middle of his back , as big as a peck , he is cloven footed , and his tail little , and for his strength he will carry as much on his back as four horses , and continue with his carriage on his back threescore hours without meat or rest . I have seen four thousand of them laden at one time with Merchandise going a very slow pace , and nothing so fast as a Carrier's horse , yet will they continue that pace two days and two nights together , without any eating or drinking : and when they do rest and feed , it is but slender and very little , in this manner : when they come to their resting place they lie down with their lading upon their backs . then the Moors or Turks , put a Ball made of Date stones beaten , into every one of their mouths , the powder of the stones being compounded with Linséede Oil , and the white of Eggs , which makes the Balls as hard as Stones , and thus they will live and continue their travail sixtéene days and nights together , receiving the said rest and relief at every two day's end . Their Sheep are twice as big as ours in England , but in all fashions like our Sheep , except the tail , for their tails are marvellous great , broad , and thick , being very fat , for I have weighed many of their tails flayed from the Butchers , and they have weighed ten , eleven , and twelve pound weight , and throughout all Barbary and Turkey , they have plenty of these beasts , and also all kind of beasts that we have in England . There live many Greeks in all parts throughout the Turks Dominions , but in great bondage and poverty : they are good Christians , abhorring the Idolatry of Rome , and observing the same computation for Christmas and other festivals , that we do in England . 

Also there are Jews in all parts of Turkey and Barbary , and all parts of Christendom , England excepted : yet though they be thus dispersed throughout most parts of the world , living in extreme slavery , yet shall you not see one Jew beg his bread . One thing I have greatly marvelled at , that a Jew is respected more in Christendom , then with the Turks : for the Turks ( as you have heard ) detests him above any Nation , tying him to a notable and known mark , or manner of apparel , and yielding him no Law or right , either against Turk or Christian : whereas , contrariwise , in Christendom , he is tied to no manner of wear , but may go in what shape he list's : and for Law , by reason of his wealth , he shall sooner have right done to him then a Christian : wherefore in my mind , the Turk greatly in this condemns the Popish Christian : for it is an ordinary saying with them , tha● if a Jew had put Mahomet to death , nay , but touched the hem of his garment violently , they would not have left one of the race of them alive , nor yet any thing , or building unraced , that might procure their memory . But in Christendom they are suffered to build Synagogues , and to use their Religion publicly . But I beseech the Almighty God that this our Land of England may never be defiled , either by Pope , Turk , or Jew . 

IX . The Description and discovery of Sicilia . 

Sicillia is a famous Island of the Spaniards , having many worthy Cities upon it . This Island is in bigness seven hundred miles about , very fruitful , and plentiful of all things , as Silk , Flesh , and Fish , Corn , Wine , and Oil , with great store of Fruit. This Island is governed by a Vizeroy , under the king of Spain : his chiefs abiding is at Palerm● , or Mercina , two famous Cities , but his chiefest residence is at Palerma . This City lieth in low ground , having a Mountain near it , called Monta Pellagrune . This City is very populous , being rich of Merchandise and wealth Merchants . At this City I have been very often in the time of my sla●●●te in the Duke's Galleys . Also , near this City there is a Town called Trappany , in which Town there is a Monastery , wherein they affirm that the Pillar of Salt that Lot's Wise was turned unto , coming out of Sodom is . They profess the Romish Religion through out this Island both men and Women , speaking the Italian tongue generally , as many as be born in the Island , and are called Sicillianes . Mercina being another famous City , lieth close upon the Sea , and is situated upon high ground , under the foot of a great Mountain . This City is strongly fortified and planted with O●●●●nce : also there is great store of Galleys and Shipping belonging to this place , which doth much offend the Turk , ●●t chiefly they are employed in Marchandiye . This high Mountain that hangs over the City is called Mungebella , and standeth in the East-part of this Island , the top of it burning continually both night and day , and by reason of the fierceness of the fire , hath consumed many Uillages . The reason of this fire is a Brimstone , or a Sulphur Mine , which being high , is ( as all men imagine ) set a fire by the heat of the Sun , as the Island Strambula is , which continually burneth : and many other high places more that I have seen , as Mount Aetna , the pike of Teneriffe a Southward Island , and many others , etc.  

Unto this City Mercina belongs a strait entrance by Sea , commonly called the ●ale of Mercina it lieth betwixt the Land of Sicilia and Calabria , very dangerous to pass through for any Ship , except they are very well experimented . For my part I know this place well , being often there in the ●●me of my slavery . 

X. The Description and discovery of ●●ggadore . 

Mvggadore is an Island of the Moors , and lieth near the Lan● o● ●arbary , without the straits , not far from the Lands of the Kings of Fez and Morrocco . Th●s' Island is not inhabited , but very barren , being all Rocks by the 〈…〉 side , and very smooth on the to● , and full of bushes , 〈…〉 Pigeons do breed in great store : we held it nothing 〈…〉 〈…〉 six or eight in company together into the Island , and 〈…〉 〈…〉 the space of three hours , twenty dozen of Pigeons 〈…〉 with us. Betwixt the Main and this Island there is very good riding for a Ship . Also , the Moors will bring out ●● the Main Land such Uictuals as they have to re●●●●e o●r wants , as Mutton , Beef , ●c . The Moors of this Countr●● are very deceitful and treacherous : their clothing is but very naked and thin , for they wear but one slat of thin●● F●an●●● wherewith they cover their breasts , backs and p●●u●e parts and as for their arms , legs , and thighs , they ●●e na●ed of them : the said Garment , or piece of Flannel , they call ● Barnoose . In this Country of Barbary there is great store of Sugarcanes , and Sugar made , as they in Braz●e . Sometimes in this Country there is Amber-grease found , but the cunning of the Moors makes a great deal counterfeit . I came to this Island in a Carnell of Plymouth , Master Edward Decon of the said Town being Master of her : Moors coming oftentimes aboard of us , where they were kindly entertained ; but they returned our kindness in this manner ▪ Setting of the chiefest , with many more of them ashorem our Boat , wherein six English men rowed them ashore ▪ they being all a Land , our Boat was aground , than one of our men stepped out of the Boat , up to the knees in water , and by strength would have set the Boat off from the Land , which as ●oone as they espied him out of the Boat , they took h●●d of him ▪ and drew him a Land , where they cut all his clothes off his back , and divided them in pieces amongst them , carrying the man stark naked up into the Country , saying tha●●e should never have him again except they had twenty French Crowns for his ransom , which news the Boace brought presently aboard , ( which being in vain to st●●●e with them ●ée gave them , and received the man naked , having no further dealing with them . 

XI . The Description and discovery of Candy . 

Candy is a famous Island of the Venetians , very fruitful , yielding great store of Wine and Oil , and all other things plentiful . This Island is very high and long , pointing East and West : the North-side of it very pleasant , with great store of Gardens and Uineyards , and such like : but very barren to the Southward-side , with great Rocks , Cliffs , and Mountains , which part is inhabited by poor Greeks : and also there are many small Lands under these Cliffs , inhabited likewise by Greeks , as Christiana and Godza , with others more . These Greeks live all together in bondage to the Uenetians . The North-side of this Island is inhabited by Italians , and some Jews . There are two very fair Cities : ( viz. ) Candia , and Acony , these Cities are inhabited most with Uenetians , strongly fortified and planted with Ordnance . These Cities lie right against the entering of the Arches of Appellican , which goeth to Constantinople , where the Great Turk continues , receiving tribute of the Duke of Venice for this Island , and other parts , for the Venetian is tributary to the Great Turk . Also the Great Turk keeps him in subjection by Land and Sea , neither dare the Venetian join their forces with any Christian , at any time whensoever a Fleet of Galleys and Ships is set forth against the Turk , yet the Duke of Venice hath twice as many Galleys as any Christian Prince whatsoever , which he doth employ , some of them in Merchandise , having continual trading both with Christian and Turk , and some of his Galleys continually lieth about the entering of the Gulf of Venice , about the Island of Zant and Saphlany , and the small Island of the Stravales , and near about Madonna : these parts do they defend from any Christian men of war , or Christian Galleys , or either Galleys or Briggantéens of the Turks that shall approach near unto these parts , in the manner and fashion of men of War : and oftentimes the said Galleys do take both Christian and Turk , making Slaves of the men , or else chopping off of their heads ; for it is lawful for him so to do , by the conclusion betwixt Him , the Christian , and Turk , taking them within twenty leagues compass of the entrance of his Gulf , but not in any other part of the Sea , without the said compass . 

XII . The Description of Morria . 

Morria is a small low Island , lying in the River of Amazons , the highest part of the West Indies . This Island is altogether inhabited by Women , having no Mankind amongst them : they go altogether naked , using Bow and Arrows for the kill of their own food : the hair of their heads is long , and their Breasts hang low : and whereas many here in England do imagine that they have the right Breast seared , or cut off , it is no such matter as now ▪ what hath been in times past I know not : for this of mine own knowledge , I have seen forty , fifty , or threescore of them together , each of them bearing Bow and Arrows in their hands , going along by the Seaside ; and when they espied a Fish , they shoot at it , and strike it , and so throwing down their Bows , they leap into the water after their Arrows , and bring the Fish aland , fastened to the Arrow : and ●o in all other things as well the dressing of their meat , as their lodging and customs , they resemble and imitate the Indians of the River of Amazons , as you heard before in that discourse . But some ●● these Women do use to bear their Children upon their backs , in this manner : They take a year of the unde of ● Tree , and with the one end thereof they fasten the Child's hunmes , and about the armpits and shoulders with the other , and so hang him on their backs like a Tinker's Budger , and cast up the breast to him over the shoulder . The reason wherefore this Island is inhabited by Women only , ●s this One Month in the year , the Men from each side of the Main Land comes in their Canowes' , over to the Island , every Man matching himself with a Woman , living there a Month : and what men Children they find there , they carry away with them ; and the Woman Children they leave behind with the Mothers . And this is their use once a year , whereby this Island is altogether inhabited by Women . There is one thing more to be wondered at , that I have also seen , that is to say , very good Oysters and Muskles growing upon trees , for I have eaten my part of many an hundred of them . And for your better understanding how they grow , you shall know that the Trees stand near the Sea side , and at every full tide the bows hang into the Sea a fathom , or a fathom and a half , so that when the tide goeth out , they are found hanging in great clusters upon the branches , like Barnacles to the side of a ship , and at the coming in of the tide , they receive their moisture . 

FINIS . 

The Conclusion of the Book : to the Reader . 

Thus far ( gentle Reader ) I thought good , out of my slender capacity , to acquaint thee with a brief and plain discourse of my Travel , which though it be rude , as coming from a barren brain , which professeth nothing less than learning : yet assure thyself it contains undoubted truth , being no more than I have seen , known , and to my grief and peril felt . And if any , as well or better acquainted with these Parts , or any of them , whereof I make mention , disliking the rudeness of my stile , will undertake to refine it , he gives me no discontent , so he derogate not from the truth thereof . And whereas I made promise in the beginning of this Treatise , in these twelve discourses , to touch or speak something of the rest of the places , specified in the Table , I have partly performed it : but to have written of them at large , would have been but frivolous and superfluous , partly because they are places of no extraordinary note , but specially because they do in most , or all things , agree with the Countries to which they are annexed , and tributaries , or vassals : as the Land's tributary to the Spaniards , follow their manner of government , customs , and orders . The Turkish tributaries imitate them in most things : and so you may judge of the rest , according as they are severally distinguished . And so much may suffice to clear that doubt . Now the reasons that urged me to publish this Book are manifold , but chiefly three : The first was , to keep in record , and make known my own misery , lest with the forgetful Butler in Pharaos Prison , who being delivered forgot his promise made to joseph . that foretold his delivery : so I ( such is infirmity and frailty of human nature ) might ( cheaked with worldly prosperity forget my merciful and mighty Deliverer . The second was , that others ( warned by my misery ) might eat the like . The last and chiefest reason was , to glorify God , especially here in England , which above all earthly Countries and Nations is most bound to extend and set forth his glory . For what Christian , reading but the extreme thraldom and punishment he hath inflicted upon the Jews , even to this hour , being a Nation he had once selected to himself from amongst all the Nations of the earth . Or the present misery of the Greeks , who once were monarchs of the Earth , and one of the chiefest Churches of Christendom , being the first fruits of the Gentiles , whose extreme bondage is now lamentable , yet not with the Israelites , sacrificing their children to Idols , but forced to give as well the tenth of their children , as of their substance to that monstrous Mahometan Idol the Turk . Or who , duly pondering the blindness and obstinacy of the Spaniards , Pope , and Italians , with the horrible and absurd sins that God hath given them over to : Or who , seeing the Infidelity of the simple Indian ( well may I call him simple , because his error grows more of want of true knowledge than obstinacy ) who worship's the creature , being ignorant of the Almighty Creator ? What English heart ( I say ) duly pondering these things in general , or any one of these things in particular , can otherwise choose but falling down on his bent knees , yield God immortal and innumerable thanks and praysegiving , not only for electing him above all other Nations of the Earth , to the true and perfect knowledge of his blessed Gospel , but also for preserving him so long from so many miseries and wretched thraldoms , whereunto most Nations of the Earth are subject ? 

FINIS . 





Distant from England leagues 700.  Distant from England leagues 480.  Distant from En●land leagues ▪ 600.  Distant from England leagues 630.  Distant from England 700. leagues . Distant from England 1600 〈…〉  Distant from England ●●●●eagu●● . Distant from England 1000 leagues . Distant ●ro● England 〈…〉 ●eague● . ● 〈…〉 〈…〉 England 〈…〉 〈…〉  Distant from England ●●● leagues  〈…〉  