Advertisement . 

The Copy of this Treatise was Given out to be Printed a Year and half ago ; but by Accident or Negligence , was laid by , and could not be Retrieved till very lately , which may , I hope , serve to Excuse this Delay in Publishing it . 

THE Blatant Beast Muzzled : OR , REFLECTIONS ON A Late Libel , Entitled , The Secret History OF THE REIGNS OF K. CHARLES II AND K. JAMES II  

— Pudet haec Opprobria — 
Velure dici potuisse — 


Printed in the Year , 1691.  

TO THE READER . 

TITLES , which at first sight look Odd and Fantastical , are apt to draw some Prejudice upon the following Book . To meet with which , I must avow , That it was impossible for me to invent any other that was half so Proper . Yet , because it may not perhaps have light in the way of every Reader to discover this , I stand obliged to be something large in giving thee the True Reason and Meaning of it . Our Ingenious Countryman , Spencer , in his Excellent Poem , called , The Fairy Queen , shadows the Moral Virtues under the fictitious Names of Gallant Heroes ; and some of the Worst Vices , ( in regard they are most Opposite to Rational Nature ) under the Counterfeit Names of certain Monstrous Brutes : Particularly , he represents that pernicious Vice of Calumny or Slander , by a deformed Creature , which he calls The Blatant Beast ; whose property it was to Defame all States and Sorts of Mankind , not sparing even Princes , nor leaving the Clearest Honour untainted , that came within the steam of its Contagious Breath . Had that Poet lived in the time of this Libeler , his Fiction might have been History : He needed not to have used a Poetical Disguise , nor to have borrowed Imaginary Natures to make a lively Idea of that Vice. The Author of this Libel had furnished him with a Real Exemplar of it ; equalling , if not outdoing all he could have fancied or invented . And therefore , since Shame makes him put on a Mask ( for he can fear nothing from the Times , in which the Foulest Calumnies are most in Fashion ) : I knew not by what . Name more properly to call him , as that more Exactly Suits with his Genius , than that of The Blatant Beast . 

How justly that Title is his due , will be best learned from the Poet's Description of that Hideous Animal ; who , speaking of his Mouth , has these Words ; In which there was a thousand Tongues empight , 
Of sundry Kind's and sundry Qualities : 
Some were of Dogs that barked day and night ; 
Some were of Cats , that wrawling still did cry ; 
Some were of Bears , that groined continually ; 
And some of Tigers , that did seem to grin , 
And snarl at all that ever passed by . 
But most of them were Tongues of Mortal Men , 
Which spoke reproachfully , not caring where nor when . 
And them among were mingled here and there 
The tongues of Serpents with three-forked stings , 
That spit out Poison and Gore-bloody-gear , 
At all that came within his Ravenings , 
And spoke Licentious Words and Hateful Things 
Of Good and Bad alike , of Low and High , 
Nor CAESAR spared be a whit , nor KINGS , 
But either blotted them with Infamy . 
Or bit them with his baneful Teeth of Injury . 




The Reader needs but Reflect on this Description , as he peruses this Libel , and he will all the way discover that the Poet's Idea of Calumny , is the perfect Pourtraicture of this Contumelious Scribbler ; for he will observe how he plays upon all the Keys of Satyr that can be imagined ; and , according as his Passion tunes his Fancy , he either wrawls discontentedly , or grunts churlishly , or grins and snarls angrily , or rails licentiously , or barks currishly , or stings venomously ; and this indifferently both High and Low , Kings and all sorts of Subjects that are not of his own Blatant Kind ; either blotting their Names infamously , or biting them injuriously . 

The Reasons which induced me to write and Publish these Reflections , were , First , The Reverence I owed to the Sacredness of Christianity , and to our Blessed Saviour's excellent Law of Charity towards our Neighbour , so often repeated , and so earnestly recommended by Himself and His Followers ; which makes it an Obligatory Duty in us not to suffer him to be traduced in such a heinous Manner , but to Vindicate his Credit in what we judge him innocent . And I took myself to be the rather obliged to maintain and stand up for that Divine Precept , because I saw that , of late , it seems not only to be neglected or forgotten , but to be quite contemned and vilifyed here in England . Another Motive , was the Common Regard every Honest Man ought to have for Truth ; which is here Violated and Affronted in the highest Degree , by Multitudes of Wilful and most Notorious Falsehoods . Nor shall I be afraid heartily to own that I had a dutiful Respect , very particularly to the Honour of those two Excellent Princes , whom he so Injuriously and Barbarously traduces , as the Blackest Monsters that ever lived , and little lesle than Devils Incarnate . Nor is it fitting that the Honour of the Present Governors should lie under a Disgrace so Scandalous to all Good Christians . 't is well known how sensibly even many Indifferent and Good persons are offended at it , as Unnatural , Vndutiful and Unchristian , that Infamous and Nasty Slanders against their Royal Relations , whom God's Law commands them to Honour , are suffered to be Printed , bawled about the streets , and Sold Publicly , as very Current Ware , in every Bookseller's Shop ; without the least Diligence used ( say they ) or Care taken to search after the Authors or Printers . Now from these kind of Aspersions , Governors will have a Fair Occasion to Clear themselves , by letting the World see they allow those Prince's Credits to be Vindicated as far as may consist with Truth , or be without Injury to any , which is all I attempt or aim at . It will appear , I say , by their not discountenancing these , but letting them have , at least , the same Privilege of passing currently , and being sold openly , which was indulged to those slanderous Pamphlets , that 't is below their Thoughts , Ex aliena infamia sibi famam captare , To borrow a Lustre to themselves by blackening their Relations : Which is the avowed scope of this Libeler , who has done them , as far as lay in his Power , the greatest Dishonour imaginable , by breeding a Conceit in his Readers , that their Authority in itself , or their Credit with the People , do stand in need of such Crooked Supports ; and that they are well pleased , and esteem it Meritorious to them , that such Impudent Slanders should pass up on the World. Besides , I saw plainly , both by the Contents , the Manner of it , and the Timing it , that this Pamphlet , was calculated merely for the Common wealthish Meridian , and directly levelled at the bespattering all Kings alike ( as far as he durst ) and the representing them ( as himself calls one of them ) The Greatest Knaves in Nature , out of his Hatred to Royalty and Monarchical Government ; which by insinuating thus an Odium of them into the People , he studies to undermine . 

None will blame me , nor do I value it if he does , that I treat this Libeler as he deserves , without showing any Respect to him , who has not shown the least towards Princes , or towards Truth . In the rest of my Book I have born myself as impartially and unoffensively towards all sorts , as I could possibly , without forfeiting my own Credit , as a Lover of Truth , and a truebred Englishman . Nor ought it to be interpreted as a Design to undervalue any man , or reflect upon his Just Repute , that I lay open on occasion this Libeller's Folly , in fawningly and ridiculously over-praising him . There is nothing , next to virulent Calumnies , my Nature more abhors than such fulsome Flatteries as are utterly disproportioned to the subject , which , like shining Paint daubed too thick upon matter unfit to receive it , never stick to them , but fall off as soon as laid on , and always leave some Blemish , or at least , some Tarnish behind them . 

Nor was it one of the least Motives I had , to write and print my Reflections upon this Libel , that I saw plainly , not only by the spreading it so industriously , and reprinting it so often , but much more by the manifold Attempts of the same scurrilous Strain ; that there was a formed Design laid , to pursue and carry on resolutely those Wicked Calumnies , and to make them pass in the World for Certain Truths . I found that they began to gain a kind of Authority with the ordinary sort of People , by this unchecked Currency , and with many others were deemed unanswerable , because the Crimes were of such a high nature , and charged so confidently , and yet none stepped forth to contradict them in the least . This made me see it was absolutely necessary , and a most precise Duty , to put a stop to that wild Career of Slander , which by so many sly steps was insinuating itself into the Belief of the Credulous , who make up a considerable part of the Generality . I insist not on those lesser squirting Papers , handed about by Malicious Tops , such as is that villainous Piece of Ribaldry , entitled , A Letter from Lewis the Great , to james the Lesle ; with Reflections upon it ; taken up as it dropped from the Pocket of a justice of Peace at Hicks's-hall , and yet reserved in Lavender for his Worship's sake : Nor of such other little Squibs of Satyr ; but of other greater and more bulky Pieces , which our Godly Times , luxuriantly fruitful of such immodest Productions , do frequently teem with . And first , there comes out a brisk Romance , bearing for its Title , The Royal Wanton ; or The Amours of Messalina ; in no fewer than Five Parts , maliciously penned and contrived to recommend those abusive Forgeries to young Gentlemen and Ladies , who are addicted to such kind of Foolish Toys , and framed with as much lewd Art as was possible , to debauch them into the bargain , by the lively Expressions of its Bawdy Contents . I shall do the Author a greater Kindness than he deserves , by not naming him at present , though he is known to more than he dreams of , and may justly fear that his second Recantation will not be so easily prevalent to procure his Pardon , as was his first . His Character is best drawn by himself ; for the whole Mien of his Books do amply acknowledge , that he is a wild Debauchee , who has wholly devoted his Life to Sensuality and Amorous Intriqus with his Misses ; whence his Heart being full of Affection for those Darling Pleasures , his Fancy could not be at ease till it was delivered of them , by venting them after a very pathetical manner ; and , hoping the better to ennoble his own Beastly Conceptions , he applies ( without regarding whether there be the least shadow of Ground for it ) his own Immodest Pranks to Kings and Queens , at his pleasure , to humour the Times , and gain the noble Repute of the State-romancer . But alas ! What a most improper Subject has this poor unfortunate Ribald made choice of , to fix that Disgraceful Character upon ! A Princess , whose Incomparable Worth and Unblemished Virtue is such , that it never permitted any occasion to the least sinister Imagination in any that knew her . Nor durst Malice itself ever be so bold , as to taint her Unspotted Life so much as with a Suspicion of deviating from the severest Rules of Modesty , till we came to fall into such Times , in which to be Infamously Traduced , is the surest Token of the Clearest Honour , and to be free from Obloquy is a most certain Argument of deserving it . A Princess , whose Goodness alone , unassisted by any Abetter or Compurgator , has set her Honour so high above the reach of Calumny , that it has daunted all Attempt of Proof from appearing barefaced , and has made it , when it was to have come to the Trial , retreat with as much Shame as it attacked with Impudence . 

Next comes out Blatant ; and , to make the Romance seem True , with a History , containing matter enough to furnish out many Volumes of such Fantastic Stuff : But the mischief is , 't is so full of Forgery , that it disgraces History by being named such , having scarce as much Truth in it as is generally found in Romances . Cassandra , the Grand Cyrus , and The Illustrious Bassa , compared with it , are good tolerable Histories . The Arcadia and Argenis , by the help of a Clavis , may have much Truth covered under those Poetical Veils : But Blatant's History is barred of that Plea , by professing to contain nothing but Real Verities . How well he comes off , these Reflections will inform the Reader . 

After this , to Second the Two other Invectives , comes out a Tragicomedy , called , The Abdicated Prince ; as full fraught with venomous Slanders as either of his Brother Blatants , and he delivers them too with as ill a Grace as was possible : Knavish Conceptions use to be varnished over , and recommended with some kind of glossy Wit , to hide their odious Deformity , or divert the reader 's Eye from attending to it : But the Author of that Piece of Foppery seems to be of no higher a pitch than those pitiful Hackney-poetasters , that use to set off Merry Andrew's Drolls : Yet the poor man has a mighty Ambition to gain the Repute of a Wit of the Times . For , as those Boys in the Universities used to be most cried up who durst with Scurrilous jokes most abuse the Doctors and their Superiors , so now a-days he is held the Greatest Wit , and Theman for-my-money , who can most slander Princes . But 't is pleasant to remark with what Solemnity this Ridiculous Farce was introduced and welcomed into the World. First , comes out a Printed Paper , which was posted up in Coffee houses , to give notice , by way of Prediction , when this admirable Mouse was to be born . Next , my L. Mayor's Old-baily-book must acquaint us with this material Piece of News , where the Puny Monster was to be seen for our Money , Which is a very ill Omen , signifying , That this Libelling Malefactor may come in due time to have his Name and Crime registered there against his William However , this double-diligence gives Light enough to pull out by the Ears the seulking Printer , and the Author . And lastly , 't is handed about very sedulously by the Blatant Gang , as if they were afraid that short lived Mortals should die in Ignorance of the Sacred Truths it contains . Now , since it is evident , that this Poetaster ( and his Fellow Romancer ) aims to have his Ribaldry pass for true History , he stands obliged to justify the Truth of those many Idle Stories on which he builds it ; Otherwise all his Achievements ( and the same may be said of the Romancer too ) are no more , but a running of Voluntaries or Fiddling Division upon no Ground ; for at the bottom , 't is no more but Blatant's way transversed ; which how empty it is of Solidity and full-stuft with Forgery , the Reader will see . Nor can any sober man be brought to believe , that any of them can make out the Truth of those things , which the stickling Party in one of our late Parliaments , though zealously bend to do it , were forced to wave , being in utter despair of compassing it . Which Consideration alone is enough both to confute the better half of this shameless Libel , and withal , to render both the Romance and the Farce perfectly ridiculous , and utterly insignificant ; for if their Historian be convicted of Lying ▪ no wise man can expect any Truth from their Romancer or their Poet.  

Lastly , to crown the Work , and to top Blatant's part , they have published a bold piece of Ribaldry , entitled , The Great Bastard , the Protector of the Lesser one ; of which all England may come to repent at leisure . 't is well known how dear the printing Ridiculous Pictures of Crowned Heads did , within our Memory , cost the Common Wealth of Holland , though that Affront was far inferior to this , and the States did not order , nor long suffer , such an unmannerly Action , but only permitted it for some time . And may we not fear , that such Infamous Slanders as we are daily spreading of that great Monarch , will so highly provoke him , as to neglect his other Enemies , or make Peace with them , and bend all his Forces against our rude and barbarous Nation : And should he , in that Case ( as the chance of War is uncertain prevail upon us , many thousands may come to lose their Lives to revenge this and such like Libels . I insist nor here on the Clownishness and Injuriousness of it , ( these are Nuts to the depraved Palate of our Age ) but I would know what Good this Libeler could in Prudence propose to himself , by writing and publishing such a piece of Ribaldry . Did he hope , that his Bawling would ( as to the one part of it ) outweigh , with Men of Honour and Reason , the unblemished Virtue of that Princess ; or the Attestations of Multitudes of sworn Witnesses , most of which were Personages of the highest Repute , and very many of them protestants ? Or , Does he fancy , that the Railing of a skulking Fellow , that dares not appear to justify a tittle of what he says , when he is secure of Impunity , and , perhaps , sure of a good Reward roo for doing so , will ever pass for Proof ? Or , as to the other part of it , Does he think he has done a great Kindness to England , by setting such a Base Character upon so Potent a Prince , which could he prove , would avail us nothing ? Had we already conquered the French King , or brought him under us , though even then Civility and Generosity would not allow the insulting over him , with shameless Lies , yet there might , in that case , be some kind of Prudence in such an Action pretended , because it might be done safely . But , as things stand now , 't is mere Foolhardiness to exasperate so powerful an Enemy to no end . Even Kings do not take upon them to give such Affrontive Language to other Kings , with whom they have War , though they be of the same Dignity , and their Equals , but content themselves , when their Honour or Interest is concerned , to send them a Manly and Generous Defiance : But in England every petty Coxcomb is Hail fellow well met with a King. What a Dishonour this is to our Country , the whole World that is acquainted with our Methods and Actions , discern with Scorn , and laugh at us for Madmen ; being so sober , as to see , that there is no Nation under the Cope of Heaven so barbarously Rude , and so sillily addicted to forge or believe spiteful and infamous Lies , as England has been of late years , and this ( as was said ) without any Prospect of the least Good , but merely to please their Rustic Humour of Malicious Railing I beseech God , that our Repentance may avert the judgements due to the Connivance and Complaisance with which we have entertained and applauded these Blatancies . Let us remember Shimei's Cursing , and reflect in time , That Despightful and Opprobrious Language to Kings never passed without some severe Punishment , sooner or later . 

REFLECTIONS ON A Late Libel , etc.  

In a Letter to a Friend . 

SIR , 

YOU ask my Judgement of the BOOK you sent me . Your own may discern at the first Blush , that it carries in its Forehead all the proper Brands of a plain Libel . no Author's , Printer's , or Licenser's Name to it ; no , not so much as the Name of the Place where it was Printed . Which , when the Contents are grateful to the Times , ( as we have too much Reason to fear these are ) use to be the Notorious Ear-marks of a Libelling Pamphlet . Next , I doubt not but any unbyast Understanding , though never so weak , will at the first glance discover , that there is scarce a Line in it , where he Charges any thing upon those Two Princes , but betrays it very evidently to be the mere Product of a Highflown Passion and Extravagant Malice : The Author places a peculiar Felicity in expressing every thing waspishly ; and no Ragoust of Eloquence pleases his Palate , but that of Satyr and Invective . Never was Man in a higher Salivation with Rage , or drivelled more Foam . I should take him to be possessed with Fits of Madness , but that he has no Lucid Interval . Kings had best take heed how they come in this Man's Debt ; for it will be difficult ever to get his Acquittance . I should advice them to give him a Pension ( as 't is said , some did to Aretine ) to bribe him off from bespattering them ; for , otherwise , he will make them all Rogues and Rascals , and scarce leave an Heir to any Crown that came Honestly by it , in all Christendom . 't is his Gallantry , I do assure you , to Trample upon Majesty like Dirt , and then to Strut and Crow over it most unmercifully . To tell us that King Charles the Second ( the most Mild Prince than living ) had nothing in his Thoughts but Bloody Designs ( p. 32. ) that He had not a Grain of Common Humanity in his Adamantine Heart ( p. 124. ) ; or that he Committed Incest with his own Sisters ( p. 22.50 . ) These , I say , are his Common , but Course Compliments to that Prince : And we may be sure 't is Resolved on , that his Royal Brother and Successor must be far worse than he . He is Bloody and a Murderer every bit of him , even of his own Brother ; Cruel as Nero , and the very Dioclesian of all the protestants ; though he struggled even beyond his strength , to give Liberty of Conscience to them all . What a Scandal is it to the Age we live in , what an indelible Disgrace to the Government , that such a jack Pudding should be let loose to libel Kings , and scribble with such a Magisterial Impudence , against Personages which filled some of the highest Places in the Universe , and had been his own Sovereigns ! 

Ever I leave to Reflect on his manner of Writing , or give you the Character of it myself , I desire you to Note how candidly this Libeler tells you what you may expect from him in that kind , and how plainly he not only confesses , but excellently proves himself to be an Insulting Barbarian , and this by his own Discourse and his own Words , ( p. 197. ) where , speaking of the Late Chancellor's Domineering Carriage , he descants upon it thus ; [ To tell a Peer of England , and the Bishop of London , so much his Superior , only that he sat upon the Throne of his Commission . ] He that was not to be mentioned with the Bishop in the same day , was such a foul piece of Exuberance of his Guildhall Eloquence , which only could have dropped from the Lips of insulting Barbarism . Now a Modest Man , or indeed any one in his Right Wits , would verily judge that there is far more distance betwixt this fellow's Pitch , and that of Kings , than there was between the Bishop of London , and a Lord Chancellor ; and that , if these Two were not to be mentioned in the same Day , such a Puny Wretch as this and Sovereign Princes , are not to be mentioned in the same Age : Which if it be true , than this inconsiderate Fop , has , by a far better Consequence than any in his Book , most learnedly proved himself an Insulting Barbarian . All that can be said , why even himself should not judge so , is , That his proud and exaggerating Genius does , in his haughty Imagination , print himself in such a Noble Character , that he judge's his own Quality , far Superior to that of poor Monarches , or ( to pursue his Phrase ) fit to be mentioned with them in the same Minute . In which I most humbly beg his little Grandeurs Pardon , I am something afraid he is mistaken ; and that , ( to use his own Words a little altered ) as Men commit Absurdities when laden with Wine , so this was his Extravagancy , when he was Drunk with Pride and Malice ; the Potent Charms which so intoxicate him , that ( as will be amply proved hereafter ) he thinks himself some kind of Peerless Thing , and Paramount to the whole World. Thus has our Libeler buffeted himself , while he strikes at Kings ; and so , since he has evinced it so evidently , an Insulting BARBARIAN let him be . 

Nor must I forget how accurate he is in picking out , and penciling to the Life all the immodest Stories he could either hear , or invent ; and how he hugs his own Harlotry Pleasure in Expressing them pathetically . O , how his Fancy is tickled with that nasty Idea of the expanded Nakedness of a Harlot , ( p. 85. ) which he is not ashamed to show his Reader ! This , and such as this , I must confess , are foul pieces of an exuberant Eloquence , beyond Guild-hall pitch ; and such as more becomes an Academy of Whores in a Bawdy-house ; whence , in all likelihood our honest Libeler transcribed it into his Fancy , & hoped that what was so pleasing to himself , would mightily gratify his sort of Readers . 

Nor must I forget the strong Reason he gives , why he became obliged to write and publish this Hotchpotch of Ribaldry . The French King ( as he tells us in his Preface ) had published a most scandalous Libel , entitled , The True Pourtraicture of William Henry of Nassau , etc.  Now , says he , though I do undertake to Vindicate him here , I will not so much as Answer to any one particular objected in that Libel , for fear of Proving and Fending ; but let all the Dirt stick upon that Prince still , and let him wipe it off that will ; but I 'll do that which is better : And what 's that ? Is there any better way to clear a Man's Credit , than to confute the Calumny ? What is then this better way ? Mary , says he , I 'll show that his nearest Relations are as ill Men as he can be for his heart , and so let them , for me , pass in the World for a pack of abominable Monsters together . And this he calls his more Concise Way of Defending that Prince's Credit : Has this Fellow Common Sense in him , to think that the leaving all unanswered which was Objected , and instead of doing so , falling foul upon his Relations , is the more concise way of clearing the Reputation of him whom he had taken upon him to defend ? Or , that any Man's Credit is Vindicated merely by Recriminating other Men ? Yet this Trifler tells us there ( p. 2. l. 1. ) that he has Vindicated that Prince , by this New and more concise Method of not-answering : And this Piece of most refined Nonsense , is the Apology he makes , Why he published to the World such a saucy and scurrilous Invective . Nay , which is worse , by this Carriage of his , he leaves that Prince's Credit in the Lurch , and , in some manner , takes the French Kings Part against him ; for the Zeal he expresses for him , shows evidently he had a good Will to Vindicate him particularly ; which since he did not , in a Book , as he confesses intended to Vindicate , 't is enough to make indifferent men suspect , and his Maligners say , that it lay not in his Power to do it . Had such a Prevarication , in a like Case , happened in the Plot-time , People would have sworn the French King had hired him off for Money . 

Who is the Author of this Libel , was for some time uncertain . But , since I had begun to write , and was near finishing these Reflections , I am given to understand for Certain , That this Gallimawfry of Scurrility , was written by an Atheistical , Damning , Swearing , Drunken Fellow of the Fraternity of Blackfriars , who gets his Living by Scribbling for Money . The Inconsiderableness of the Man made it below me , and too Honourable for him , to meddle with him , had not more powerful Motives , lately mentioned in my Preface , won me to publish what I had already finished , ever I had certain Knowledge of the Name or Quality of the Author : Besides , his Libel being the Groundwork both of the Romance and the Farce , I could no way better Confute those Pieces , than by exposing to the World , the shallow Vanity and ridiculous Lies of Blatant's History , the Foundation on which they were in part built . 

Lastly , though this mean Fellow was thought the fittest Penman for the Blatant Party ; yet 't is not to be doubted , but that the Materials were given him by some of the Heads of that Gang ; who spread , and abet by word of Mouth , what this perilu Libeler prints ; whose Calumnies therefore to Confute , I judged might not misbecome me ; though this Fop , singly Considered , was below Contempt . 

I am not of your mind in the least , that Higher Powers incited him to this senseless Barbarity , or that they will long connive at it . no certainly , it too much misbecomes any Man who has the least Sense of Piety towards such near Relations , or of Generosity towards Personages of so high a Station , and who have born so great a Figure in the World ( even although they may be thought to have been subject to some Failing ) to be willing they should be thus publicly branded for Monsters , by the licentious and intemperate railing of every petty Buffoon ; whence I hope you will suspend that rash Judgement , till you see whether his Book passes currently ( after it is exposed ) without some severe Animadversion . Nay , were that Unlikely Supposition of yours True , yet 't is incredible , that persons even of any Ordinary Prudence , ( much lesle such as they ) would not have been chary to abuse Princes so nearly Allied to them , with such Foul and Contumelious Language ; but would rather have made Choice of some sober and grave Writer , who knew what good Manners and Decency meant , to lay open the plain Naked Truth , ( had Necessity so required ) in a Style full of charitable and respectful Expressions towards their persons , and with a sensible regret that he was forced to expose their Faults ; and not to have employed such a foul-mouthed Thersites , whose whole Book is woven quite thorough with such rancorous Invectiveness , that , could a Mad Dog speak , he could scarce vent his Cerberean Foam with more Venom . All Wise Men , who have a good Opinion of the Present Governors , fear this Libeler has gained a fair Title to a Pillory or the Gallows , for such impudent Slanders against their Relations , notwithstandding his glavering Flatteries to curry Favour with them ; even the highest Encomiums from such a dirty Pen , are at the best , but scurvy Commendations . 

Thus much for the Manner of his Writing . As for the Matter of it , you may please to observe that the Title of his Libel , is , The Secret History , etc.  In the Name of Wonder , how comes this inconsiderable Wretch to be better acquainted with the Secrets of State , than all the Herd of Mankind besides . There have not wanted Times of late , in which there was Impunity enough for Factious Men to speak such Truths as could be proved , or had any degree of Likelihood in them , even against Majesty itself ; there wanted not Politicians who had Wit enough to know them , had they been real Vertties , nor Boldness and Malice to detect them : Yet we never heard of such a Complicated Series of Bloody Contrivances , till Blatant , in whose Breast these Horrid Secrets lay hid from the World's dull Eyes , bolted out this Unexpected Discovery of them . But how comes he then , and none but he , to know these Secrets ? Was he ever Secretary to any of those several Princes or Popes , that he should be so well Versed in their most private Transactions , and pronounce upon them with such a Confidence ? Yet , he must be more than that ; he must be of their Cabinet-council too . Nor , will even such an intimate Familiarity with their persons and Outward Transactions , justify the abominable Suggestions that are delivered as so many Certain & Evident Truths in this Libel of his . He assumes to himself yet a far greater Privilege , than the knowing all the Arcana Imperii . This is too superficial an Object for his reaching Brain . He Fancies himself a little God Almighty , and dives into their very Thoughts ; and ( which is a Prerogative peculiar to the Divinity ) searches their very Hearts and most retruse Intentions ; and when he has done , he turns their Consciences inside-outwards : For , otherwise , the Particulars he huddles up together , will fall short of inferring what is still the Burden of his Song , The Design of introducing Popery and Slavery . He keeps a huge Pother about the French King , and King Ch. his siding with him , and seconding his Intentions ; whereas , every wise Man knows that there is no True Friendship betwixt Kings : They all do what they think is best for their Interest , and strive to circumvent one another by Policy . They commonly look one way and row another . The French may make Proposals , and our Kings , if they see it expedient , may in Outward Show , admit their Pretences ; and in their Treaties , give way seemingly to their Intentions ( so they can but gain the Point they aim at ) though they never meant them , nor had the same Motives the others had . Sometimes too , Kings may tell the Parliament what was really then their Intention , yet change of Circumstances intervening , may show the complying with them in that particular , to be , hic & nunc , Imprudent and highly Inconvenient . The Common Good is their proper Object , and 't is hard for any , to know what is such so well as themselves , by reason of their High Station , and Universal Intelligence , both at home from their Ministers , and abroad by their Ambassadors : Yet the subtle Wit of Blatant can penetrate into their inmost Breasts , and tell their Thoughts to an Hairs breadth : He thinks Solomon , for all his Wisdom , was but a Fool , and the Scripture much to blame in saying , That Cor Regum inscrutabile , The Hearts of Kings are unsearchable : Their most dark and opacous Meanings are to his Lynx's Eyes as transparent as Crystal : However , we poor undiscerning Mortals be of opinion , that his leaden Skull and short Line of Reason , are utterly unable to fathom such depths . Nay , he knows of all Secret Letters between Party and Party , as well as if he had written them with his own Hand ; though now and then , if he fears them unauthentick , he is put to make them current with an [ If. ] But of his Proofs and Arguments hereafter . 

Indeed he tells us candidly , in his Preface , That he will not apologise for the Truth of what 's contained in his Libel . Now , the Crimes charged in it , are of the highest nature , and against Personages of the highest Dignity , which the Scripture forbids us to speak evil of . wherefore one would think such an Action as this , of all things in the World , should need an Apology , and such an Apology too as carries with it the clearest Evidence and strongest Conviction ; and that otherwise our Blatant will gain to himself the Repute of an Apostate from all Common Honesty , Civility , Charity and Christianity : Nay , he is to show us too the Necessity of publishing to the open World such horrid Crimes of such Personages , even though True ; since all secret Truths , especially such scandalous ones , are not ( as himself confesses in his Preface ) to be trumpeted about at all times , if at all . And lastly , he needs a good lusty Apology , why he delivered those supposed Truths in such a scurrilous manner . How comes it then , that he so kindly indulges himself the heavy and most necessary Task of Apologizing ? Because ( says he ) as for what was more publicly carried , there are the loud and general Complaints of the Kingdom to confirm it . By the word [ Kingdom ] he means , we are to think , Himself , and his own factious Party , and especially the Traitors and their Adherents : By the same Figure of his kind of Rhetoric , as by making the Dissenters ( or rather the most bigoted and furious part of them ) the only protestants , he , by consequence , ever and anon Christens those of the true Church of England by the Name of Papists . I cannot but note here how this poor man quite forgets what he is about . The Title of his Pamphlet is , The Secret History , etc.  And he stuffs out his Book with Matters publicly carried , and which ( as he says ) a whole Kingdom loudly complained of . These are some of honest Blatant's SECRETS , which made such a noise , that every one must needs hear of them , whether they would or no , especially his Factious Crew , who were the persons that made that Noise ; for their Mouth and their Ears are not far asunder . Unless he will maintain , ( for he does as great Feats as this in his Book ) that a whole Kingdom complained loudly of they knew not what , and that he is the only man ( forsooth ) that has ferreted out these Public Secrets . But to the point . 

The Kingdom , notwithstanding some Taxes , ( which were inconsiderable , if we compare them with K. Ch. the Second long Reign ) lived in Peace and Plenty , and for all his ill Husbandry , and his being addicted to his Pleasures , ( Faults , though no way excusable , yet incident to many Princes ) he was beloved generally by his People , and his Death much lamented . Again , under the Reign of K. james , there were no Taxes at all : And as for some forward proceedings , which disgusted many , he acted by the Advice of his Judges , assuring him , that his Prerogative ( of which every King is tenacious ) did warrant the Legality of his Actions . Indeed , I must join with Mr. Blatant in this , That he had the Misfortune to have had an haughty Chancellor , whose Humour led him to carry all things with huffing and a braggadochio height of Arbitrary Authority ; which did not a little contribute to lose his Prince the Love of many ; and that king 's different Religion made the People easily susceptible of sinister Impressions ; which disgusted men made it their Business to improve and heighten with ridiculous Lies and groundless Jealousies . 

But why does not he apologise for the Truth of the more secret Transactions ? A man would think that the more secret they are , the more clear the Proofs ought to be , since the Blacker the Objects are , the more Light is requisite to make them perfectly Visible . Why no Apology then for the Truth of those private Concerns , wrapped up in the mysterious Veil of Cabinet-counsels and State-policy ? The Reason why he gives none , is , because The Consequences and Events are his Testimonies . But this poor Babbler is mightily out in his Logic ; for , we ought to see his Premises are true , ever any Truth can follow from them : Since , if this be not first made good , let his Consequences be as well knit to them as he pleases , his Conclusions may all be false . Now the Consequences he draws , rely upon some pretended Papers , Letters , and Treaties , and an innumerable company of wild Stories , babbled up and down by the Factious Party that forged them themselves . These therefore a solid man would have made it his first care to prove , that they could not be Forgeries or Mistakes . But never was Writer so slight in that main Performance : He barely puts down , That such a thing was printed , such a thing written or talked , and so let's it shift as well as it can for its own authenticness , and appuys himself on the hope he has of his reader 's Bias towards his side ; or on his good-natured Credulity ; and if these fail him , good-night to Blatant's whole Libel . At least , if the Reader must trust his Word or Judgement , it would have been some glimmering of Satisfaction to him , had he told him what Means he had ( above other men ) to know such Passages to be true , where he had seen the Records , in whose Hands they are or were , and suchlike , and not to leave his Reader in an Amusement , how he came to be so particularly enlightened , as to know that what was thus printed or written , or said , was a Certain Truth , and to be firmly relied on . 

Thus much for his Premises , on the Truth of which all depends . Next , even supposing some of his Premises were Certainly True , yet his pretended Consequences can never be a perfect Apology , unless he shows the necessary Connexion of the one to the other : For , if the thing might possibly spring from another Cause than what he assigns , viz. [ the Design of introducing Popery and Slavery , ] then 't is far from being an Apology for the Truth of that for which he brings it . To examine this then a little more narrowly , I affirm , That either these Consequences , which are to testify the Truth of those more secret Transactions , do follow naturally from the more public one ; or they require some Skill to deduce them . If the former , than every man of an ordinary pitch of Reason would be able to see them , as well as this Owl-eyed fellow , and his Party ; and then he might have spared his Pains , it being to no purpose ; for , in that case , he would have told us no News but what we knew before . If the later , we ought to be satisfied of Blatant's Skill in drawing his Consequences , and partly on his unbyast Sincerity . His Passion too visibly manifests his want of the later ; and as for the former , he must pardon us if we cannot admire him ; for , 't is visible through his whole Libel , that his Malice so transports him , that ( as shall be seen ) he makes any thing follow out of any thing : Nay , should a sober man deduce them , they do far more naturally bear another shape ; and can fright no man , unless such weak Souls , whom Blatant's Bugbear Stories have made believe that every Bush is a Spirit . 

Take an Instance or two , how , though this Libeler may be gifted in other Performances , yet his Skill in drawing Consequences is very untoward and even ridiculous . The Dutch War is levelled by him ( p. 42. ) at the mere bringing in of Popery and Slavery . Whereas , they being our known Competitors in Shipping and Trade , and daily encroaching upon us ( not to speak of their owing us satisfaction for old Injuries , recounted in the Book entitled , Amboina ) a War once in Seven or ( at farthest ) Ten Years was ever held by our wisest Statesmen , in former times , ( for I meddle not with what is our Interest now ) as seasonable and necessary , as is the lopping off the under-growing Suckers , that intercept the Sapritius from the Tree , which gave them Life and Nourishment : And it has ever been imputed to K. james the First , as the most impolitic Act he ever did , and of the most dangerous Consequence to the Interest of England , that , out of his too great love of Peace , he did not kerb the Growth of Holland , but let them rise to such a height of Power , as to be our Equals at Sea ; in which the Wisdom of Q. Elizabeth , and her Council , thought fit severely to restrain them . Yet this babbling Libeler can see no reason in the World for a War with Holland , ( how long soever it had been intermitted ) but merely the introducing of Popery and Slavery , upon no other account , ( says he , p. 42. ) but because they sheltered and protected those whom K. Ch. and the French King persecuted for their Religion . He has forgot , that the long Parliament made War with them upon the score of Interest , without any design sure of introducing Popery by that means . He has forgot too , that the Persecution of the French Hugunots , and their running hither for shelter , was long after that War , which he makes to be the Cause of it . He has forgot how many of them sheltered themselves lately here in England , even under K. james the Second , who not only afforded them Refuge , but also recommended the Relieving them , and to that degree , that it invited Swarms of them to follow , till they grew fat and rich , and fared better than ever they did in their own Country , to the great impoverishment of our English Tradesmen , and ruin of innumerable poor Families , by intercepting their Gain , and under working them . Lastly , He has quite forgot what kind of Christians they were whom chief K. Ch. the Second persecuted , ( that is , permitted Q Elizabeth's Laws against them to be executed ) viz. The most violent-humoured Fanatics , who were ever and anon raising Disturbance both in Church and State ; the rest of the more quiet Dissenters suffered for their sakes , it being impracticable to separate them . 

The reason then of that War with Holland , is obvious to every Eye but Blatant's ; and that it was held then the true Interest of England : Nor would any King in the World , though he had been of the same Religion with them , disaccept the Assistance of another King , if offered , let him be of what Religion he will , for then the Work would both be the easier , and the burden of it lie more light upon England . But let our Blatant take the business in hand , with his special Gift of drawing Consequences , the whole Action , and every Step that was taken in it , shall clearly demonstrate an arrant Design of introducing Slavery and Popery , however remote and impertinent the Premises are from the Conclusion ; and no more hang together than the building of Tenterdon's Steeple does with the stopping of Goodwin's Sands . But , alas ! This is one of his stoutest and most Achillean Arguments ; K. Ch. the Second could not keep a Miss for his Pleasure , but , have-at him with a Consequence , cries Blatant , ( p. 26. ) ergo , it was a mere Plot of his to debauch the Nation , and so to introduce Popery and Slavery . The then D. of York took an innocent Nap at Sea. A clear Case , says our man of Consequences , ( p. 160. ) that it was a mere treacherous Plot , to let the Dutch beaten the English , and make 'em destroy one another to bring in Slavery and Popery . Our allseeing Blatant could peep into his Fancy , though the Windows of his Senses were shut up , and craftily spy out his very Dreams , and there read plainly , that he was still plotting Slavery and Popery , even in his Sleep . Nay more , he makes him to be a man of such a Chimerical Composition , ( p. 161. ) that he both procured the firing the Dutch Ships in their Harbours , and also procured the firing of our Ships at Chatham ; and to mend the Jest , our implacable Blatant , whose ambi-sinistrous Humour nothing can please , is very angry with him for doing both the one and the other : Most Unhappy they that offend this man , or come under his Clutches ; for , let them do things quite contradictory to one another , they shall still be sure to do wrong . Yet to do the Libeler Right , he has once in his life drawn a very clear Consequence , if we will out of kindness grant his Principle , which is the sure Basis of his whole Book , viz. That [ Whatever K. Ch. the Second , or K. james the Second either did , or can be said or pretended to do , must needs be Wicked , Bloody , Treacherous , etc. because it is done , or said to be done by Them ] or , as Hudibras has it , Thou there were nothing to forbid it , 
't is Impious yet , because They did it . 


His skewing and screwed Deductions of this kind are innumerable ; which show our Libeler , to give him his due , no mean Artist , to clutter so many of them together in so little a room , and to tack them to one another , to make his Tale tell smoothly , with such a dexterous Confidence ; for it requires no small Skill to make a Rope of Sand , which is Blatant's Master piece : Yet upon my word , he crowns the Work , and fortifies his Redoubts beyond all possibility of Attack ( pawn 28. ) by assuring the Reader ( and who dares disbelieve him ? ) that his pretended Proofs are Geometrical Demonstrations . Is not this a pleasant Fellow , to expose himself thus to the Scorn and Laughter of Learned men , by venting such Stuff as this for Demonstration ? Indeed , in one sense his Discourse may be called Geometrical ; for , abating his own numberless Fictions , which give a loose kind of Contexture to the whole , the Thrums-ends of his Tittle-tattle hang together by Geometry ; as will more amply appear hereafter . 

This then is the Success of his Consequences , which were to apologise for the Truth of his Libel . The other thing he alleges in his Preface , to bear Testimony to the Truth of what he writes , is , The Events : But these can do him no Service at all ; for no such Events as he feared have happened ; nor have either Popery or Slavery been introduced , much lesle forced upon England . King's may possibly , in some particulars , be misled by flattering Judges , or other ill Counsel , to extend their Prerogative ; and Subjects may take Shadow at some Actions of theirs , and , giving way to groundless Jealousies , be as much mistaken in cramping and retrenching their Just Power ; and yet neither the former have the least Intention tyrannically to enslave the People , nor the later have any thought of being Traitors to their King : Both are Men , and so both may err in such cases , without pushing every thing to such lewd Extremities as this Incendiary does . K. Ch. the Second might endeavour to get the Roman Catholics some Ease , and Security for the Private Exercise of their Religion , ( or perhaps now and then put some person , whom he held to be faithful to him , and fit for the Place , into an Office ) without incurring a just imputation of a Design of introducing Popery . To let some men say their Prayers after their own way , is not to bid or force others to join with them , or become of their Persuasion ; nay , he was in some sort bound to be thus Civil to them both in Equity and Conscience : For , how ungrateful had it been in him , when he was restored to his Crown , to have , by a public Act , indemnified all his Enemies , and at the same time , to have persecuted those who were , and had ever been , his constant and faithful Friends ? Many of them had assisted towards his Maintenance when he was beyond Sea , had forfeited their Estates , and lost their Lives , for him and his Father in England : could any Good man than do lesle in Honour , than protect such Loyal persons , such faithful Friends , and such kind Benefactors ? King james the Second ( besides the former Motives ) took himself to be yet more particularly obliged in Honour and Conscience to do the same , having publicly professed himself to be of that Persuasion : Nor would any Prince living , in his case , do other ; nor , indeed , could he do lesle , without declaring himself , at the same time , to be an Hypocrite , as not valuing the Religion he professed , or thinking it ought to be protected ; whereas yet the Sincerity of his Conscience was manifest to the whole World , by his going so plainly against his Interest , as to hazard the loss of Three Kingdoms , rather than quit the Persuasion he had embraced . And , for the same reason , it was but decent for a Prince of that Communion to send an Ambassador to Rome , ( though Blatant , after his usual manner , belies his Errand ) to receive a Nuntio thence , and to make some Ecclesiastical Superiors here to preserve Discipline and Good Life amongst Roman Catholics . But , that either of these two Princes ( though they might intend that Party a kind of Freedom , and some Favours ) could aim at the introducing Popery , or forcing it upon their English Subjects , or , by means of that Party , Slavery , is as wild a Conceit as ever entered into a raving Head. The Papists , 't is well known , are but an handful to all England ; but a Breakfast , should all the rest rise up to devour them . Add , That an Army , of which seven parts of eight were protestants , ( and the Militia of England were all of them the same ) was the most unlikely Means in the World to compass such an End , or rather it was such a Remora , as made it impossible to be ever compassed : Nor wants it weight , that a Declaration for Liberty of Conscience to all ( so displeasing of late ( p. 202. ) to our angry Blatant , who is resolved , that nothing shall pacify his Indignation ) was most solemnly promised , and even too zealously endeavoured to be put in execution , and to be made a firm and unalterable Law of the Land : Which , as it was the best Expedient imaginable to secure the Consciences of all the English Subjects , by making it the Common Interest of the whole Nation , and engaging all Parties to stand up as one man against the Papists , had they ever attempted to violate such a Sanction ; so it is no lesle an irrefragable Evidence of that king 's sincere Intention never to use any Force or Coercion upon any man's Conscience , and a perfect Confutation of that ridiculous Shame , which is made to pass upon the Vulgar , that we must in that case have all turned Papists . This is the true state of that Affair , testified by Common Reason , and abetted by as many Pregnant Evidences , and known Matters of Fact , as a thing of such a nature can possibly bear ; which yet our Libeler paints in the most hideous & monstrous form that his disordered Passion could invent , or his squinting Fancy could delineate . 

Yet I will not make myself so great a Politician , as to contend but there might have been some Miscarriages , ( and , in what Government in the World are there not some ? ) the Sense of which being improved by disgusted men , and noised abroad till they reached the Generality , the Nature ( as it were ) of England conceived itself aggrieved ; and Nature ( as all Histories testify ) will at length work out its way by one means or other , to compass its Real or Imaginary Satisfaction , though perhaps the Remedy , resolved upon in an hurry , sometimes haps to be worse than the Disease . Particularly , to show how far I am from justifying any Action which is indeed Unblameable , I must confess , That the shutting up of the Exchequer by K. Ch. the Second , was a very ill business : Blatant charges it in the foulest Language , p. 62. yet he might have been so just to that Prince , as to let his Reader know , That this was done by the advice of the Earl of Shaftsbury , to render that King odious ; and that K. Ch. was so sensible of that Injury done to his Subjects , that he settled , by Patent under the Great Seal of England , the Interest of that Money at 6 per Cent. to be paid out of the Hereditary Excise , till the Principal could be discharged ; which Settlement all the great Lawyers in England did agree to be a Legal and Good Security : So that it was far from being such a notorious Robbery as our Blatant represents it . Indeed , the not paying the Interest afterwards though so legally due , was a very high Injustice . But , as he charges it not , so 't is not my Office , or pertinent to my Business in hand , to determine where the Fault lay ; only I must say , That the Complaints of thousands , who are undone by the detaining it , cry aloud to Heaven , till that Oppression be redressed , and Satisfaction be made for their Sufferings . He might have told us too , ( for it is true ) That K. james the Second , then D. of York , did with his own Hands bring a Bill into the House of Lords , to have that Settlement confirmed by Act of Parliament , and never desisted till it had passed that House , in the year 78.  But that Parliament being prorogued , that business , though well intended , failed of success . 

His other Arts are to give an ill turn to every Transaction , and lay hold of it by the wrong Handle . A method , by which 't is easy for any babbling fellow , endowed with a pretty Tantum of Wit , to travesty all the most Sacred Actions , and traduce the Intentions of the most Innocent persons in the World. He builds much upon little tattling Court-stories , gossiped amongst the Ladies , which never wanted in any Reign , nor do they at present : Yet till our Blatant , for want of better Stuff , thought fit to make use of them , no wise man ever held them worth the bringing upon the Tapis , or indeed worth heeding , much lesle judged them to be a competent Ground to bear such heavy Charges against Kings and Princes . He picks up all the abominable Fictions invented and spread in the Plot-time by the factious Sticklers , though every one of them that was of moment , was a confuted Lie , either proved by plain Experience , or by Legal Evidences sworn openly in Court ; or , at least , branded for Untruths by the Recorded Perjury of the Testimony on which solely they were built : And then , lest those Prejudices against his Stories should be of any weight , he arraigns' all the Judges and Juries as Popishly affected , though they were all of them , to a man , protestants . If any of his own Party do but hold up his Hand at the Bar , 't is made a flat Condemnation of the whole Court , and a Geometrical Demonstration with him , that they were all of them most abominable Papists . His Topics ▪ of this sort make up near one Third of his Libel . 

He traduces even the Devotions of K. Ch. the Second , ( p. 21. ) for that Prince might have intended Liberty of Conscience to all at that time , which , after he came into England , the Necessity of Affairs , or the Treasonable Demerits of diverse of the Fanatic Party , might show him to be hic & nunc against the Common Good , and therefore in these Circumstances imprudent . Or he might have intended it still , though he did not then execute it : And , indeed , 't is manifest he did so , by his attempting to introduce it afterwards ; but , by the opposition made against it , he found it impracticable . However , he made it evident , that the not giving Liberty of Conscience then , stuck not at him . 

His Confident sayings , without any Proof , are numberless , and make up above half his Book . Take a few Instances : He would almost make his Reader believe ( p. 27. ) that he had seen the King write a Letter to the Pope , in the year 62 , for not the least Proof does he offer for it , nor do any of his pretended Apologies reach to excuse him , for laying such a Scandal . He affirms , as stoutly ( pawn 29. ) as if he had been present , That all who had been abroad with that King ( except three ) had bound themselves by Oaths and Promises to assist in the Design of extirpating the Protestant Religion ; and othing but one hotheaded Presbyterian , ( whose Name too we must ot know , for fear of catching him in a Lie ) quoted for it , who was laughed at , I fear , by the Parliament for a Madman . But I am afraid our Blatant is pleased to tell us an egregious Tale in this his Rant of Calumny . What thinks he of my Lord Chancellor Hyde , who was one of those abroad with that King , and one of the Three excepted ? Was he too sworn to extirpate Protestant Religion ? Certainly that noble Peer had the worst Luck of any man living , to be looked upon by Roman Catholics as one who , out of zealous Affection to the Protestant Religion , was their great Adversary ; and yet , if we may believe Blatant , was by Oath bound to extirpate protestants to set up Popery . 

He relies ( pawn 52. ) upon a Libel printed at Paris , which he confesses , p. 50 , was done by the French King , to make King Ch. despair of ever being trusted or forgiven by his People ; that is , it was done by him to set England in Confusion . Now , had it made for his purpose , he would in another Circumstance have sworn it was a Politic Invention , contrived by that King to do a Mischief to England ; but his Design here was to disgrace K. Ch. and therefore it must necessarily be a most Certain Truth . Nay , our kind Blatant co-operates with the French king 's pretended Design , or rather outdoes him : For , the French King ever asserted the Truth of that Libel , but stifled it , and punished the Author ; whereas our Blatant vouches the Truth of it , and ( unless he will be ungrateful ) must acknowledge an high Obligation to the man who counterfeited and printed it , since he has afforded him such a precious Lie to lay load on that King , which is his Darling Design . 

That the French King was supplied by K. Ch. with Arms and Ammunition , to take ( his own ) the English Ships , is so senseless a Calumny , that it would honour it too much to go about to confute it : For , it depends on his bare word , or rather , 't is against his own words ; for , he confesses , p. 89 , That K. Ch. sent to expostulate and require Satisfaction for the Injuries done to the English ; but yet , he turns it off to another business , and assures his Reader this was but a pretence ; and than who dares disbelieve a Person of that high Honour , who creates and annihilates Truths at his pleasure , by virtue of his special Gift of diving into Man's Intentions ? 

He takes the part of all the Traitors , against our Kings and Government ; he licks up all the venomed Stuff that the Salamanca Dr. had vomited , and magnifies his unblushing Impudence and his pregnant Reasons , ( p. 94. ) I suppose he means his many and palpable self-contradictions ; as is shown evidently , beyond confute , in the Treatise entitled , Titus against Oats . Nor do I wonder he should retain such a special Kindness for that Gentleman , for standing as he does , perjured upon Record ; he is the honester man for it in Blatant's Judgement ; only , he should be a little startled , had he the least Grain of Indifferency left him , to see , That that Ignominious Brand is so perpetually and unremovably fixed upon him , that the stickling of all his best Friends , in a late House of Commons , could not , ( even in that most favourable juncture ) procure him to be unstigmatized and re-qualifyed for a Witness . no truer is his Assertion ( p. 95. ) That Coleman confessed there was a Plot against our Laws , Liberties , and Religion , and that it was advanced so far , and seconded by persons of that Quality in the Nation , and Figure in the Government , that there was no possibility to give a Let or Disappointment to it . Which is a Fardel of Lies packed up together , without either Proof or Shame ; as are also the Messages between Coleman and the Duke , so impudently asserted in the next Page . 

He confesses , ( p. 115. ) that Dangerfield was a Miscreant and a Rascal , yet takes his bare Word against the King and his Royal Brother , that they hugged , caressed , and feed him privately : But now , let Common Sense beware , and stand out of the way , for Blatant is going to bring his Argument , which will , we may be sure , knock down all the Reason of Mankind , that dares stand against it . P. 165. he tells us , That 't is a most convincing Proof of the Truth of Dangerfield is Examination , that the Duke hated him for it after the Discovery . Very good : But , in case he belied the Duke when examined , why might not his Resentment against him afterwards arise from thence ? And , if so , how is the Duke's Anger a convincing Proof he spoke Truth , when the same Anger was more justly deserved by him for witnessing Lies ? So that we must have recourse to Dangerfield's Personal Credit for the Truth of his Testimony ; and , how great that was , Blatant himself tells us , p. 115. viz. That he was a needy Profligate , a Miscreant , an Impostor , a Rascal , an unpardoned Coiner , and a Common Cheat. This is to be meant ( we must understand ) what Dangerfield was in puris naturalibus , before he became Regenerate , by doing Service to the Faction ; but as soon as ever , following the vogue of the Times , he took the Boldness to abuse and belly the King and his Brother , This Man for my Money , cries Blatant , I 'll warrant him an Honest man , and a Sincere Witness . This , this alone atones for all his past Misdemeanours , & sanctifies him immediately into a Babe of Grace . Such another Job he affords us , p. 129.  Fitzharris , he confesses , said backward and forward : Score him up then for another irrefragable Witness against the King and the Duke , says honest Blatant . 

It were easy to refute all his Cavils concerning Argyle , Russel , Essex , etc. but that it has been done over and over by better Pens : Had he candidly informed the Reader with what was alleged and proved concerning them or their Cause , he might have had some Light what to think of it ; but our Libeler conceals all that was objected and evidenced , and tells Stories of his own Factious Copartners , which he seconds with multitudes of his own Forgeries , scatteringly intermixed , and ( so selfconceited he is ) that he hope's such light Stuff will counterpoise the Gravity of Courts , and the Justice of the Nation . But , above all , I wonder he was not ashamed to object the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey , after he had seen the Mystery of his Death unfolded by Sir Roger L'estrange ; where he will find no such Stuff as his own bare sayings , or Tattles of the Multitude , or the Words of biased men ; but the sworn Attestations of a great number of Indifferent persons of all sorts , conspiring so perfectly to the same Truth , that they force Human Nature to see evidently the Conclusion ; to answer the least of whose many Arguments , is beyond the Skill of all the Blatants living . 

But , o ! how he triumphs in the Testimony of his new Evidence , Dorothy Smith ! After all the baffled Shams of Braddon , and the rest of that Seditious Gang , which he furbishes up again , and varnishes over ( pawn 177 , 178 , 179. ) with a voluntary Lie ( without any Proof offered for it ) in almost every Line , this pitiful Drudge comes , like another Daniel , to discover that sinful Account of Murdering the Earl : But , I beseech you , good Mr. Blatant , why was not this Authentic Kitchenwench called before the Parliament lately , nor Holland neither , though kept in Prison to that purpose , when that business was moved ? It would have pleased all your Friends infinitely , to have had that Earl's Murder , by the Duke's Order , well proved at that time of day : Nor wanted they Zeal to prosecute it , had they judged they had competent Witnesses to make good the Charge . But , you know well , that such a Choak-pear was put to that Calumny , by Witnesses of another kind of Quality than Dol was , that the intended Prosecution was passed over as desperate , He says ( p. 178. ) That several were ready to depose ; But , why came they not in then , when the late Parliament sat ? Who discouraged them ? Or rather , indeed , who durst have hindered them at a season when it was meritorious to blacken K. james all that was possible ? As for Dol's Testimony , it discredits itself : The pretended Murderers must needs meet at her master 's ; must needs speak so loud and so carelessly , as to let the Protestant Maid hear them , both before and after the Murder was committed : Nay , she must needs be gadding abroad , and have business obliging her to walk , a little before the Earl's death , before his Chamber Window , in the Tower : She , who , as he told us ( p. 178. ) lived in a by-corner in the Town , what had she to do there ? Or , if she had , why must her Business invite her thither just when the Earl was to be killed ? How comes it , that she alone must hear a great trampling and bustling in his Chamber , see three or four Heads move close together , and hear a loud and doleful Cry of Murder ? The upshot is , Dol was in every place , and just at the very nick of time too , wherever her Inspirers could have wished her to be : An evident Token of a Lie and Subordination to boot , as could be imagined ! And so much for Dol. The rest is the unattested words of a dead Man , and Blatant's own Forgeries or Conjectural Conceits . 

Of the same leaven is his positive affirming ( pawn 187 , 188. ) not only without Proof , but against the Senses of all the persons and the Records of the Court , that his dear Brother Dr. Oats was condemned for Perjury by Witnesses already falsified and known Papists : Whereas , whoever heard that Trial , as I myself did , know well , that not any one Witness against Oats was convicted of Perjury , as also , that there were many protestants , who swore positively against him ; the Religion of each Witness being asked publicly and particularly . 't is well the House of Lords were Sitting when Blatant printed his Libel , or he would have mauled them all for Papists , for not reversing that Sentence against that First Saviour of the Nation , when it was pressed so mightily by the House of Commons . But , how bitterly Blatant declames there against the Whipping Punishment ! Poor man ! the dreadful Lashes which he fears he may bring upon his own back , are so lively by Anticipation imprinted in his Fancy , that the Idea of them makes all the Humours in his Composition turn Choler , at the very thought of so rough an usage , likely to be his own Lot.  

What a pother he keeps ( pawn 193. ) about K. James' endeavouring to bring the Corporations on his side ! I meddle not with the Legality of any such Proceeding , humbly acknowledging , that I want the high Privilege which Blatant assumes to himself , of knowing better what is Law than all the judges , or what is more conducing to the Common Good , than does a King ; only I may , with his Leave , venture to say what every man knows , and the Matter of Fact testifies , That that King's Reason for doing it , was to get Liberty of Conscience enacted by Law , and this too , after his having used all other means he could invent to bring it about other ways . Why Blatant should be so angry at that which would have been so grateful to all his Friends , must be imputed to his inveterate Distemper of Mind , which is altogether incurable , since even such Lenitives are so far from asswaging it , that they exasperated it the more . Furious Choler is so rooted in his very Composition , that 't is beyond all the Power of Hellebore to purge it away . 

I must not forget how he lays open at large , from p. 11 , to p. 19 a Treaty of K. Ch. the Second with the Pope , in the Year 52. counterfeited most certainly by some former Blatant ; For , 't is so very ridiculous in all its parts , that none but a Madman would have proposed it to the Belief of any man of common sense : For , first , what show of Reason is there , that K. Ch. would have closed so with Rome , while he was in Scotland , this being the only way to ruin himself as soon as he was newly come into a good condition ? 2.  What a silly thing it is to desire the Pope to cause the whole beneficed Clergy in the World , of what Dignity , Degree , State or Condition soever to contribute the third or fourth part of all their Fruits , Rents , Revenues or Emoluments to a War against England . In the emperor 's great necessity , when the Common Good of all Christendon seemed to be concerned , the Turk then ravaging Hungary as far as Vienna , it was never known that any asked , or the Pope gave , more than a Tenth , and this not in all Countries , but in some few only . 3.  What an imprudent and odd Expression is that [ the whole beneficed Clergy in the World ] Did that Forger think , or , could K. Ch. imagine , that the beneficed Clergy in Russia , the Country of the Abyssins' , and many others , are at the Pope's beck , or under his Jurisdiction ? At least , if it means all under the Pope , could it be thought fit , that the Roman Catholics in America should contribute to the European Wars ? 4.  What mean the Words [ cause and compel ] every wise man knows , that all the Pope can do in such cases , is , to exhort or permit , leaving it to the respective Princes , to whom they are subject ; to compel them to contribute , and that himself can compel none out of the Ecclesiastical State , of which he is the Temporal Prince . 5.  What an impertinent thing it is to request , that the Pope would admonish them all to have no Commerce with England ? A very likely thing , that so many Nations will wrong their own Interest in such an high manner , as to leave Trading with England at the Pope's Entreaty ! Lastly , Grant it , That the than Governors in England were sworn Enemies to Monarchy ; yet , what a loud and senseless Lie it is , That both in Germany , Spain , France , Polonia , etc. and in the very Dominions of the Great Turk , they have raised and fomented dangerous Insurrections , and that , to that purpose they supply the Charge , and make large Contributions to it . And certainly , they must be very large ones that can supply the Charge of pulling down the settled Government of all those Countries , ( besides what the large , etc. includes ) and making so many Commonwealths of them . Is not this man frantic , to write at this mad rate ? Yet , this he makes vast use of ; nay , and to abett it , he name's Father Dawly , that went to Rome about it . Now , the truth is , That that Gentleman's Business was , to get K. john the Fourth to be owned for K. of Portugal by the Pope , and by that means to obtain Bishops for that Kingdom , than quite destitute of them ; and the Point where it stuck , was , That the Pope , out of fear of disgusting Spain , hung back then from acknowledging that Prince for King , and Bishops ( according to their Laws ) could not be had without the King's nomination . This is the Truth of that Affair , the rest is mere Fiction , and the silliest one , into the Bargain , that ever was forged ; which , in all likelihood , was the reason that the whole Story was torn out of Whitlock's Memorial , before they were published , lest it should discredit the whole Book and its Author . 

Just such another Flame ( p. 144 , 145. ) is his Story of a Treaty with the K. of Poland , about establishing the Roman-catholick Religion ; and this he calls , An undeniable Convincement to all the World of the Truth of what has been hitherto said . Observe , by the way , that all he has said hitherto , cannot so convince , but it may be denied , if the Strength of this Story , which is to support them all , does hap to falter . no doubt then , but he will exert his very utmost Endeavours to make it evident , since so precious a Concern as is the Vndeniable Truth of that has been said hitherto , lies at stake . He proves it notably , by its standing still Recorded under K. Ch. his own Hand . By my Faith , this looks terribly : By the way , 't is the first time I ever heard that Kings did use to record things with their own Hands : But , let that pass . How proves he , that it stands still recorded under his own Hand ? Mary , he proves it with an [ If ] ; If ( says he ) the Original of the Instructions be extant . Very good : The Argument stands thus . If the Original of the Instructions to the Ambassador be still extant , than the thing is undeniably true . Well ; but is the Original indeed still extant ? I do not know that , says Blatant , and can only say , If it be . Is there , at least , an Authentic Copy of it extant ? He knows not that neither , else we should have heard News of it . Nor , if there were , is it sufficient to render his Proof undeniable , it being wholly built on this , that the thing stands Still recorded under the king 's own Hand . So that the Truth of all that he has hitherto said , for 144 Pages , stands or falls by the strength of the doughty and most substantial Proof [ If. ] Whence if honest [ If ] chance but to totter , and 't is Ten Million to none it will , seeing its very nature and notion expresses Tottering ; and 't is known , that a Conditional Proposition puts nothing in re , than all Blatant's Heroic Achievements hitherto , as to their Truth , fall to the Ground . Does such a silly Puppy ever hope to gain Belief from any man that is not a mere Natural ? Yet this is the very Genius of his way of Talking , throughout his Book : He will speak so Big , and run on with such a rushing Career , that he over-bears the Reason of a well-minded Reader , and wheedles , or rather hurries , him into a Belief that all is Real that is delivered so confidently ; but , if he be so considerate , as to suspend till he sees the Force of his Proof , not a Line shall he find that has the least show of true Evidence ; but that , what gives a kind of Counterfeit Life to his whole Discourse , is his sputtering , and keeping a great coil and clutter to amuse weak Readers , and put them at their Wits-end what to think . Only , they can see , that either Blatant ▪ is the Greatest Liar living , or , every man he is offended at , is the Greatest Knave in Nature . Whether of them is thus faulty , any sober man may easily divine by his Natural Reason , without needing to go to a Vizard . 

We have seen by these few Instances picked out of many , ( and I made choice of those I judged his strongest and most important ) what a terrible Beast Blatant is at laying his Grounds , and drawing his Conclusions ; and that either his own Forgeries , or those of others , are generally his only Premises , or else that his Consequences from some True Principle or True Relation of Matter of Fact are mere Paralogisms . Which , put together , show him to be a Desert●● of Human Reason , which consists in the inferring Necessary Consequences from firm Premises or Principles . I● remains now to Examine what he defers to Authority : For , if he bot● wilfully baffles Reason , and with●● despises Authority , he has nothing i● the World left to support his Credit in the least , but must be look●● upon as a wretched Deserter of Human Nature , and a Brutish Monster in the shape of a Man  

How saucily he bears himself towards particular persons , though sea●ed in a high Place of Authority , hi● Carriage towards Sir Lionel jenkins' one of King Charles his Principal S●●cretarieses of State informs us , p. 119● That Worthy Gentleman behaved himself so moderately , and civilly in that Employment , that he was esteemed by all , but the Factious , to be a true Lover of Integrity and Justice ; nor was he Hated even by those generally , but only by some few of them ; and this merely upon the Score of executing his Office ; which , when their Demerits required it , was the unavoidable Duty of an Honest Man Yet he falls upon him very rudely , ( p. 119. ) tells us , he was a Fool as well as a Knave ; makes him in a manner , accessary to a supposed Murder ( which never was , the Person being alive still ) by concealing it . Lastly , he makes him a Papist in his Heart , or One of F. Goff's Creatures ; but brings no particular Reason for it but his Fasting , which he makes one Infallible Token of it : Whence we may gather , That our Jolly Libeler uses to Feast for his Sins , and to eat heartily of the best , to correct his inordinate Appetite , and Tame his Original Concupiscence . He tells us , indeed , in common Words that there are other I●●fallible Tokens of the same ; whic● we may imagine are to be brought to light , when our Infallible Libe●●ler's' Fancy has coined or created them . But his Anger spring's only hence that he lived and died a True Son o● the Church of England , and a stric● Observer of Her Ancient Canons which in Blatants deep Judgement are Popish enough in all Conscience . 

Our judges and juries are the Deciders in Ordinary , of all Law-controversies , and the Dispenser's of Justice to every English Subject ; an● if they loose the Repute of Unbyas● Honesty , no Man can think he shal● be able either to keep or recover hi● own , or that any Verdict given by them , is Lawful and Valid ; especially , should they be represented as Godless Wretches and Monsters for Injustice . Their Authority then , as one would think , aught to be preserved inviolate , and their Credit secured from public Reproach , under ●he highest Penalties to those who ●hould Libel them in any Infamous manner . But ever we entertain too ●ood an Opinion of them , or their authority either , we must first know ●latant's Thoughts in the Matter , or we shall be sure to incur his heavy Displeasure , and fall into the same Condemnation . Who , p. 194. speaking of the Twelve Judges , passes ●entence upon them from his Supreme Court of Judicature , that they overturned the very Fundamentals of Human Society , etc.  This is very ●●d , and I hope is not True : For ●hey seemed Civil Gentlemen , and , ●or any thing we can discern , Mankind held Society and Commerce with one another , just as they did ●●rmerly , notwithstanding their Determination in Favour of the Royal prerogative . One would not think that this should make them such inhuman Barbarians . Yes , says Blatant , they had abandoned all high Opinion of God and Nature , and quit all sense of Conscience and True Honour . Here we see this poor wretch not only make himself more skilful in Law , than all the Twelve judges in the Nation , but their Superior too to whip them with the Iron-rod of his Indignation ; nay , to search their very Consciences , and know their Religious or Irreligious Tenets to a tittle . Atheists indeed , have abandoned all high Opinion of a God , but yet they retain a mighty Opinion of Nature ; but these judges are far worse than Atheists , for they ( according to Blatant ) have no good Opinion of God , nor Nature neither ; which signifies they are not Men but Devils . A moderate Man , who had disliked their proceedings , would have been content to say , that they complied out of Fear or Interest . But Blatant comes Armed with Terror , wherever he attacques , and thunders out no lesle than Hell and Damnation , against all those poor Sinners which are of his own Creation : Nor let us think 't is only against our English Judges ( or upon this occasion ) that he bears them this Grudge ; for he assures us , ( p. 172. ) That the judges and juries of Scotland , ( though every one of them were protestants themselves ) were as Malicious against the protestants , as the Duke of York was . And how Malicious was that ? Why he tells us ever and anon , in his Libel , that he was their avowed Enemy , and wished them all destroyed . Fie upon these Judges and Juries ; for certainly they 'll never leave their Cruelty , till they have destroyed all Mankind but themselves . 't is pity that they are not summoned before the highest Court of Justice ( this Wretches angry Fury ) and there sentenced to be hanged together for a Pack of Graceless Villains . We are to Note that all this heat spring's from their Condemning a most desperate and incorrigible Scotch Presbyterian Traitor , Robert Bailzic of jerismond ; for all the whole Brotherhood of them are ( by I cannot tell what Commission ) Blatants peculiar Care. He chuckles them all under his Wing , and there they ( or at least their Credits ) are safe , against all those Foxes and Kites ; Kings , Princes , Privy - Councillors , Secretaries of State , and especially against those most abominable Fellows , judges and juries . 

Perhaps , the Right Reverend Bishops of the Church of England ( especially having shown themselves so hearty against Popery of late ) may obtain the Equitable Favour from him , to be esteemed good Men , and good protestants . no ; not a jot ; For he complains sadly , ( p. 32 , 33. ) That many of the greatest Bishops in K. Ch. his time were still ( that is , all along ) chosen out of the number of Papists , or else were such as were of no Religion at all . What! Many of the Bishops , and those of the Greatest , and this still , that is continually during his Reign ! Most certainly , if Blatant's Word be Oracle , there are , even now , not a few of the Churchof - England's Greatest Bishops , who are either Atheists or Papists . Now , by his currying Favour with the present Government , we are not to think that he means , the Swearing Bishops , but such as are , His Grace my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury , the good Bishops of Ely , of Bath and Wells , etc. and the words [ Greatest Bishop's ] seem to aim at them . And , why should these be held Papists , who in the Opinion of the Presbyterians themselves , have both acted and suffered for keeping up the Protestant Religion , and stood in the Gap , to keep out Popery ? This is a thing cannot be denied by the most shameless Slanderer . All this is true , says Blatant ; but , o ! this Fasting ; this most abominable Sin , Fasting ; this infallible Token of Popery , Fasting , will never agree with Blantant's Stomach ! wherefore those Bishops being known to be exceedingly addicted to that worst of Popish Vices , shall never have any Quarter from our Bacchanal Libeler . But , let them do what they can , as long as they wear that Badge of Popery [ Fasting ] Papists they must and shall be with him . Would it not now be a pleasant Comment upon that place in Scripture , where our Saviour says , That such a sort of Devils are not cast out , but by Prayer and Fasting ; to take the word [ Fasting ] in Blatant's Notion , and say , that the meaning is , They are to be cast out by Prayer and Popery ? Yet 't is not Bishops alone he thus reproaches ; his Hand was in , and he lays about him at all that come in his way . It was but Many of the Greatest Bishops that he made to be Atheists or Papists ; but he lays the same Scandal without any Restriction , upon all the Ambassadors , General's , and Ministers of State , ( p. 32. ) and affirms they were still chosen out of the number of Papists , or such as were of no Religion at all . Which is to give the open Lie to the Certain Knowledge of all England to the contrary , and to make himself justly liable , did not his Mask a little conceal him , to as many Whip for Scandala magnatum , as there were noble Personages in England , who had born those Employments , and yet were zealous protestants . 

But these Gentlemen , though of most Honourable and Sacred Quality , are not thus scattered thinly into so many particular persons , an Adequate Object for Blatant's Noble Displeasure : Have at them then All at once , assembled in a Parliament . He gives it them home , upon my word , with a facetious Jeer into the Bargain , and tells us ( p. 101. ) That the Protestant Parliament paid double for the keeping up a Popish Army , to secure the Protestant Religion . Nay , and that they did it contentedly to . Which is an Impudent Lie in every particular ; for neither was that Army in the least Popish , nor kept up for any end of securing or meddling with Religion , but upon other Scores ; but he twists together ( as is his constant fashion ) a many little Ends of Falsehoods , and not one of them proved , which his awkward Fancy casts into a smooth Narrative-frame , to patch up an invidious Story , and then thinks his Work is done . 't is a Thousand pities the Wisdom of the Nation did not consult the Oracle of this Fellow's Judgement ; for than they could not have done amiss ; whereas now , though not in express words , yet we may see , that at the bottom of his Heart , he holds that whole Parliament , as he did Sir Lionel , to be a pack of Knaves or Fools , or both . 

't is hard to go higher than to calumniate the Actions and Decrees of Parliaments ( Kings being already so degraded by him , that they are scarce held worthy to follow the Wheels of his Chariot . ) Yet , what think you of the whole Diffusive Body of the Nation at once ? Why , he tells you a piece of his Mind ( p. 33. ) concerning Them too , and that , once upon a time , that is , upon Charles' the Second Restauration , the whole Nation was in a Delirium or Frenzy ; by which he means not that they were thus mad by their former wild Distractions , but by consenting to settle themselves under the Government of their Lawful King , when they could make no other hang together . But , if all the whole Nation was then in a Frenzy , it were not amiss to ask Blatant where he was at that Season ? Not in the Nation , for then , he being a Part of that Whole , must have been mad for Company too , which is not by any means to be said or thought of such a sober man as Blatant is . We ought then to believe , that he was at that time either translated , as Enoch and Elias were , or else rapt to the Third Heavens ; and thence , by a special Mercy , sent down to whip Vice , and tell all Sublunary Kings and Ministers of their manifold and heinous Transgressions . 

Thus we see that our Termagant Hero Blatant , does , like another Drawcansir , take upon him an Absolute and Super-soveraign Dictature , by virtue of which he snubbs Nations , Kings , Parliaments , Ministers of State , bishop , judges , and juries , and , in a word , is Comptroller-general of the whole World at once . He spares none , if they come within the whisking reach of his Flayl , against which there is no Fence , but thrashes them all to Dust. And the reason of it is , because we are to take notice , that this fellow 's profound judgement is the only true Standard and firm Square of all Human Action . He is like Bays in the Rehearsal , who made his Plays his Test , to take the true Dimensions of every man's Parts and Capacity : If they did but approve of his Plays , than he was certain they were wise and judicious persons ; but if they did not , then Igad he knew not what to think of them , he would have nothing to do with them , but let them go for a pack of silly Blockheads and Dunces . So , if any hap to suit with Blatant's Fancy , ( and , as will be seen anon , 't is hard to hit it , without complying with both sides of the Contradiction ) than you shall be Saints , Cherubims , or what else you would wish ; but if you do not , your Doom is passed ; for , be as many for Quantity , or as Great for Quality as you please , Igad you are all stark naught , every Mother's Son of you , and he packs you all away in a Bundle to Old Nick , for a company of Doting , Frantic , Knavish , Villainous , Treacherous , Incestuous , Murdering , Fasting , Popish and Atheistical Rogues and Rascals : You have forsaken the only strait Rule of all Morality , his Infallible Judgement , and so it follows of course , that all you do must of necessity be wicked and abominable . 

These few Instances are more than sufficient to demonstrate , that this Selfconceited Coxcomb makes it his least concern to regard either Sense , Reason , Authority , Truth , or Honesty , but rails on contentedly to himself and his Friends . I could have presented you with thrice as many , had it been needful ; yet , though I omit them , I stand engaged to add one more , relating to one Mr. Sergeant , ( p. 118 , 119. ) which I was the willinger to examine , because I was informed , that he was held by all that knew him ( the Lords of the Privy-council amongst the rest ) to be a man of Sincerity and Ingenuity . Not being acquainted with him , I found means , by a Friend , to send him an exact Copy of half a Page , where he was concerned ; and my Request , that he would please to give me under his Hand , what was the Real Truth of that Story . wherefore , since that Gentleman has been at the pains to write it , and send it me , and withal signified his desire ( if any Answer be made to the Book ) to insert it for his vindication , I ought not ( though it be something longer for one Particular , than suited with the Brevity I ' had intended ) to refuse him that Kindness . Take then his Words , transmitted to me under his own Hand , and signed by himself . SIR , 

Hearing , in the Plot time , that Bedlow had Order from my Lord N — to look after me , I found means to get into Holland , where a Dutchman , who discoursed me in Latin , while we were going to the Hague , in the Skuyt , would needs recommend me to the acquaintance of a Countryman of mine , by name ( as he pronounced it ) Mr. Rockut , whom he praised very highly for his excellent Parts and Civility , and said , he was Agent there for the Prince Palatine . I could not for my Heart imagine who this famous man should be ; but , I must confess , the dulness of the Country made me willing to enjoy the Conversation of Learned and Ingenious persons ; so , the Dutchman having made my way , and an Invitation being sent to my Lodging , I accepted it , and went to visit him . He had never seen me but once in his Life , which was in the protector 's days , and that merely by accident ; yet he knew me again , called me by my Name , and acquainted me with his Person and true Name , which was Rookwood , changed by him there to Rockwood . I was much surprised at such an unexpected Encounter : For I had not seen him in above Twenty Years before , did not know he was living , much lesle expected he should be in that Country ; and , had I guest at him beforehand , I should have avoided him , knowing him to be an ill man , and one who , having been sent over by K. Ch. the Second , about his Business , had betrayed his Master , took Money of Oliver , and had like to have ruined all his Friends ; as that King declared both in his Closet and before the Council . However , being light casually into his House , I thought it became me to carry it civilly , and accepted his Invitation to Dinner ; not imagining in the least , that a Person whose Business it was to serve a Foreign Prince , had any thing to do with England , or was able to work me any Mischief there . After repast , he began to ask me how Affairs stood in England , of which , to circumvent me , he pretended himself wholly ignorant ; only he said , He had heard much of the Plot , that he perceived men had different Opinions of it , and desired I would give him mine . I told him I verily believed it was a Contrivance of some designing Politicians , to unhinge the Government ; alleging for that Judgement of mine , the Incredibility , if not Impossibility , of many of the things attested , the slight or rather no Credit of the Witnesses , and the Incoherence of their Testimonies in many particulars . I alleged also , That the Evidence they gave in was unabetted , by any Circumstances , or Overt Acts , except such as were merely talked of , not proved , which therefore I believed to be forged ; for the pretended Matters of Fact were of such a nature , as must necessarily have been attended by a vast Train of Circumstances , either accompanying them , or naturally issuing from them , which must have rendered the things witnessed by those they called The King's Evidences , incontestably manifest to the whole World. Lastly , that all the persons condemned upon that account , did die , taking it upon their Salvation , they were Innocent , to believe whom Charity and Christianity enjoined me . At first he slightly opposed , but at length he seemed perfectly convinced by my Discourse , saying , That he was of my Opinion , that some ill men swore for Money , and deluded the Great ones ; adding , That he heard his Brother was in Prison for the Plot , who , he durst swear , was no Plotter . So that Discourse broke off , and he began ( having then , I conceive , the rough Draught of the Design in his Fancy ) much to pity me , that a man of my Parts ( forsooth ) and Loyal Principles , should be forced out of England . I replied , That I was loath to leave England , if I could have been there without Danger ; but , that I did not apprehend England was , at that present , a fit Soil for Loyalty to thrive in ; in which he took much Pains to undeceive me . then he earnestly requested I would tell him whither I was going : I told him , I thought Tergouw was a fit place to live in , where there were few English , and I desired to be private , and retire to my Studies : Which I said , being willing to eat his farther acquaintance ; for , in truth , I was resolved to settle at Amsterdam . Lastly , he earnestly begged I would come and see him within three Weeks or a Month. To avoid his Importunity , I promised him I would visit him at my first conveniency , which I made account would be never ; and so we parted . 

no sooner was I gone , but he writes two Papers to the King and Council , importing , That I had told him I knew of 2 Plots ; the one of the Jesuits , to kill the King ; the other of the Secular Clergy , to raise a vast Sum of Money , and by it an Army , and so bring in Popery by force . The Author of these Papers was concealed in England by his Friends , with all the care imaginable ; whence , it being rumoured , that I would come over ( my Pardon being granted ) and join in the Discovery of the Plot , and no man named , it came to be apprehended , talked , and printed , that I had written so myself : Which is a perfect Falsehood ; as will appear manifestly , when I come to unfold that business . I was advertised of this strange Report in my Retirement by the Letters of some Friends ; which , at first , made me smile at such a groundless Story ; but the Noise increasing , I penned and sent abroad a Protestation , calling God to witness , that I neither knew any thing of the Plot , nor said or signified to any that I did ; as also , That I had neither written nor caused any to write into England any thing to that purpose : And , That I renounced any Pardon that should be offered me upon the score of knowing and concealing the Plot. So having done what I was able , to clear my Credit , I composed , as well as I could , the Disorder of my Thoughts , and fell again to my Studies ; not being able to imagine how such a senseless Fiction should come to be raised ; and , of all men in the World , not suspecting that Mr. Rookwood could possibly be guilty of such Forgery against his own knowledge so unmistakably imprinted . About six Weeks ( or more , as I guests ) after I had parted with Mr. Rookwood , cold Wether approaching , I went to the Brill , to fetch my Winter-clothes ( which I had sent for out of England ) and came back by the Hague , Mr. Rookwood's Man by accident espied me , and told me his Master was very often sollicitously desiring to see me . Being thus caught , and importuned , I could not handsomely refuse to see a Gentleman , to whom I had been obliged for his former Civil Entertainment , and to whom I had in show promised a Visit. After some Compliments and kind Complaints , that I would not in so long time either let him see me , or hear from me , he told me , the Secretary of the Embassy must needs speak with me . I told him , I admired what he could have to say to me . Mr. Rookwood pretended to wonder at it as much as I did ; But , says he , you cannot in handsomeness refuse to see him ; he is a very Civil Gentleman ; I was speaking to him of you , and possibly he desire's your Acquaintance . So being hooked in thus by Civility , I was in a manner constrained to go with him to the Secretaries ; who immediately delivered me a Paper , which contained an Order from the King and Privy Council , Commanding me to come over . I was struck with much Amazement at such an unexpected Greeting ; however , having overcome the Pause and dumb Suspense , in which I had stood a while , I opened it and began to read , but checked at those Words [ about Matters of great Importance , as tending to the safety of His Mastiffs Person and of the Government , ] saying , In the Name of GOD , Sir , what can I do to secure His Majesty's Person and the Government ? I wish I knew , I would do it with all my heart . Lord ( says Mr. Rookwood ) What need you make these Scruples ! Here is nothing required of you but to come over . Yes , Sir , replied I , here is an Expectation annexed , which I am utterly incapable of satisfying . The short is , says the Secretary , will you obey the King or no ? I replied , the King is my Sovereign , and I ought to obey him ; and though I see plainly there is a Trick put upon me , and I fear , a Plot against my Life , yet I trust that God's Providence will instruct my Prudence how to avoid the Snare . then I began to make a deep Protestation before them both , that I never knew any thing of the Plot ; which I repeated with much Vehemency before that very Courteous and Civil Gentleman Mr. Henry Sidny , at that time His Majesty's extraordinary Envoy at the Hague ; who ordered me to return to Amsterdam , to compose my little Affairs , and dine with him on Tuesday after , and so go over in the Pacquet-boat on Wednesday . I came , as was ordered , and found Mr. Rook●wood at the Envoys , who began to discourse me apart ; bidding me fear nothing , for I had greater Friends in England than I was aware of , who were able to protect me against the King himself . He told me how my Lord Shaftsbury had written Two Letters hither , much in my Commendation , and that If I would come over ( and , as we are to suppose , be ruled by him ) I should neither want Security , nor Money , nor Honour . He added , That I could not but know something of the Duke of York ; that , if I did but witness it , there was Ten Thousand Pound laid up ready for me . At this I could not but blush with Anger , to hear such a villainous Proposal ; and replied , Certainly , Sir , the World is grown very Generous , that a poor Man can get 10000 l. so easily , and yet be an honest Man He smiled , and said I was a Droll , and that he hoped I had wit enough to know my own Interest . These Discourses made me plainly see the Devilish Trap that was laid for me , wherefore I then resolved to decline going , if it might stand with my Duty and Honour ; and , if I did go , to Acquaint His Majesty with the Intrigue . I should also by this have begun to suspect Rookwood , and that he was a Pensioner of that Earl , but that he faithfully protested to me , he neither knew any thing of that Order to call me over , nor had any Correspondents at all in England , but that my Lord Should — his Letters came to another Person at the Hague , who upon occasion showed them to him ; every tittle of which was false . 

As soon as dinner was done Mr. Sidney took me aside , and told me he wondered I would thus Resolutely deny any knowledge of the Plot ; Assuring me that he had of late certain intelligence out of England , that it was expected there I should make very great Discoveries of it . Hereupon I began to Reiterate my former Protestations to the contrary , with that earnestness , that he came back , and told the company he saw not to what purpose it was to send me , since he was confident I would say the same before the Council in England , that I said here : And I , on the other side , earnestly begged of him that before I went I might know Liquidly what I went for , it being in vain to send me to attest a thing I knew nothing of . He resolved hereupon to write to His Majesty how things were , and to know His farther pleasure whether I should still come or no : Taking a note of my Lodging at Amsterdam , ( which I had not yet put off ) and my Faithful Promise that I would come , if His Majesty should yet send for me ; so I set myself to return . Mr. Rookwood followed me ; exclaiming highly against Mr. Sidney for stopping one that the King and Council had sent for ; and threatening that perhaps , when he came into England , he might be made shorter by the head for it . The reason of which mighty huff I could not comprehend , till College , the Protestant Joiner , told me here in England , that my Lord Shaftsbury had ( out of his wonderful care of me ) sent a Guard to Harwich at the time that very Wednesday Packet in which I was to have gone should arrive , to conduct me safe to London , lest ( according to the Shams that past in those times ) the Jesuits should kill me by the way : That is , this pretended Guard was to carry me to that Lord , where ( as was the Method then in vogue ) if I would have been a perjured Villain , I should have been a Rich one ; or , if I would not , than I should , by some Stratagem or other , either be hanged for being too Honest , or else have passed through poor Prance's Fiery Trial. Blessed be God's good Providence , which thus wonderfully delivered me from the Hunter's Net , by making Mr. Sydney's well-meaning Prudence defeat the Designs of that Great Politician . 

After I had thus parted with Mr. Rookwood , whom I left in a very angry Mood , that the Information he had ( doubtless ) sent to England the Packet before , of my coming over in the next , was so scurvily disappointed ; ever I went from the Hague , I written and sent a Letter to His Majesty , protesting upon my Faith as a Christian , and upon my Allegiance to him , which was one part of it , that I never knew , directly or indirectly , the least thing of the Plot , nor ever did say or signify to any that I did ; humbly begging His Majesty would take some way , as he in his Princely Wisdom should think fit , to clear me of this dangerous Mistake , lest , if I should come into England , my invincible Ignorance might be interpreted a voluntary Concealment ; which would expose me to the highest Dangers . What was the Issue of that Letter , will be seen hereafter . 

When I came back to Amsterdam , I written to two or three dear Friends how the Case stood at present , and what passed hitherto . They in their Answers conjured me by no means to go into England , and assured me my Life was in imminent Danger if I went. I replied , That I judged the same they did , but that nunquam feci animam meam pretiosiorem me . I alleged four Reasons , why I ought to venture myself in going : First , My Duty to my Sovereign : Next , My Promise given to Mr. Sidney : Thirdly , That did I now hang back , I should leave a Blot upon my good Name , which had never been blemished with the least Slain of Disloyalty ; for I should never be able to wipe off the Aspersion of having known of Treasons against my King and Country so long , and never discovered them which would render me Guilty of Misprision of Treason in the Eye of the World : A Disgrace which I had rather hazard any Danger than undergo . And lastly , That this Plot , which had taken away the Lives of so many innocent persons , would receive a greater Countenance and Confirmation by my absconding ( especially after my Promise to come ) than ever it had been able to gain by any thing hitherto : For , being esteemed by all ( as , God be praised , I was ever held ) an Honest man , it would be judged . I refused to come , because I would not be perjured by denying what I knew ; and therefore , if I were shy to appear to answer my Accuser , ( whom I as yet knew not , but supposed he was in England ) it would , especially as the Times went , be loudly proclaimed , That all which had been informed to have been said by me was true . These were the Reasons I gave of the necessity of my going into England : Whether the last of them , and my hazarding my Life upon that score , have received the just Return from some persons , who ought to have had more Christianity and Honour in them , than to slander their Neighbour , without caring to know how Matters past , I leave even to their own Guilty Consciences to judge . 

His Majesty having received my Letter , in which I petitioned to be cleared from this Calumny , was pleased to send to his Envoy a Copy of Mr. Rookwood's two Papers , and an Order to confront us before him ever we came , as to the Contents of them . This being judged the surest Expedient of knowing whether he or I had belied the Truth . A Messenger brought the Papers , who came also to call Mr. Sidney into England , with an Order to bring me over with him ; wherefore the very next day he sent the Gentleman of his Horse to Amsterdam , to require me to attend him . In the Morning , after I had arrived at the Hague , he commanded me to dine with him : I was perfectly ignorant of the Order to confront us , or what he had to say to me : Mr. Rookwood had got light of it , and never left soliciting me to dine with him at his own House ; saying , That he too was invited , but he would send his Excuse for us both . I admired at his Importunity ; but after Dinner he discovered his Reason , by telling me , That we were to be confronted that Afternoon about some Papers that he had been forced to send into England , concerning some words that , if he did not misremember , had passed between us about the Plot ; earnestly begging of me , for his credit 's sake , to admit his Words , and make my own Interpretation , and he would witness that was my Meaning . then , and not till then , did I apprehend , that Rookwood was the Person who had raised that Lie of me , and put me to suffer all that Obloquy and Vexation . Which when I resented in such Language as it deserved , telling him plainly ▪ I would not admit one word , but what I truly spoken ; nor make any Interpretation for his sake , who had so grossly abused me ; that , if he had written Falsehoods , they should lie at his door , to his shame ; I would stand to precise Truth , and I was sure Truth would stand by me . At which he fell into high Language , and threatened me , That if I were Uncivil to him , he had Friends in England should hang me high enough . Finding this wrought nothing with me , but that I returned a scornful Smile to his Threats , and answered them with a flat Defiance , he grew moderate , blamed his Passion , and fell to Entreaties again . At length we came to his Composition , That I should not impeach his Credit , nor reproach him for forging , but put the blame upon his bad Memory , and he would not justify his Memory . I knew he was able to work me Mischief in England , so I condescended to grant him that Civility , as long as it abated nothing of the Truth of what had passed between us . To Mr. Sydney's we went , and his two Papers were read , in every Particular of which , that were of moment , or related to the Plot , I baffled him . One Passage was very remarkable : Mr. Rookwood , said I , certainly you have a Memory of another nature from the rest of Mankind , that could write into England , that I told you of two Plots , whenas I told you plainly I did not believe any Plot. How , says Mr. Sidney , Do not you believe the Plot ? Mr. Rookwood fearing I should have related all our Discourse at large , which would have shown too clearly , that there was more than a Bad Memory in the Business , immediately prevented my Reply with these words : no , Sir , his Charity for Dying men was so great , that he could not believe they died with a Lie in their Mouths . At which Concession of his I caught readily , and said to Mr. Sidney ; Observe this , Sir , I beseech you ; If I told him , as he confesses , that I judged that all who died for the Plot said true at their Deaths , then since 't is known , they all died denying they knew of any Plot , I must hold withal , nay , tell him I held , there were no Plotters ; and if no Plotters , than no Plot ; and if I told him I believed there was no Plot , then how could I tell him , at the same time , I knew of Two Plots , or indeed of any ? When we had ended Mr. Rookwood went away very ill satisfied : And , though I had gained this main Point , yet I was not perfectly satisfied neither ; for these were but fleeting words , and I feared Mr. Sydney's Memory ( he being then in extreme haste ) might not enable him to speak firmly and particularly to our whole Discourse , by which I might come to lose half of the Advantage I had gotten . There were besides Mr. Sidney , two other Gentlemen present at this Rencounter , one of them was called Mr. Plott , the name of the other I remember not : wherefore I pressed upon Mr. Sidney's Patience , who was now very busy in putting up his things , being to part within five hours ; and civilly demanded the Justice of him , that himself and the other two ( who were not to come over with us ) would , while the Matters were yet fresh in their Memories , Sign to a Paper containing the several particulars in which I had confuted Mr. Rookwood ; and requested that he would bring it with him to be read before the King and Council ; which was done accordingly . 

To Sea we went ; and when we came near Greenwich , I requested the favour of Mr. Sidney , that I might go to London in his Boat , and in his company , to his House ; and there to stay and lodge till I was conducted by him to His Majesty ; lest it should be pretended , that some body had treated with me to warp me , ( a great Policy then of the Plot-framers ) which he civilly granted . The next Morning at Eight , the King Ordered him to bring me to his Closet , where His Majesty was present with my Lord Sunderland . The King , after I had kissed his Hand , asked me , What meant this Information of Rookwood's ? I assured His Majesty it was a perfect Forgery not only without any Ground , but directly contrary to all the Discourse that had passed betwixt us . I know well , replied the King that he is a Rogue ; for he took Money of Oliver and betrayed me and my Friends ; but what Motive should he have to send such a lying Information to a King and a Council ? Hereupon I acquainted His Majesty with their manifest Design ; which was to get me over into England with any pretence , to be managed there by my Lord Should — and if I would have been obsequious to my Inspirers and witness against the Duke I knew not what , I was to have had 10000 l. for being a Knave ; and , if I would not , I should be hanged for being Honest. I humbly begged therefore of His Majesty , that since I had done my Duty even with hazard of my Life , and acquainted Him with the plain Truth of their Intrigue , He would please to protect me . Hereupon His Majesty took an occasion to speak of another that had 4000 l. offered him to come over ; and said to me these very words as far as I can recollect them . Mr. S. I have been present at all the Examinations relating to the Plot , and I do protest I have not found one single Circumstance that concurs to abet it , but it wholly depends on the words of two or three odd Men. He was also graciously pleased to promise me His Pardon under the Broad Seal , lest they should Prosecute me upon other acounts , as Writing Controversie-books , etc. as also His and the Council's Protection ; telling me withal that it was a Council business ; and therefore , that I was to appear at the Board the next Council-day , which I did : Where the Oath being tendered , Rookwood's Papers were read , & I addressed myself to my Defence . And , First , I showed the Falsehood of that Pretence , that I made means to come into England ; or so much as had a thought of it ; not by myself ; there being no Letter or Paper of mine alleged or produced , nor I am sure producible to that purpose , nor that can be pretended to have been written before I was sent for : not by Mr. Rookwood ; for , I there confuted that pretence by many clear and unanswerable Arguments . As that , ( as appears by his very Papers ) I would not acquaint him with the true place I was going to , nor hold Correspondence with him . By the Orders lying dormant so long ever it reach 't me ; whereas had I been fond of going into England upon such a score , or made means to have procured an Order to that end , I should have been diligent to look after it . By my taking Pains to go as far as the Brill , to fetch my Winter-cloaths ; by my having taken a Chamber till Spring , at which Time I had purposed to go to Abbeville in France ; as likewise by my having laid in my Winter-provisions of Turf , Butter , etc.  All which was Attested to Mr. Sidney by the Gentleman of his Horse , who paid my Landlady for her Chamber , and saw the rest of my Provisions . By the Surprise I was in , when the Order to call me into England was delivered me . By the mere casual meeting with Rookwood's Man at the Hague , which occasioned my Visiting his Master the second Time ; which had it not happened , the Order had never come to my hand at all . And , lastly , by this , that I never capitulated for my Pardon beforehand , but , in the Protestation I had put forth , utterly renounced it , nor spoke of it to Mr. Sidney , nor petitioned for it in my Letter to the King ; but readily obeyed His Command , as was my Duty , relying solely on my own Integrity ; whereas , had I been Conscious to myself of having known and concealed two such horrid Plots so long , and consequently , been highly Guilty of Misprision of Treason , no Man of ordinary Discretion , but would have secured that dangerous Point , while he was yet in safe Circumstances , and out of the Reach of our English Laws . The Paper also signed by the Three at the Hague was produced , and Mr. Sidney was present to testify all the Particulars , that came to his Knowledge , which abetted my Defence . I was very large and particular in my Discourses of this Nature , till both His Majesty and the whole Council were perfectly satisfied of my Ingenuity and Rookwood's Knavery . After which I was Questioned about some Tenets of certain Catholic Writers ; and about a Story which I and others heard in Flanders from a Gentlewoman , about some Words said to be spoken by one of those who died ; to all which , being still ( as my Lord Chancellor told me ) npon my Oath , I Answered according to the best of my Knowledge , as became a sincere Christian : But I was so far from Charging it upon that Gentleman , or making him a Plotter for it , that I Declared openly , ( having first asked His Majesty's Pardon for speaking freely ) That both he and the other Four ; nay , all the rest that suffered for the Plot , did in my Opinion die innocent . A thing which I believe , few at that time of day durst have done ; but , being upon my Oath , I was resolved to speak my true thoughts without fear or favour of any . The whole Narrative of which Particulars , I ( as I was then commanded ) gave in under my Hand to the Council , where they are yet to be seen . I desire it may be observed , that these Two last Points , about which I had been examined , came in only accidentally ; and were far from being the Occasion of my being sent for , or coming over . For the whole Series of this Transaction shows manifestly the sole Occasion of my coming , was to speak to Rookwood's Papers , concerning the Two pretended Plots ; and that the others came in on the by only . Which will stop the Mouths of my Traducers and Maligners , who give it out , not only that I made means to come , but also , that this was the sole , at least main Reason of my coming ; and , it seems , would have had me forswear myself to gratify Parties . But I humbly thank their Kindness , Non sic didici Christum . My Comfort is , that those who did Calumniate me upon that score , are either malicious and partial Men , bigoted Ladies , or silly babbling Women ; and I have learned so much Philosophy as to consider that 't is to be expected every thing should act as it is . I beseech God to forgive the first , and to give the others more Discretion to guide their Zeal for the future . 

't is besides my present Purpose to Relate what Wiles were used , and Traps laid here to circumvent me , and in all likelihood , take away my Life . The Importunity of the impeaching Folks to get into my Company , was incredible . Upon this , being never at quiet , I was forced to change my Lodging & abscond ; yet this could not stave them off : For they came to that Impudence , as to tell me they had an Order from the King and Council to know where I lived , under pretence ( forsooth ) of protecting me , which obliged me for my safety to send in a Note to my Lord of Radnor , than Precedent of the Council , Complaining of their Insolence ; who came out to me with my Lord Sunderland , and when I had related to him my just Fears of some Mischief intended against me , he delivered me from my Apprehensions , by bidding metell them he had given me a Command , that none should know my Lodging but himself : For knowing my Lord Shaftsburys Resentment against me , for Discovering his Design , and his Bribing Offer , and seeing such a bold Pretence of that Party , to get Knowldege of my Lodging , I had good reason to fear , that their Plot was either to kill me at my Door , or to bolt into my Chamber , and then accuse me of Speaking Treason , or of confessing to them , that I did indeed know of two such Plots as Rookwood had informed , but out of Fear or Interest was not willing to reveal them . 

Sir , I do protest to you faithfully , this is the true History of that affair in every particular , as far as my Memory Reaches ( for I have not my Papers by me ) and the Truth of the main Branches of it , which sustain all the rest , do not depend upon my mere sayings , or my Memory ; but upon Authentic Testimonies , known matters of fact , and on my Papers given in to the Council , containing great part what I said before them , to be found yet among their Records . And I am confident that my Lord Sunderland , and my Lord Sidney are persons of that Honour , that they will witness the Truth of this Relation of mine , as far as it engages their Testimony . Having premised this plain , and Candid Narrative of that business , I now come to comply with your other Request , that I would note down how many open falsities are contained in that half page which you sent me . 

First then , whereas he says confidently , that one Sergeant made a Discovery of the Popish Plot from Holland ; This is manifested to be a most palpable Untruth ; both by the protestation I put forth , and spread as soon as ever I heard of that report : And by my protesting the contrary before the Secretary , and Mr. Rookwood , when I first received the order to come ; by my abjuration of my knowledge of any such Plot before Mr. Sidney , and all this while I was yet in Holland ; likewise by my declaring before His Majesty in his closet , and afterwards before the Council , upon my Oath , that I knew of no such Plot , nor believed it ; Nay , by the words of Mr. Rookwood himself ( who was the Informer ) when we were Confronted . So that I cannot but Admire that any Man , who has the least regard whether what he says , or prints be True or no , would venture to Assert so Notorious a Falsehood . 

2 dly , He says , I caused my discovery to be Transmitted to the Court. This is worse than the other ; for , besides what has been even now alleged , the whole course of this Transaction shows , that I was wholly the Ignorant of Mr. Rookwood's Papers which informed of that discovery . Nor did or could Rookwood , though hard put to it , Challenge me to have sent or caused to be sent any such matter ; which was Obvious , and easy for him , nay , necessary to have done when we were Confronted ; this being the only way to clear himself , and confound me who then denied it . Lastly , had I caused any such discovery to be Transmited to the Court , it would have been alleged against me by the Council ( at least by some of my Lord Shaftsbury's party ) to my utter confusion , when I denied it before them upon my Oath ; and have avoidable proved me to be be a perjured Villain . 

3 dly , He says I had aen Intention to have discovered several others . This is still more surprising . Can this illuminated Gentlemen see into my Intentions ? Or , does he pretend to know this from my Words , and outward Actions ? But , if Denying it , Swearing , Writing , Protesting the contrary , Confuting my Slanderer , and the whole Course of my Carriage from the very first to the very last , be the best Signs of any man 's inward Intentions then 't is most manifest , That I intended no such thing as this Man Asserts with such a Careless Confidence , but the direct contrary . He can then pretend nothing in the World , but a Revelation of my Intention ; which I much fear he will hardly be able to show us . 

4 thly , He says I was first bribed off by Pillory Carr. Now , Sir , I do protest to you in the Presence of God , That I cannot call to mind , that I so much as know any man living of the Name of Carr , and that I as little know who he should mean by Pillory-carr ; only , I hope Pillory Carr was some very Rich man : For , if Ten thousand Pound could ot bribe me on to witness a Truth ( as he believes Rookwood's Information to be ) there must in all the reason in the World , a far greater Sum be requisite to bribe me off ; otherwise I must be a Great Fool , that no better understood my own Interest , and my own Safety too . But , to be serious , if this Gentleman can name me any one honest Man , who will attest , that I ever had the least acquaintance with the Person he name's Pillory-carr , I will give all the World leave to repute me a Lying Villain ; if not , I am sorry to tell him , that he must be content to wear that infamous Character himself ; for , it will stick to him whether he will or no. Now , my Circumstances happed to be such , that it quite spoils his Calumny : For , desiring to be private , I conversed ot with so much as one English man while in Holland , except the Secretary and those of Mr. Sydney's and Mr. Rookwood's Families ; and if Pillory Carr was none of them , he must not be looked for in Holland ; and my cautiousness , as soon as I came to England , to keep close with Mr. Sidney , till I had spoken with the King , and made all the Discoveries I could make of the true Plot ( which was , to bribe me to witness what my Paymasters should inspire ) utterly spoils any Pretence of my being bribed off here . 

5 thly , He says , I was slightly and slyly examined . Now , Sir , I was examined so slyly , that it was openly before the whole Council ; nor was there ever a fuller Board ; all the Lords being big with expectation of what strange matters I should discover ; which was raised by this , that I had ( God be praised ) the Character of a Sincere Person , which none of the other Plot-swearers ever had ; insomuch , that I have been informed , how even His Majesty himself was startled , when he was told , that I was to come in to make Discoveries of it . Nor was my Examination slight , as this Gentleman presumes : It lasted about two Hours , and not only His Majesty , and the Chancellor , but many other Lords took their Turns to question me . I wonder whence this Gentleman had his Intelligence , who still contradicts Matter of Fact , though never so patent and notorious . 

6 thly , He says I was sent back with God knows how much Money . And this is so perfectly false , that the whole Council , and thousands of others , who conversed with me a long time after in London , can witness the contrary : For , in the Order to call me hither , after their Promise there expressed , That I should return in Three Months , they immediately added these words [ If he shall so think fit ] and because I did not think fit to do so , they were pleased still to renew my Protection and Leave to stay from three months to three months , for a long time . 

7 thly , He says , That this Game ( that is , the managing of me ) was done by the Contrivance of Sir Lionol Jenkyns , whom he very angrily calls here Fool as well as Knave . What Quarrel there may have been between them , which occasions this uncivil Heat , I do not know ; only I do assure you , upon my Faith , I never treated with Sir Lionel ; never knew his Person ; never saw his Face to my knowledge ; nor ever had the least Ground to imagine , that he had so much as a Finger in this whole Business : Nor can I conceive how it is possible he should , since it wholly passed through the Hands of Mr. Sidney , my L. Sunderland , the King and the Council : So that it never lay in his way , nor was in his power to hinder or help it . 

Lastly , He inveighs against the same Sir Lionel , for endeavouring to conceal my Murder at Abbeville in France , when I was coming into England to make a farther Discovery of the Plot. Certainly , Sir , this man is either crack-brained or stark drunk with Passion ; for , both myself and all that converse with me , verily judge that I am alive yet ; and , if I be alive , a very short remove of Reason makes me gather that I was never yet murdered . 

Sir , I am sorry your Friend is tasked to spend his Pains and Time in answering such a Monster of Forgery ; who , as it seems to me , ( and , I believe every indifferent man will be of my Judgement ) is so fully bend against Truth , that he can scarce write a Line , but is a direct and flat Falsehood . And , which is worse , he is so brazened in that Humour of his , that he has not the least care to choose out such Untruths as he may hope to conceal ; but he rather makes choice of such as are most evidently and inexcusably False . If you count them exactly , you will find there are at least Ten egregious ones in the short compass of about half a Page . Pray desire your Friend not to engage or extend my Testimony to any State-matters ; you know I do not love to meddle with such Edg'd-tools ; though I hope this Bundle of Lies of his , in one particular Subject , may serve for a Pattern , to show what ridiculous Fictions did pass for Gospel among that Brotherhood in the Plot-time . What I have done here , is in my own Vindication , which , since at his Request to you , and yours to me , I have taken the pains to write , let it be mine to you both , that , if your Friend thinks fit to publish any Answer to that odd Book , he would do me the Right to insert this Narrative of mine ( and that in my own words , without any alteration ) in its proper place . 

Your Friend , etc. J. S.  



When I had got this Relation of Mr. S — is , so clearly coherent in all its Parts and Circumstances , so testified by the Council's Records , and abetted by such Vouchers yet living , I began to be half sorry I had fouled my Fingers so long in meddling with a Fellow so evidently convicted of Imposture in almost every line . Yet , since I have begun with him , I shall proceed in the Track I had designed to follow , and show , in the next place , some few of his Self-contradictions , which are far more Infallible Tokens of a Forger , than Fasting is of Popery . 

P. 26 , he pretends that K. Charles the Second following his Pleasures was done on purpose to weaken and make soft the Military Temper of the People by Debauchery and Effeminacy , and so introduce Slavery and Popery . Now , if this Argument holds , then to train them up in Military Employments should , in all Reason but his , Work a contrary Effect , be the ready way to secure the Nation against those Mischiefs , and to keep them out . But our Blatant scorns to follow that ordinary common Track of Reason , beaten so bare by all Mankind before him : He will be above them , and extraordinary , as in every thing else , so in this too , else he goes below himself . That Logic which will not make any thing follow out of any thing , is not worthy him , nor able to do him the least Service . For , p. 71 , 72. he makes that King's training up his Subjects in Military Discipline a mere Plot to enterprise upon his Protestant Subjects ; that is , to bring in Popery and Slavery , as well as the other . So that Fight and Courting , rough Soldiery and soft Effeminacy are equally argumentative with him to prove a palpable Intention of altering the Religion of the Nation , and enslaving it . 't is but clapping upon every Action , though contrary to one another , a wicked Intention of his own Inventing ; and then 't is impossible to do any thing , but it shall be writhed about to look the wrong way , and skew towards the mark he levels it at , the introducing Popery and Slavery . 

He complains of K. Ch. p. 31. for persecuting the Nonconformists ( that is , for not hindering Q. Elizabeth's Laws against them from being executed ; ) and yet ( pawn 65 , 66. ) he is mightily out of humour with the same King for his Declaration to give Liberty of Conscience ; and as ill displeased at K. james , p. 202 , for attempting the same . Such another is his Saying ( pawn 39 ) That K. Ch. had encouraged the Lord Clifford to attempt the bringing in of Arbitrary Power , and yet called him rash Fool for his pains . As if any man in his Wits did ever call another man a rash Fool for doing what himself had bid him do , or for obeying his own Commands and this too after he had ( as he says ) encouraged him to obey them . 

He characters K. Ch. all over , as a perfect Creature of the French King , or rather his mere Slave , to that degree , as to assist him to take his own English Ships : Yet never could man more amply become his Compurgator , from being overfond of France , than our forgetful Blatant is ( p. 47 , 48 , 49. ) where he tells us at large , That K. Ch. was the first that began to form a Confederacy against the French King , by sending to propose a nearer Alliance with the Hollanders , and a defensive and stricter League than was before between the two Nations ; That to keep the French King from having the very Thoughts of ever stirring , he sent to several Princes of Germany , to invite them into the Leagne ; That his Envoy , with no lesle heat than plainness , laid open the Danger all Europe was in , urging the Insensibility of most Princes , the watchful Ambition of the French , the Greatness of their Forces , and the little reason to trust him ; omitting nothing that could alarm all the World , and procure a general Confederacy against the Oppressor : Lastly , That fearing the Spaniards should not pay to the Swedes ( who were also in that League ) the Subsidies stipulated , our King offered to advance part of it himself , and had done it , in case the Dutch would have advanced the rest . Now , these things being confessed , could the most avowed Enemy of France have done more than K. Ch. did to abate his Height , when he saw the occasion required it ( for to oppose such a powerful Prince without necessity , was very Impolitic ? ) Do not these known Matters of Fact clearly evince that he was very far from being a sworn Devote of his , as Blatant has oftentimes shamelessly asserted ? And if so , may we not safely conclude , that he has all this while told us a most egregious Falsehood , and positively contradicted himself ? no , I 'll warrant you , he 'll come off well enough for all this . True , says he , the outward Actions of that King do seem indeed very pregnant Testimonies of his Aversion to the French ; but if you did but look into his Intentions , as I do , the thing is quite otherwise ; for , I read it plainly in his Heart , that he did this prompted more by his own fears than out of any kindness he had for the Nation . Well ; let his Love for the Nation alone a while , and let us suppose ( since he will have it so ) another of his Contradictions to be true , and that K. Ch. made head thus vigorously against the French , out of Hatred to the English ; the Point yet sticks , Does not this brisk Carriage of K. Ch. signify , that he was far from being the French King's Creature , and that he was not enamoured of him so , as even to assist him to take our English Ships ? Let it be Fear of him if he pleases , this abetts our Assertion , that he was far from overloving him whom he so feared , or doting on a Person he could not trust . He runs from the Business , to tell us how the League was broke afterwards , and multiplies Lies upon Lies , well laid together , to amuse us with a fine Story . And , what if , upon Reasons of State , it was broke afterwards ? Was that League engraved in Adamant , so as to be perpetual ? He grants , that it lasted till it had done the Work it was intended for , that is , This triple League , and the Peace of Aix la Chapelle soon after concluded , did put a stop to the French King's Cureer ; and was not that enough for his purpose ? The altering of Circumstances breaks Leagues every day . This is no News to any man who has but read Gazettes . The Suede , he confesses pawn 59 , fell off too , nay , drew his Sword in the French Quarrel ; Did he intend too to bring in Popery or Slavery into his own Country by doing so ? Did he do this to give Demonstrations of his Fidelity to the French Monarch , or recommend himself the more meritoriously to his Patronage ; as he banteringly imposes ( pawn 54 , 55. ) upon K. Charles ? How comes it then to be such a Geometrical Demonstration against K. Ch. that he did it with that pretended Intention , or out of a crouching Submissiveness to the French King ; whereas the doing the selfsame action ( nay , a worse ) was never thought to have the force of the least probability against the King of Sueden ? In good faith , Mr. Blatant , you even say any thing , and entangle yourself in Contradictions the more you blunder to get out of them . The short is , K. Ch. did like a wise Prince : He was glad to live quietly by such a Powerful Neighbour , if he could without danger to his Kingdom , especially knowing he had a factious Party at home , who desired no more but tangle him in such a War , that he might be forced to truck his Prerogatives for needful Assistances ; which was the reason he kept fair with him as much as he could ; but , when he saw his Encroachments threatened England , than he acted vigorously to repress them , even though he hazarded his own Inconveniences . And this , in Blatant's Language , is giving Demonstrations of Fidelity to the French King , and recommending himself to his Patronage . 

But is it not pretty Non sense that he should ( p. 93. ) make K. Ch. know of the Plot , the chief part of which was to kill himself ; that is , know there was a Design on foot against his own Life , and yet be the chief Stifler of its Discovery ? Which amounts to this , That he was content to be killed , and Felo de se in his Intention , even while alive . But , how comes that Prince to be so rechlesly careless of his Life ? He was held to be naturally held timorous , and the fear of Sudden Death is enough to startle the most resolute man , even though a Saint . Why , he was strangely infatuated ( says Blatant , p. 172. ) to believe all was for the concernment of the Cause to which he was so affected himself , that is , the bringing in Slavery and Popery . Very good : But was he willing to be killed to carry on that Concern ? It must be so , in case he believed it : And , if he believed the other parts of the Plot ( I am sure he has granted he knew of it all ) it must have been upon the Credit of the Witnesses ( for nothing else appeared to evince the Truth of it , as the King himself openly and frequently declared in all Companies ) than he must believe withal the Lord knows how many methods laid to kill himself , as , by Shooting , Assassinating , Poisoning , etc.  And 't is a strange Infatuation ( as he says well ) I add , And such a one as Human Nature is scarce capable of , to have the same reason to believe his own Murder was designed , that convinced him the other things those men attested were true , and yet not be willing it should be looked into , that it might be prevented . Now , the Truth is , the King utterly disbelieved the whole Plot , as he often declared , and held the Evidences of those Times , to be a Pack of perjured Knaves : wherefore , seeing so many persons , whom he verily judged did die Innocent , put to Death upon that score , he could not in conscience , ( though the Nation being put into such a ferment , he was forced to give way for a while to the violence of the Stream ) suffer the Guiltless to be still thus barbarously murdered ; and therefore he endeavoured , as far as Prudence would permit him , to put some Blocks in the way of those Feet which were so swift to shed Blood.  

What follows is yet worse , and indeed as ill as can be , and therefore it shall be my last Instance of his admirable Nonsense and Self-contradictions . He pretends ( pawn 72. ) that K. Ch. had an inveterate Malice to the Dutch , merely upon the account of their being protestants , & Protectors of the Protestant Religion ; insomuch , that he says , p. 42 , That it was thought most requisite to destroy them in the first place , and he all along makes the DOCTOR of York to have the same Thoughts with him in that point , and to cooperate with him in that Design . Yet he is so Forgetful as to acquaint us with three such signal Favours done to the Dutch by the Duke , as no man living would do his Best Friend , much lesle ( as our Libeler pretends ) his avowed Enemy . The first , ( p. 160. ) that he purposely fell asleep at Sea , to the end the Dutch , for want of Orders , might have an opportunity to wrist the Victory out of the Hands of the English. Which was a Kindness with a witness , to be willing to forseit his own Honour ( which great Personages value above their Life ) by letting the Victory slip out of his Hands , which was ( as he tells us here ) in a great probability of Success ; nay , to hazard to be beaten himself , ( perhaps killed too ) for their Advantage . The second , That he permitted ( pawn 160. ) himself to be surprised at Sould-bay , by which means the English were sacrificed to the Dutch. The third ( p. 161. ) That the Duke procured the Firing our Ships at Chatham . Now , if the Dutch be Protectors of the Protestant Religion , the Duke must with all reason in the World ( if what he says be true ) deserve to be styled Protector of those Protectors , or Grand Protector of the Protestant Faith ; for , those Vnder-protectors might have been ruined , had not their kind Patron thus friendly assisted and reprieved them . But how think you does he come off from such a ridiculous Contradiction , to make the Duke hate the Dutch so unmercifully , and yet befriend them so unmeasurably and preposterously , in defiance of his own Honour , Interest , Safety , and Common Sense ? If he hated the Dutch so deadly , merely upon the account of their being Protectors of the Protestant Religion , he should have let slip no occasion of mauling and destroying them in the first place ; for , the Supporters of that Religion being once overthrown , he could not but think ( in that Supposition ) that the Religion itself would fall without more ado . This than ought to have been the Duke's first and most sure aim , and not to Establish them by the Overthrow of the English , who , as it seems , by his Discourse , were not near so zealous Protectors of the Protestant Religion , as were those Saints of his , the Dutch. How comes he off then from such a gross and palpable Self-contradiction ? Well enough I warrant you . 't is but making use of his Supernatural Optic , and peeping through it into the Duke's Intention , and then telling us ( for he says any thing ) that he did it to keep the Balance even , and presently he fancy's all is as smooth and current Sense as Heart can wish . He had forgot what he had said ( pawn 42. ) That it was thought most requisite to destroy those Protestant States , in the first place : Which quite spoils his pretence of keeping the Balance even . A sober man would rather think , that to give the Protectors of the Protestant Religion such Advantages as were able to set them above us , and hazarded to disable the other side from ever hurting them after , was most clearly a turning the Scales on their side , and quite contrary to an Intention of destroying them in the first place . Besides , the Die of War is uncertain , & such Advantages lost or given away , are oftentimes never recoverable . could any man foresee the Consequences of the Duke's yielding them three such vast Advantages over us , or , that the Dutch being by this means our Betters at Sea , would not follow on their blow , keep us under them , and so quite spoil the pretended Design of introducing Slavery and Popery ? With what impertinent and ridiculous Flams does this Baffling Fellow hope to fool his Readers ! Yet this is his constant handy-dandy method in every point he handles : Voluntary Talk serves him for wellgrounded Truth , mere Pretences for Proofs , and flim-flam Stories for clear Evidences . Innumerable such as these the Reader may observe in his Libel , grounded on nothing but his own voluntary sayings , or his untoward commenting upon every Action by his Gift of diving into invisible Intentions ; of which many others I had noted down , and intended to prosecute , but he is an everlasting Subject , and I grow weary of him . 

We have seen how ridiculous our Blatant is in his Rational Performances , how far from Solid in his airy Principles , how Untoward his Skill is in drawing Consequences , how carelessly and openly Lying in his Narrative part , how intolerably Arrogant in censuring all Authority but his own , and how contradictory to himself in many Particulars : It remains now , that we examine a little , by reflecting on two or three of his most grievous Charges of Sins of the greatest Magnitude , and the Proofs he brings to make good those Charges , how good a Christian he is . The true Badge of Christianity is , that new and peculiar Command of our B. Saviour , to love one another ( joh. 13.34 . ) And when he resumed all the whole Law into two main Commandments ( joh. 22.37 , 38 , 39 ) he declared , that the second of them , which was , to love our Neighbour as ourselves , is like the first , which is , to love God himself entirely . Nay , the same Holy Evangelist ( CITIZEN Ep. cap. 4. v. 20. ) makes it impossible to love God without loving our Neighbour . Now , to do an Injury to our Neighbour wilfully , is utterly inconsistent with the Love of him ; especially to wrong his Reputation and Credit in any high nature , which ought to be as dear to him as his Life , is yet more uncharitable ; and this , though the person thus injured be our Equal . But , the Dignity of the persons thus defamed does aggravate still more the Fault of the Slanderer ; which makes our Laws inflict such severe Penalties upon those who are Guilty of Scandalum Magnatum , above what uses to be inflicted on them who shall speak contumelious words against those of meaner condition : But , in case the persons thus defamed be of the Highest Rank in the Universe , whose Office and persons ( by reason of their superintendency over the Common Good of a great Portion of Mankind ) are justly esteemed Sacred , it adds still a greater degree of Enormity to that most uncharitable Sin of Calumny . But then , to make any such Personage a Monstrous Compound of all the Villainies imaginable , and ( which is yet worse ) without Evident Reason to prove the Charge , does exceed all the Bounds of Ordinary Malice , and approaches to plain Devilishness . We have seen already how perfectly seared Blatant's Conscience is in this Particular by many Instances ; but we have reserved the Examination of two or three of his most horrid Slanders till the last ; by the laying open of which , it will not only appear how this wicked Libeler is an Absolute Renouncer ( or rather a declared Enemy ) of that best Christian Virtue , Charity ; and this in the highest degree possible , and under every Consideration that can enhance his Vice , but also , hence we may make an Estimate of his whole Book ; For , common Reason gives it , That if he brings no Evidence to justify his highest Accusations , much lesle has he brought any to make good his other Charges , which are of an Inferior nature , and so lesle needing it . 

K. Charles the First has been so celebrated for his Piety , by the whole Protestant Church , and the day of his Martyrdom so solemnly kept amongst us , that one would scarce think there could be such a Villain found in Nature , as would take the Boldness to leave a Blot upon his Sacred Memory . But it being Blatant's design , to vindicate the present Governors , by representing all their Relations of the Family of the Stuarts , to be Rogues and Rascals , he could not let even that B. King escape without some Mark of Infamy . Taking occasion then ( p. 102. ) to inveigh against K. Ch. the Second , for sending away the Parliament , lest ( as he says ) they should prosecute some of the pretended Popish Conspirators , he tells us , That he did therein like his Father ( K. Ch. the First ) when the DOCTOR of Buckingham was accused of poisoning his Father ( viz. K. james the First . ) By which words , since he all-along makes K. Ch. the Second know of the Plot , and yet protect the Plotters , he not obscurely hints , That good K. Ch. the First was privy to the poisoning his Father , and therefore by sending away the Parliament , protected his Murderer from Prosecution . Now , the Truth is , that when there is any great and sudden change , People's Minds are naturally in a violent motion , which hindering the settling a steady Judgement of things , they ofttimes grow apt to entertain groundless Jealousies , and egged forward , perhaps , by some politic great persons , who out of sinister ends , hate those men , they let fly at some one or more of them whom the Princes themselves judge Innocent . In such a Case as this , than it is that Kings have one of their hardest Games to play : Their Conscience will not let them willingly sacrifice those they hold Innocent ; nor their Policy allow them to oppose the Torrent openly . They are therefore in those cross and perplexing Junctures forced to take such measures , as to gain time , till those violent Heats spend themselves and evaporate , and a calmer Temper succeeds , that so they may be able to protect the one without disgusting the other . This was the very Case of those two Princes ; for neither did K. Ch. the First believe the DOCTOR of Buckingham had murdered his Father , nor K. Ch. the Second the least tittle of the Plot ; and therefore they judged it more becoming their Christianity and Duty of protecting their Guiltless Subjects , to make use of their Prerogative , by dismissing the Parliament till men's Thoughts did settle , than to be forced to yield to the Murder of those whom they deemed to be Faultless in themselves , though unfortunate , by the undeserved Malice of the People or Parliament , wrought up to a high ferment by some designing Politicians . And therefore , since this was in all likelihood the very Cause why K. Ch. the First did send away that Parliament , whose Hatred towards the DOCTOR of Buckingham was known to him upon former scores , antecedent to his Father's Death ; with what Charity , with what Conscience could this Varlet hint , That he protected him from Punishment , though he knew him Guilty of such an Inhuman Parricide ? 

Again , p. 22 , he is not content that K. Ch. the Second should be held only Guilty of Adultery with the Lady Castelmain , ( though , God knows , that alone was too shamefully sinful ) but , as if he would prosecute his Soul after death , to the nethermost Hell ; he will needs have him Guilty of Incest too , at the same time , by pretending that that Lady was his Sister by the Mother's side . The Fact is very Horrid , and the Charge Grievous , and therefore we are to expect very clear Evidences , to make it out , otherwise our Blatant Beast will be convicted to be the worst of Ribalds , and far from a Christian. His first Argument is [ It being the Opinion of several persons who had reason to know more than others dill , that she was begotten by the E. of St. A — , upon the Queen's Body , after the Death of Ch. the First . ] How ! Opinion ? Is the man mad ? Is the Opinion of diverse , I cannot tell who , sufficient Ground to charge a King thus publicly in print with Incest ? Let him bring such a Plea into a Court , for publishing the like Slander of an ordinary person , and then seriously bethink himself what a Judge and a Jury would have said to him : I doubt he would scarce abide such a Trial before an Earthly Tribunal , armed with no better Allegations than Opinions ; and dare he stand it out before the dread Tribunal of a severely just God , who has commanded him , under pain of Eternal Damnation , not to violate his Sacred Law of Charity ? Observe his words , and you shall see 't is just the style of babbling Gossips at their meetings , when they have a mind to slander some Neighbour they hate , and dare name no Author for fear of being caught and confuted : 't is the Opinion of some body , that knows I know what , that spoke with those that heard it from others , who have reason to know more than we do , etc.  What Stuff is this to ground so horrid an Accusation of a King upon ! But why does not this Slanderer , if Opinion have such a Power with him , reflect how it is the Opinion of all England , that that Lady was not his Sister , and that King Charles the first 's Queen never had any Child after his Death ; that many are not only of Opinion , but have certain Knowledge , that that Lady had both another Father and Mother than those he is pleased to assign her , and can bring many Witnesses of her Birth and Extraction ; as That she was Daughter to my Lord Grandison and his Lady , her Name registered in the Parish Book where she was born , all the Neighbourhood being Witnesses of her Education in her Infancy ; and her Relations , that she was brought up afterwards with my old Lady Villers her Aunt ? Is it not a wilful Dotage then to prefer the Opinion of some few , against the certain Knowledge of many , and the Consent of the whole Nation ? His Second Proof is , That Mr. R. OH ▪ saw that Earl and that Queen married . He must pardon me if I do not believe him . But , does it follow thence , that that Queen had ever a Child , or if she had , that the Lady Castelmain was that Child ? Or why is it rather to be believed for that reason ? Must every Female Child be believed to be their Daughter , because they were married ; and this notwithstanding the Certain and Firm Belief , nay , Knowledge , of all her near Relations , that she had other Parents ? What a beastly Fool is this , where clearest Evidence was needful and expected , to allege nothing but perfect Nonsense ? How will this insulting Barbarian clear himself then of this graceless Slander ? He told us in his Preface , That as for the more secret Transactions , the Events and Consequences were his witnesses , which voided the necessity of his Apologizing . Now , here is a Transaction the most Secret of any in the World ; and , what Consequences , what Events can he allege to justify the Truth of it ? Alas , he had quite forgot that : All he talks is at mere Random , and such things use to go as they come ; they are taken up to serve the present purpose , and dismissed again without ever thinking of them after . 

But Blatant makes that Lady King Ch. his Sister by the Mother's side only , which renders it but Incestuous to the half part , and so in his Opinion does not blemish that King enough . Have-at him then once again ( says he ) with another and a more complete Incest with the Duchess of Orleans , who was his own Sister by Father and Mother's side both . He charges it positively upon him and that Virtuous Princess ( p. 50. ) who , in despite of her husband 's pretended Jealousy ( which , as also Obloquy , are the usual Misfortunes of those Ladies who are rare Beauties ) was ever held by all that knew her well , and were her constant Attendants , the Mirror of her Sex , both for excellent Natural Endowments , Moral Virtue , and unspotted Honour and Chastity . I demand then his Proof for this double foul-mouthed Calumny : Not a jot , he thanks you ; his own ipse dixit , and bare Affirmation , is all he can afford us : For , sure he cannot think that the DOCTOR of B — is holding the Door looks , in the least , like a Proof , were it true , which 't is very unlikely to be ; for , Why could they not ( were such a shameful Wickedness intended ) go into a Room where they could themselves fasten the Door on the inside ? Is it any Misbecomingness for a Brother and Sister , who ever loved dearly , and had been many years far distant from one another , to desire ( after such a Medley of Chances happened to them both , which Nature would prompt them to communicate ) to be an Hour or two in private ? Or , is it unusual , that such near Relations , at their first Interview , should have some body attend at the Door , to keep them from being disturbed in their Discourse ? Had he alleged , That the Duke peeped in at the Door , or through it , and seen any the least Indecency , ( though it had argued an incredible Folly in them both , to take no better order for their Privacy ) this Forger might have had some small Shadow of Excuse : But , to allege nothing , but that one stood without the Door , and then raise so foul a Slander upon such an Innocent Circumstance , and so usual in every Prince's Court , shows , that this Ribald's Soul , and the Spiritual Life of it , Charity , is totally corrupted with the Gall of Bitterness ; and that Slander is so natural to him , that he vomits it out gratis , without caring or concerning himself whether there be the least shadow of Ground for it or no. He is as much out in his Conjecture , that this Rencounter occasioned her Death . The DOCTOR of Orleans knew she was to come into England , and gave his Consent to it ; and Blatant himself tells us , if we may believe him , That he knew she was to have a private Conference with her Brother about making a League with France : And more than this , the Duke neither knew nor could know when she came back : Why should this then so alarm him ? But the whole Story is perfectly false ; for , whoever has conversed with the Great ones in France , may hear it there current , That ( in case the D's Jealousy caused her to be poisoned ) it was ever held to be for the sake of another , who would needs either follow or attend her into England , and , that not the least apprehension of K. Charles was ever in his Thought . So that our Blatant is a mere Forger of Slander , and a Patcher together of Falsehoods , to defame his Neighbour , nay , his Sovereign , and by consequence , a perfect Apostate ▪ from true Christianity , or rather what those who know him do conceive of him , a perfect Atheist . 

It remains now , only to examine what kind of Kidney this man is of as to his Principles of Government : He scatters his Thoughts here and there , concerning that point too , and I hope one Stricture or two will give us a perfect knowledge of the System he would set up in the World to govern it by . He tells us then ( p. 2. ) That where the Prince strives to subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Society , there He is the Traitor and the Rebel , and not the People , who endeavour to preserve and defend their own . Had he said , That in that Case they had been Unjust Men or Tyrants , I should not oppose him ; but , the word Traitor or Rebel , applied to a King or Supreme Governor , is a kind of Bull in Human Language , and sounds like a Slipshoe-hat . If a King can be a Traitor , or a Rebel , he must be a Traitor or a Rebel to somebody above him : And , who can that be , in his Judgement , but the People ? By his Discourse then the People are the Sovereigns , and the Prince is their Subject , it being Nonsense to say , that the King and the People may be mutually Traitors and Rebels to one another . By which we may see how consonantly to these Principles of his he bears himself , in thus huffing Kings : For , he being one of the Super-royal People , that is a Parcel-soveraign , 't is but fit he should at his pleasure kerb and check , and rail at those naughty Boys , Tom , Dick , and jack , the Princes , which are his and the People's Vassals and Subjects . 

Take another Expression of his , which is so odd , that one cannot easily tell at first sight what to make of it . Speaking of K. Ch. the Second , ( p. 25. ) he has these words : From the first hour of his arrival into These Kingdoms , ( for I d●●e not call them His ) etc.  Why , what fears he ? Or , What should hinder him ? Did any person in the World but K. Charles lay claim to them when he was restored ? Was there any other Pretender under Heaven , that put in for his Right when he came to take possession of them ? no , no , means Blatant , ( if he mean any thing ) there was no other indeed of those pitiful Usurpers called Kings did so , but the People were the True Sovereigns , and unjustly driven out from their Government of it , when the Nation was ( pawn 33. ) in a Delirium and Frenzy upon his Restauration . This sure should be his Commonwealthish Meaning , and 't is confirmed by his telling us , p. 27 ; That it was a Great Blunder in Politics , to re-admit K. Ch. the Second for their King.  

In a word , he is a Commonwealth's man every Inch of him , and his Flatteries of the present Governors are but mere Feintures , either out of prospect of getting Money , or some petty Place for Secret Service , by means of some Friend that set him on to scribble ; or else out of hope they will stoop to a Common-wealthish-government ; in which I shall hope and pray he may find himself mistaken . 

Friend , I have performed your Command in perusing attentively the Libel you sent me . I have milked your He-goat , and have found nothing in him but Froth and Filth : Give me Leave to complain of you for setting me about such an unwelcome Task ; for , to meddle with such a dirty Antagonist , is ( as an ingenious Gentleman said in a like occasion ) Non tam in arenam quam in sterquilinium descendere . One Key will serve to open all he has thus laboriously involved . Let but the Reader carry along with him that ordinary Discretion ( as every honest man ought ) not to yield his Assent to the least tittle of his smooth Tale , merely for its being said , but suspend his Belief till he sees it proved ; and , withal , be aware , that the pretended Proof depend not on his bare word , but either on Authentic Records , acknowledged by the Generality of the Indifferent World , or upon the necessary Consequence from some known Matter of Fact , and then I dare pronounce , that he will not find even a probable Reason to give Credit to one Line in his Libel , that are invective against those two Princes , as endeavouring to introduce Slavery and Popery . This Honour I shall willingly yield to the Author , that he is an Absolute Idea in his kind , or an admirable and almost unimitable Exemplar , to show us how much it is possible to deviate from the Love of Truth , which is so agreeable to our Nature ; or rather to degenerate into a perfect Hatred of it , whenever it thwarts the Headlong Impulse of his Rash Passion or Rude Malice . 

Your Humble Servant , N. N.  

