REASONS FOR CROWNING THE Prince and Princess of Orange KING and QVEEN jointly , And for placing the Executive Power in the Prince alone . 

Whereas the Grand Convention of the Estates of England , have asserted the People's Right by declaring , That the late King James the Second , having endeavoured to Subvert the Constitution of the Kingdom , by breaking the Original Contract between King and People : And by advice of Jesuits , and other wicked persons , having Violated the Fundamental Laws : And having withdrawn himself out of this Kingdom , has abdicated the Government , and that the Throne is thereby Vacant . For which Misgovernment He has forfeited the Trust of the Regal Inheritance of the Executive Power , both in Himself , and in His Heirs , Lineal and Collateral ; so that the same is devolved back to the People , who have also the Legislative Authority ; and consequently may of Right Give and Dispose thereof , by heir Representatives , for their future Peace , Benefit , Security , and Government , according to their good Will and Pleasure . And forasmuch as it is absolutely Necessary , that the Government be speedily settled on sure and lasting Foundations , and consequently , that such Person or persons be immediately placed in the Throne , in whom the Nation has most reason to repose an entire Confidence : It therefore now lies upon Us to make so Judicious a choice , that we may , in all Human Probability , thereby tender Ourselves a Happy People , and give our Posterity cause to rejoice , when they shall Read the proceedings of this Wise and Grand CONVENTION . Who is it therefore , that has so highly Merited , the Love and good Opinion of the People ? the Honour of Wearing the Crown , and Swaying the Sceptre of this Land ? As His illustrious Highness the Prince of Orange , who with so great Expense , Hazard , Conduct , Courage , and Generosity , has happily Rescued Us from Popery and Slavery ; and with so much Gallantry Restored Us to our ancient Rights , Religion , Laws , Liberties , and Properties : for which Heroic Action , we can do no lesle , in Prudence , Honour , and Gratitude , than pray Him to Accept Our Crown . 

II It is better to settle the Exercise of the Government in One who is not immediate in the Line , than in One that is , ( 1 , ) Because it is a clear Asserting of a Fundamental Right that manifests the Constitution of the English Government , and covers the Subjects from Tyranny and Slavery . ( 2. ) It cuts off the Dispute of the pretended Prince of Wales . ( 3. ) The old Succession being legally Dissolved , and a new one made , the Government is secured from falling into the hands of a Papist . 

III The making the Prince and Princess of Orange King and Queen jointly , is the nation 's Gratitude and Generosity : And by recontinuing the Line in Remainder , is manifested the inesteemable Value the People have for the two Princesses , notwithstanding the Maladministration of their Unhappy Father . 

iv. The present State of Europe in General , and of these Kingdoms in particular , require a Vigorous and Masculine Administration . To recover what 's lost , rescue what 's in danger , and rectify what 's amiss , cannot be effected but by a Prince that is consummate in the Art both of Peace and War. Thou the Prince and Princess be King and Queen jointly , and will equally share the Glory of a Crown , and we the Happiness of their Auspicious Reign : yet the wisdom of the Grand Convention is manifested , ( 1st . ) In placing the Executive Power in one of them , and not in both ; for two persons , equal in Authority , may differ in Opinion , and consequently in Command ; and it is evident no Man can serve two Masters . ( 2ly . ) it 's highly necessary and prudent , rather to rest the Administration in the Husband than in the Wife : ( 1. ) Because a Man , by Nature , Education and Experience , is generally rendered more capable to Govern than the Woman . Therefore , ( 2. ) the Husband ought rather to Rule the Wife , than the Wife the Husband , especially Considering the Vow in Matrimony . ( 3. ) The Prince of Orange is not more proper to Govern as he 's Man , and Husband only , but as he is a Man , a Husband , and a Prince of known Honour , profound wisdom , undaunted Courage , and incomparable Merit ; as he 's a Person that 's naturally inclined to be just , Merciful and Peaceable , and to do all public Acts of Generosity for the Advancement of the Interest and happiness of Human Societies , and therefore most fit under Heaven , to have the sole Executive Power . 

Reprinted in the Year , 1689.  

