Mola asinaria : or , the unreasonable and insupportable burden now pressed upon the shoulders of this groaning nation : by the headless head , and unruly rulers , that usurp upon the liberties and privileges of the oppressed persons . Held forth in a remonstrance to all those that have yet sound and impartial ears to hear , and duly weighed in the scales of equity and justice . 

by William Prynne , bencher of Lincolns-inn . 

Wherein is demonstrated , what slavery the nation must subject itself to , by allowing the lawfulness and usurped authority of the pretended long parliament now unlawfully and violently held at Westminster . 

Jusque datum sceleri . 

Printed at London , in the year mdclvix . 

Mola asinaria , &c.  

Countrymen : 

There is not any thing in the universe deserves less to be a member of it , than a self-seeking man , who unconcerned in the public good , regards only his private interest . The world unwillingly contributes to his maintenance ; and nature less abhors a vacuum , then that any place should be filled by a subject so empty of desert . He is a savage creature in the midst of civil persons , not deserving to be born of others , as not caring to live , but for himself . Nay , it is worthily reputed a kind of civil death , to do nothing else but live : for as long as we have a country to abide in , we have a duty to tender it . All we have , we have from it ; and by consequence owe it all we have . Our lives and fortunes are safest , when ventured for the public interest ; and he is the truest lover of law and liberty , that affects rather to be ruled , then to rule ; he the freest subject , that creates himself a voluntary slave to his country's service . Take from the world this inviolable law , ( That is not writ in brass , but deeply imprinted in loyal hearts ) and it shall again turn savage and barbarous . This is a truth so manifest , and not to be dissembled , that never yet was there a tyrant , but pretended to be a saviour of the persons . Liberty , conscience , a glorious nation , the good old cause , and such specious names are made use of : nec quisquam alienum servitium & dominationem concupivit , ut non eadem ista vocabula usurparit . these Machiavilian tricks , and political cheats so often put upon the persons of our nation , methinks should have by this time undeceived us with a sad experience of the miseries we have subjected ourselves to , by a perpetual itch of reforming , annulling , creating laws , and framing new governments to the model of every grandees ambition ; and yet we are again ready to thrust our necks into a new yoke of slavery , rather than any man will engage his private fortunes , and venture to redeem his country from bondage . It is laid to the charge of Englishmen by foreigners , that we are {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , and above all nations under heaven pretending to civility , the greatest self-seekers ; as regarding much more our own particular , than the general concerns . I must needs say , other nations would have canonised for martyrs , and erected statues after their death to the memory of some of our compatriots , whom ye have barbarously defaced and mangled yet alive , for no other motive , but their undaunted zeal . It has been ( I know not whether i should say ) your misfortune , or my glory , to become a sufferer for a legal vindication of the liberties of our kingdom ; but yet i never knew what it was to fear , when i perceived myself engaged in so good a cause ; not envy nor snarling pamphlets shall stop the course of my pen freely running into my country's defence , which my profession and age forbid me to vindicate by the sword . Let young men serve it with their strength and arms , let old men secure it by their heads and counsel : for my part , i desire to live no longer than i can in some sort contribute to so glorious a work . I have of late been snarled at for it by certain licentious scribblers , that durst not own their names for fear of discovering their ass' ears : however , they are pleased to twitch at the honourable remnant of mine . They thought to have stopped my mouth by their brawling and braying ; but i dare yet speak louder ; and i hope i shall be heard by all such as have yet sound and impartial ears : but if my cry will not reach you , i fear ( Dear countrymen ) the voice of blood will speedily interrupt your slumbering security . Those that will be lawless , find fault with my writings , because i vindicate the anciently established laws of England ; and tax me of desperate nonsense , because i will not allow them an unlimited , unlegal legislative power to repeal , annul , alter , and enact what laws soever they deem best to serve their own turns . They deceitfully cry out , salus populi suprema lex esto ! an axiom that i no ways deny to be true ; but i would desire to be instructed who are to be judges , of what is expedient for the good of the persons ? The author of the forecited maxim says , leges magistratibus praesunt , ut magistratus praesunt populo : and the great doctor St. Austin not doubted to affirm , that those societies where law and justice is not , are not commonwealths or kingdoms , but magna latrocinia , great thefts and trapanning cheats . As for the power of altering laws , or bringing in new ones , and setting up new governments , it is allowed by wise men , that all power lawfully exercised upon a commonwealth , must necessarily be derived either from the appointment of God , who is supreme Lord of all ; or from the consent of the society itself , that hath the next power to his , of disposing of their own liberty , as they shall think fit for their good , whose benefit is the end of all government . Therefore whoever arrogates such power to himself , that cannot produce one of these two titles , is not a ruler , but an invader , or a tyrant . Now how this pretended long parliament , restored by the force of soldiers , by whose force it had first been dissolved , and was before annulled by the death or murder of King Charles the first , that summoned it , he being principium , causa , & finis parliamenti ; after his murder , the house of Lords and monarchy being abolished , and so many of the ancient members thrown out , new ones unduly elected , and such horrid thefts , rapes , &c. committed by them upon the persons , can lawfully be said the people's representatives , and authorised by them , is the greatest riddle that ever was propounded to a puzzled state . It was in the year 1649 , that i published a legal vindication of the liberties of England ; in which i demonstrated the nullity of the then-pretended long parliament ; and lately i set forth a lively pattern of the spurious old cause pretended to be revived and vindicated by the fine pageant or now-sitting ghost of the long-since departed long parliament ; neither need i reason farther with reasonable persons about it : yet since this fantastical hob-gobbling appears still to fright the quiet persons , and tempts them ( Like an evil spirit ) to give themselves to such an unruly devil ; i will here only hold forth to the view of all good Englishmen , what slavery they must needs subject themselves unto , if they resolve to cast off forever their lawful Master and sovereign , and take for new Masters these upstart domineering tyrants . Let then every honest freeborn subject of England , lay his hand upon his breast , and ask of his own conscience , whether notwithstanding all former oaths of allegiance , supremacy , protestation , solemn leagues and covenants , &c. he can voluntarily submit to , and thereby freely acknowledge , contrary to his former knowledge and the said oath , &c.  

1.  That there May be , and now is a lawfully-assembled parliament of England actually in being , legally continuing after the late King's death , or lawfully reassembled without King , Lords , or most of their fellow-members , consisting only of a few late members of the Commons house . 

2.  That this parliament reestablished by a military force ▪ and packed together by power of an army combining with them , hath just and lawful authority , and had it before ; 1.  To arraign , condemn and execute their lawful King himself , with the peers and Commons of this realm . 
2.  To disinherit the King's posterity of the crown . 
3.  To extirpate monarchy , and the whole house of peers . 
4.  To violate the privileges , rights , freedoms , customs , and alter the constitution of parliaments themselves ; to change and subvert the ancient government , seals , laws , writs , courts and coin of the kingdom . 
5.  To sell and dispose of all the lands , revenues , jewels , goods of the crown , with the lands of Deans and chapters , for their own advantages , not for the easing of the persons from taxes . 
6.  To dispose of the forts , ships , forces , offices of honour , power , trust or profit , to whom they please . 
7.  To raise and keep up what forces by land or sea they please , and impose taxes , &c. to make what new acts , laws , and reverse what old ones they think meet . 
8.  To absolve themselves ( By more than a papal power ) and all the subjects of this land , from all the aforesaid oaths , engagements , protestations , &c.  
9  To permit , settle , or invent what sect , heresy , or religion they please , provided they be not papacy or prelacy , and that they allow not blasphemy against the trinity . 
10.  I ask now if every freeborn subject that hath not raised himself an interest by villainy , or an estate by robbery , or incurred a guilt to the gallows for having his hand in blood , had not better venture life and fortunes to reduce the true and lawful heir into a peaceful possession of his right , then to authorise by his consent a new-fangled government compacted of treason , usurpation , tyranny , theft and murder ? 


Finis . 





tacit.  Cicero . de civit . Dei . 







