Modern Religion AND Ancient Loyalty : A DIALOGUE . 

LONDON , Printed in the Year 1699.  

Modern Religion AND Ancient Loyalty : A DIALOGUE . 

Loyalty .  WHAT black Decree of Overruling Fate , 
Ordains me thus Unfortunate of Late , 
Who once made Nations Happy , and their Princes Great ? 
The People's Safety , and the throne 's Delight , 
Religion's only Darling Favourite ; 
Whose holy Priests assisted at my Birth , 
Nursed me as Virtue , and proclaimed my Worth 
Through all the Christian Kingdoms of the Earth . 
Where long , as Monarch of the Heart , I Reigned ; 
By all Approved , and by the Church Maintained ; 
To me their Love , I gratefully repaid ; 
And Nations where I dwelled , I easy made : 
Preserved the Subject's Duty to the Crown , 
And made the People and the Prince but One. 
I all things in a happy Medium steered , 
Clad in Bright Innocence , unstained appeared , 
Beloyed by all Good M●● , by none but Rebel's feared . 
But now , alas ! by some prevailing Chance , 
That sprang from Interest , Pride , or Ignorance , 
Or some Rebellious Seeds that Lurk unseen , 
Within the Hearts of blind mistaken Men , 
am I Abandoned , Slighted , and Despised , 
And from my Milk-white Robes in Rags Disguised ; 
Thrust out of Country , City , Church , and Court , 
And Foo● Ba●-like , become the Public Sport. 
Corrupted thus , they all conspire my Doom , 
And raise inglorious Interest in my room . 
Interest , that oft Contaminates the Saint ; 
And makes the Knave in holy Language Cant. 
Interest , that first taught Innocence to sin ; 
And bribe's the Heart to let Corruption in . 
Interest , that over All bears Sov'reign Sway , 
Makes the Friend faithful , and the Rogue betray , 
The Soldier hazard Life , and the Great Man Obey . 
Tell me Religion — 
Why do your Teachers suffer me to Fall , 
Once so Upheld , but now the Scorn of all ; 
Excluded from your Pulpits , and betrayed ; 
By your Revolving Priests an Odious made ; 
What was your Doctrine once , why do you now Evade ? 


Religion .  Faction Prevails , and does too Powerful grow ; 
You see I 'm brought by Toleration Low. 
How can You hope by Me to be Advanced , 
Since I myself am thus Discountenanced ? 
My spurning Foes on every side Aspire : 
I Loose my Power , They Gain what they Desire . 
How then can I ( Reduced by their Designs ) 
Promote Your Interest , when my Own Declines ? 
no more can I Redress thy Present State , 
Than Falling Princes make their Favourites Great . 
The Growing Factions thy Obedience blame , 
And call thee but an Empty Sound , a Name ; 
They think thee Giddiness , a Church-disease , 
And Tumble and Transfer thee as they please . 
thou canst expect no Favour in an Age , 
Where Truth is hissed from off the Public Stage ; 
And Virtue hides her Head , whilst Pride and Envy rage . 
Thy hateful Strictness would my Followers Fright , 
Who brand thee with the Name of Jacobite ; 
Thou known to all Opinions , few apply thee right . 
When Both Acknowledged One Supreme Command , 
Like Faithful Friends , we then walked Hand in Hand ; 
But since the Power of Heaven has changed the Scene , 
By Notions False you have Misguided been ; 
And through Erroneous Principles , Dissent 
From Me , and Heavens' Appointed Government . 
In Your Behalf how can my Clergy Pled , 
If you deny Submission to my Head ; 
And think yourself Vnalterably bound 
To the mere Name of King , wherein no Power is found ? 
Whilst you Refuse your stubborn Neck to Bow 
TO Authority , both Church and Laws allow ; 
And like a Treacherous G●ide betray the Blind , 
To Grope for Treasure , which they never can find , 
To all my Priesthood Odious wilt thou be ; 
And canst no Aid expect from Them or Me. 
We Yield Allegiance to the Sov'reign Sway ; 
Who heaven Anoints , Religion must Obey . 
Till you Submit , you can no Longer Bind ; 
The Freeborn Subject won't be so confined : 
And if they be , when once   broke the Chain , 
Like Bears , 't is hard to Fetter them again . 
they 'll hazard All to set their Minds but Free , 
So highly do they prise their Liberty ; 
That darling Object of the People's Love , 
The only Spring that does the Public move ; 
The Peasant's Comfort , and the Richman's Care , 
The Crown of Peace , and common Cause of War ; 
A kingdom 's Pride , Strength , Safety and Delight , 
The Monarch's Duty , and the Subject's Right ; 
A Pleasing Bliss the dullest Lump desire's , 
The only Native Good that all Mankind Admires . 
But You an Adamantine Yoke designed , 
Attempting , by a Lawless Force , to Bind ; 
And make Allegiance such a Fatal Chain , 
That cannot , must not be dissolved by Man 
How can such Highflown Loyalty agree 
With Bounded Power , and Native Liberty ? 
For if Obedience be the Subjects part , 
When Kings an Arbitrary Power exert , 
What Lawful Fence or Bulwark can there be 
The People to secure from Slavery ? 
What Rights or Freedoms can a Nation boast , 
But what may be by Sov'reign Power engrossed ? 
What Law can Hinder , or what Curb Restrain , 
The wild Ambition of a Vicious Man ? 
All at a Tyrant's Mercy then must be , 
Religion , Life , Estate , and Liberty ; 
The People all are Slaves , none but the Monarch Free. 
Besides — 
Submission of the Whole implies Consent ; 
And Absolute Confirms the Government . 
If you Bear Wrongs , and may Prevent the same , 
Who but the Sufferers shall Deserve the Blame ? 
Such Passive Tameness , when   Power to Nile , 
Concludes you as a Partner in the Ill. 
The Patient Bigot who Resigns his Rights , 
In Duty to a Tyrant's Will Submits ; 
Against the Public Good and Safety , Errs ; 
And basely Does more Injury than he bears . 
Thus by degrees Intails a Slavery ; 
And Gains the Curses of Posterity ; 
These are the sad Effects of too strict Loyalty : 
From hence you 're termed a musty Roman Cheat , 
Almost Exploded , and grown Obsolete . 
As far as You the Nations Rights Secure , 
And Bind Allegiance to the King in Power , 
Such Loyalty I Hold , and such Maintain , 
Whose chain 's no longer than a Prince's Reign . 
But such Deny as cannot be Removed , 
When Just the Cause , and by the States Approved . 
If such Exploded Tenets you Defend , 
I 'm no more Yours , than You the kingdom 's Friend . 


Loyalty .  Too Well , alas ! Grave Guide , you know the Cause , 
Made me Aspire and Tower Above the Laws : 
Your Frenzy Raised me to a Height too Great , 
From whence I Sunk to this Dejected State : 
Unlawful Greatness in Contempt oft Ends , 
A sudden Fall too quick a Rise Attends . 
And when Beneath the Public Scorn I lay , 
Thus left , You Steered your Course another way : 
So the Rich Churl , from all Misfortunes free , 
Proudly Shuns others in Adversity . 
First by your Priesthood was I made too Great , 
Preached up as the Main Prop of Church and Sat ; 
Enjoined on all , as Monarchies best Friend , 
On whom the Throne and nation 's Peace depend ; 
As spotless Virtue in the Church received ; 
Taught as sound Doctrine , and as such Believed . 
Thus did your Clergy blaze my Fame — 
'T was I first Tamed the Brutal Rage of Man ; 
In me alone Obedience first began . 
I was the Reinss to which the Curb is tied , 
By which Great Men their Lesser Agents guide . 
The Soldier I with Noble Warmth Inspire , 
( True Loyalty the Chillest Thoughts could Fire ) 
And turn by force of Duty , Fear into Desire . 
I taught the Subject , by an Inward Voice , 
TO Obey his King , not by Constraint , but Choice ; 
And wade through Dangers to Protect the Throne , 
Bend on his Prince's Safety , heedless of his Own. 
If you to Kings are such a Faithful Friend , 
As your Learned Clergy to their Flocks pretend , 
Why do they not my Excellent Use Proclaim , 
And to the World define me what I am ? 
To some known Rules why am I not Confined , 
Or why thus tossed with every change of wind ? 
Tutored by you from Virtue's School I came ; 
So place me , I may always be the same ; 
For if I 'm no where fixed , I next to nothing am . 


Religion .  In Times of Old , when Man forsaken his God , 
And Pride and Envy scattered were abroad ; 
When those Just Morals that preserved our Peace , 
( E'er Kings were chose ) began at first to cease , 
Ambition did the Heart of Man possess , 
Taught him to Insult , to Conquer , and Oppress ; 
And magnify Himself , by making Others Lesle . 
The World increased , worse Quarrels still began ; 
no Beasts such Enemies as Man to Man : 
Small were their Comforts , great was their Di●●ress , 
Like Fish the Mighter prayed upon the Lesle . 
These Cruel Ills and sad Disorders brought 
Desire of Kings into the People's Thought , 
That by his prudent Rule might be Appeased 
Those dire Confusions , which Themselves had Raised . 
To Laws most fit they both Subscribed Consent , 
To preserve justice , and Abuse prevent ; 
And on this Basis built their Regal Government , 
Thus did the Sufferings of Unpolished Man , 
Make the Wild Herd for Kingly-pow'r complain , 
From their own Ills they might prote●ted be , 
And dread no more each others Enmity ; 
Thus changed for Human Safety Savage Liberty . 
With glad Submission , they the Laws Obeyed , 
The Laws their Ruler and Themselves had made ; 
then Prince and Priest in Friendly Union joined ; 
The Crowd with joy some Native Rights resigned . 
By crafty Dreams , and Inspiration led , 
what 's first their Choice , was then their Duty made ; 
The Lord commands you now to bow your Stubborn Head. 
then was that Bond called Loyalty contrived ; 
From hence your Ancient Pedigree's derived . 
At first the People did on Terms agree , 
Protect Us , we 'll Your Faithful Subjects be ; 
But if you , like the Crane , exert your Power , 
Make us your Slaves , and us poor Frogs Devour ; 
The king 's Dissolved , when you our Lives Betray , 
And we are bound no longer to Obey . 
If he Destroys those Rights he should preserve , 
Subjects may justly from their Duty swerve . 
If he 's a Tyrant , Faithless , and Unjust , 
He Forfeits , when he Falsifies his Trust. 
All Obligations , on the People's side , 
Are , by his breach of Covenant , made void . 
When led by Vice , he ceases to maintain 
justice , the Law of Heaven has made it plain , 
He has no longer any Right to Reign . 
then what is Loyalty , that hidebound thing , 
That does to Misery all such Bigots bring ; 
Who , when the Power is lost , pursue the Name of King. 
So the fond Cur , when his kind Master dies , 
Pines over the Grave , where his dead Sov'reign Lies , 
Expecting every Moment he again will Rise . 
Into like Errors you your Friends betray , 
And lead them as a Will i' th' Wisp astray , 
To wander in great Danger , from the beaten Way . 
You ought to bind the Subject to the Throne , 
With due respect to Him , who justly Rules thereon . 
If you direct towards persons , wrong 's your Aim , 
For they may Change , But still the Powers the same , 
Which is from Heaven derived ; and Power alone , 
Confirms the Right of him that Guide's the Throne : 
And when that Power , by want of Conduct's lost , 
The king 's Dissolved that can't Maintain his Post. 
Thus if the the Prince beyond the Laws has Erred , 
Subjects Allegiance may be then Transferred , 
To that Great Mind whose Wise Capacious Soul , 
Hath raised him to be next most fit to Rule . 
Or if through Weakness , or Imprudence grown 
Too Tame , to do the justice of the Throne , 
How can the People rest on his Protection ? 
then who so ever intrudes with Greater Might , 
And shall divest him of his Sov'reign Right , 
If to his Government the Land agree , 
By greater Power has greater Right than he : 
If so than you are False , and should Comply , 
With him that bears the Sovereignty . 
And Teach your Misled Followers to bring , 
Obedient Hearts , as the best Offering ; 
Not to the Person only , but the Power of king . 


Loyalty .  From my old Friend , what Doctrine do I hear ; 
In what strange Monstrous Shape's do you appear ? 
In a few Years how you have changed your Text ; 
And showed yourself too Fickle to be Fixed : 
The Ancient Purity you once might Boast , 
In Interest , Pride , and Flattery now is Lost. 
And all your Glories , which appeared so bright 
And Dazzling , Shone by Faith and Reason's Light , 
Look Dim , as if Eclipsed by Sinful Pleasure's Night . 
When Priests were nearer much to Heaven Allied , 
And Grace and Truth their Doctrines Beautified ; 
Teaching in gross , with Pains , the People's Good ; 
And they the same with Innocence pursued : 
then was I Great , in each Goods Man's Esteem ; 
And only then Shined Bright the Diadem . 
When Kings , as God's Vicegerents , were Allowed , 
Not chosen , by the Blind and Partial Crowd ; 
But held too Sacred to be bound in Bands , 
Or be Defiled by th' Multitudes Rude Hands . 
But by a Right Divine the Sceptre Swayed , 
And all thus Taught , the Godlike Man Obeyed . 
then Led by Grace , your Sable Tribe were bend , 
To lengthen out the Reinss of Government . 
Passive Obedience was the Prophet's Dream ; 
And Non Resistance was the Preachers Theme . 
Into these Yokes the People you Betrayed , 
Till Galled them with the Rig'rous Chains you made . 
Who but yourselves Advanced this Airy Thought , 
Called Duty then , though Now as Slavery Taught . 
Thus what you once Upheld , you now Crush down , 
To Faith's Contempt , and Scandal to the Gown : 
If they are Useful Truths , which once you Teach , 
Why not continue still the same to Preach ? 
And if false Principles , why then Maintain , 
What now you hold so Dangerously Vain ? 
TO Assert what 's False , or Truth Condemns a Crime , 
For Each are still the same at every Time : 
Be 't Right , or Wrong , you still incur a Blame ; 
Yours was the Error , and to You the Shame . 
no Various Constitutions can excuse , 
Such Shists and Turns your Unfixed Clergy use , 
To Heavens' Dishonour , and the Worlds Abuse . 
If they , like Shuttlecocks , Fly too and from , 
How shall Mankind their Faith or Duty Know ? 
If the True Light must Kindle and Expire , 
As th' Interest of the Prince , or Priest require , 
Who then would Rashly with the Church Believe , 
Or Pin his Faith upon the Prophet's Sleeve ? 
Religion sure the Wise would lay aside , 
And choose Dim Reason as the Surer Guide . 
Since fatal Turns and Changes now Divide 
Those happy Links , in which we once were tied ; 
And we in Sov'reign Power thus disagree , 
Through our old Christial Law I 'll let you see , 
What you once Taught , and I now hold a King to be . 
In Cheerful Strains these Joyful Truths I Sing , 
Sacred's the Royal Person of the King , 
By th' Laws allowed to be alone Supreme ; 
And holds of his Own Right the Diadem . 
A Monarch , and Subordinate to none , 
Accountable on Earth , to God alone , 
Immovably United to the Throne . 
As Heaven itself , whose only Law is Will , 
Head of all Power can therefore do no Ill 
So King's , in their own Kingdoms , are the same , 
Can do no Wrong , and so Incur no Blame . 
Judges and Counsellors being chosen free , 
TO Advice , Determine , and if Faults their be , 
They screen the Prince from all Rebellious Calumny . 
The Laws , by the Three States in Union made , 
( Joined , or apart , the Sov'reign's still the Head ) 
Have rendered Plainly , and beyond Dispute , 
The Throne from all Coercion Absolute . 
The Laws Divine , with Human Laws accord , 
For , Touch not my Anointed , says the Lord , 
Which proves that whatsoever Princes do , 
it 's still the Subjects Duty to be True ; 
And Tender unto Caesar what 's his Due . 
These Pious Doctrines Long did you Maintain ; 
These Truth's first bred me in the Heart of Man : 
then was I Doted on by every Priest , 
Tho'now become each Coxcomb common Jest : 
Over Smooth Tongues , from Pulpit did I Glide , 
And in each Subjects Mind Triumphant Ride , 
became the Christians Duty , and the Statesman's Pride . 
The Soldier's Honour , and the Clergies Fame , 
The Kingdom's Safety , and the Rebel's Shame , 
The Lawyer's Argument , the Poet's Theme , 
The Young Man's Glory , and the Old Man's Dream , 
The Prince's Pleasure , and the People's Joy , 
God Save the King , the Prayer of every Boy . 
These Epithets your Clergy once could give ; 
And Preached , and Prayed I might for ever Live. 
Approved me as a Virtue fit to Reign , 
And bear Dominion in the Hearts of Men. 
But that Church Wind that Aided in my flight , 
And raised me up to such a Tottering height , 
By Saints strong Bellowss , from the Pulpit-blown , 
Being turned against me , brought me tumbling down : 
Where Buried in Contempt , my Fate I Mourn , 
Till Raised again , to serve some Holy Turn . 
So the Lame Patient , when he 's eased of Pain , 
Sleights his old Wounds , and does the Salve disdain , 
But when it Smarts , is glad to use the like again . 


FINIS . 

