the cloudy clergy ; or , a mourning lecture for our morning lecturers ; intended for a weekly antidote against the daily infection of those London preachers , who de die in diem do corrupt the judgments of their seduced auditors , against the governors and government of the commonwealth of England : grounded upon received aphorisms , digested into chapters ; fit to be considered by those froward chaplins that have been the quondam beautefews against the late King of England ; and are the present beadsmen for the now King of Scotland . 

The like whereof they May expect from week to week , while they abuse the parliament and army from day to day . 

by a friend , who for their timous recovery doth Cri in hope . 

August 15. 1650.  

London , printed for Henry Cripps , and Lodowick Lloyd , and are to be sold in Popes-head-alley . 

chap. i. of just power and government . 

Iust government is God's ordinance for man's good•… and the kinds thereof are man's ordinance for God's glory ; to live without government becomes beasts and not men ; to live under the absolute arbitrement of any governor , i•… to make men become beasts ; the rise of government or the species thereof is the people's vote , a the rules thereof the people's reason , b and the end thereof the people's safety ; c all sovereignties are virtually the peoples , though formally their rulers ; the majesty of magistraci•… is di•…erst amongst the persons , and contracted in their rule•…ss , which is not conferred upon their magistra•… to divest the persons thereof ; but the better to preserve the persons there ▪ d neither hath the persons right to wrong themselves by passing away that patrimon•… irreversibly , which was first given the•… to preserve th•… from slavery ; the people's power 〈◊〉 is of little use and of great danger ; for the•… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 will b•… 〈◊〉 tie man's 〈◊〉 , •…and each neighbour May prove a tiger each to other without control the people's power so transferred as that it should be irreversible , irrevocable , tempts the rulers into t•… , and the persons into slavery ; which if i•… hath b•…en the sin of a forme•… generation , should be the sorrow of this , and 〈◊〉 occasion 〈◊〉 the providence of God in the 〈◊〉 of means •…o a 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 •…on to their primitive privileges e the children being bo•…d to repent and forsake , and not to p•…t in their father•… wickedness . God exalts no man for his own b•… other men's 〈◊〉 the greatest •…dss are the greatest for•… , 〈◊〉 greates•… glory 〈◊〉 be d•…gent conservators of the p•…oples' 〈◊〉 God hath ma•…e rulers consorts of his dignity ▪ 〈◊〉 have 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 therefore they are not despicable , but they shall die like me•… and therefore accomptible ; God is as full of goodness as greatness ; of mercy as majesty ; of grace as glory : when men are as good as great , they render themselves like God : not only honourable but amiable ; the glory of greatness is goodness , which ( Being commensurably mingled together in rulers ) renders their precapts preswasives to obedience ; majesty alone terrifies ; and a simple potentiality by divine permission May be in Satan ; love constrains ; and the vine May better compel in government than the bramble command ; and natural ingenuity makes men willing rather to be slaves to love then servants to meet power , 

So endeth the first chapter . 

Application . 

Is just government God's ordinance , and that for man's good ? and are the kinds thereof man's ordinance , and that for God's glory ? These principles thus connext , May serve as a bundle of rods for the backs of those fools ; who ( Like the unjust judge ) neither fear God , nor regard man , but by their pettish pens and unruly tongues , in sermons , in prayers , &c. do ( As much as in them lies ) cast thereins of government upon the necks of the persons , suffering them to run without control to the devil ( If they will ) intimating unto them that they are not obliged to the present government , and by consequence at least , pro tempore , to none at all ; there being no other government in acts exercito but only that that is now established ; and is not this the practice of several of our morning preachers , whose early supplications to the god of heaven are little better than envious ventilations of their distempered minds against his vicegerents on earth , and whose morning sermons de die in diem are little other then nauseous vomitious and servant ebullitions of their restless thoughts against our present rulers , who ( It seems with Solomon's wicked men ) cannot sleep except they have conceived some mischief against them ; and whose sleep is taken away by their pillow meditations how they May rise in the morning & manage the matter so in the pulpit , that they May cause some to fall into the like contempt ; who make no other mention of our governors in prayer & sermons before the Lord in the assemblies of his persons , than such as Satan did against Job , accusing them , and enviously repining and complaining of that hedge of protection which God hath made about their house , and about all that they have on every side , that he hath blessed the works of their hands , and that their substance is increased in the land ; most sollicitously pleading with God that he would put forth his hand against them , and touch all that they have with his finger of his displeasure , and pull them down and raise up their enemies ( Whom they have displaced ) in their room , who do so principle their persons against authority , as if their education was in the schools of those whose religion is rebellion , and whose faith is faction , who ( To establish the holy chair and themselves therein ) hold it not only lawful but meritorions to sacrifice the peace and tranquillity of whole commonwealths , yea and the very lives of our governors to the service of their distempered passions and discontents ; if they fast , it is for strife and debate , pretending a sacrifice unto God , and to worship him , but designing nothing more than ( As Herod in his pretence of worshing Christ sought his ruin ) to destroy this young commonwealth whilst it is in its swaddling clothes ; or as Baalam did in multiplying his sacrifices , from hill to hill , so these from pulpit to pulpit presuming they shall bless the Lord by cursing his persons , making their fasts from day to day in public , in private , with pretence of much zeal for the glory of God , for no other purpose then as jezebal did , the end whereof is to set Naboth on high in the sight of the persons , viz the parliament and army , to procure the sons of Belial , the rude multitude , falsely to charge them for blaspheming God by toleration of error , heresy , blasphemy ; &c. that so they May rise up and stone them , and take away their vineyard , their present authority which the Lord forbids them to part with all . If they pray , instead of making supplication for those that are in authority over them , that under them they May live a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty , which favour they more fully enjoy without the least control ( Except for disturbing the public peace ) then ever under any former authority ; they either make not the least mention of them , or else so stir up the persons against them by malignant false scandolus and base reflection of dishonour upon them , that have been little other then even bloody beautefews to another war . But let us hear their objections , and return them answers . 

Object . it is true . Just government is God's ordinance for man's good ; and the kinds thereof man's ordinance for God's glory ; but care that government be just that is procured by unjust ways ? Potentiality is not authority . If Jack Straw , or Wat Tiler , no•… ▪ Crumwell and Tom pride should by force of arms pull down our lawful magistrates , and set up themselves , and rule us with rods of iron , their glittering swords : is this just government ? must we obey ? will not our submission argue our concession to all that they have done ? And shall not we by our post act partake of their sin , and so of their curse ? 

First , we answer ; though we grant the government was altered by force of arms , and that comparatively , by a small party of the nation ; yet , rebus sie stantibus , and consideratis considerandis , they had a very sufficient warrant for what they did ; for first , they had authority ; secondly , they had equity ; thirdly , they had an opportunity for their action . The reason is plain , viz. because they only adhered unto their trust ; and the rest of their fellow commissioners , which with them were the trustees of the commonwealth , did plainly , treacherously , and basely , contrary to their trusts , their votes , covenants , promises and •…esolutionss , decline the peace and interest of the nation , endeavouring to patchup a peace with the late King upon such terms , which being acquiesced in , would , and that in the then judgement of the very Scots , destroy the very ends of all their former proceedings ; yea betook themselves unto such a course by treating with the late King which ( •…cording to their own declaration when there was •…ot the least shadow of restraint upon them ) they professed they could not in conscience do , except they were resolved before hand to treat away all that they fought for , and to be treated out of all that they •…uld not be fought out of , vea , which course if they should 〈◊〉 , they declared they should draw the whole g•…lt of all the bl•…d that 〈◊〉 shed in the three nations upon themselves , and not only •…oo bad do that which they declared would tend to the apparent destruction of the persons which have engaged , and the ends for which they did engage in the late 〈◊〉 ▪ and hereupon did resolve and orde•… ▪ th•… they would m•…e no 〈◊〉 addresses who the late King , prohibiting all others upon penalty of high treason , not to makes breath of that order ; that they would receive no message from him , enjoining , that no person whatsoever should presume to receive or bring any message from him , to either or both houses of parliament , or to any other person , and yet after all this , to the amazement of all men , let there be guilt of blood , or no guilt : let the persons formerly engaged in the wars , and the ends of such engagements be destroyed or not destroyed , so they , could shift for themselves , without regard had either to God or man , they treat with the King , and by the assistance of the tumultuous citizens , insurrecting counties , adjacent and remote in Wales , the revolting navy and the base Scot invading the nation , were like to reduce us to more intolerable bondage and slavery then ever was known in this land , and to make us more perfect vassals then any are in Turkey ; and was it not high time that such treacherous , if not traitorous persons as these were , should be plucked away even by head and ears that should thus ruin their country , and betray their trust ? Do we not well remember how the bells did ring changes at Westminster while these were among them ? how did they wheel and reel , advance and retreat , go forward and backward , do and undo , say and unsay , vote and unvote , order and disorder , that the then kingdom did so shuffle and shiver , so tremble and stagger , as if it would have run into the old tohu and bohu of confusion and annihilation , and the poor inhabitants of the nation knew not what to do , nor where to fix ? If they closed with the King , beware sequestration ; if they joined with the parliament , beware ; desolation ; if they cleaved to the army , the city did frown ; if they stuck to the city , the army must down . This day , be it ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in parliament , that such and such persons be sequestered for malignancy , for raising up the persons by the commission of array against the parliament of England ; the next day , be it ordained by the authority aforesaid , that the said such & such persons be the deputy lieutenants for such & such counties ; one day , these are straightly to charge and command you to take into your safe custody the bodies of such and such persons impeached of high treason , and this shall be your warrant ; the next day , these are straightly to charge and command you to release and set free the persons aforesaid , and this shall be your warrant . Yesterday , be it ordered by the authority of this house , that such and such persons be made uncapable to sit as members in this house during this present parliament ; to day , ordered by the authority aforesaid , that the members aforesaid be admitted to sit as members of this house . Yesterday , resolved upon the question , that it is not fit or safe for the kingdom that a personal treaty be admitted with the King until satisfaction and security be given for the blood that hath been shed by his commissions & commands ; to day , resolved upon the question , that there shall be a personal treaty with the King ; notwithstanding no such satisfaction nor security given as aforesaid ; yesterday , be it declared , that his majesty contrary to his trust , oath at coronation , &c. hath raised and levied a bloody and unnatural war , against his loving , and loyal subjects , the parliament of England ; to day , ordered , that his majesty come with freedom , honour and safety to one of his houses , at such a distance from London , upon his royal word , and verbal promise , that he shall sign such and such bills , &c.  Yesterday , be it ordered by the Lords and Commons in parliament assembled , that such and such persons be commissioners for the militia of the city of London for such a time ; to day again , be it ordained by the authority aforesaid , that the former persons be no more commissioners for the militia of the said city ; but that such and such , formerly displaced , be restored again ; yesterday , exit West from being any longer lieut. of the tower , & enter Titchburn ; to day Exi Titchburn , and enter West into his place again ; was there ever seen such crossings , such shiftings & shufflings , such yea and Noes , such Noes and yea in a parliament before , was it ever like that a parliament so constituted , so uncertain , tottering , staggering , so fast and loose , so up and down , would ever accommodate the interest of this nation as the case stood ? Nay , did not all men see that these treacherous members were ready to deliver all up into the hands of him that would quickly ruin and destroy us for our adherence even unto them ? so that it was high time for those that were faithful amongst them to consult how they Might though by force of arms , separate these false-hearted men from those that would still keep firm to their professed principles , of preservation of the peace and just liberty of this nation ? and if it was just to oppose the King , and his Lords and Commons , and that by force of arms , that would have ruined us , out of the house in the open field : it is as lawful to drve away , and that by force of arms too , those that did endeavour likewise to destroy us by a law , the houses of parliament , the common safety of the persons being the supreme and sovereign end both of parliament and armies ; by all this it appears that they had authority , rebus sic stantibus , to do what they have ; they are a rightful authority , being those that were chosen by the persons , and did adhere unto the ends of their first election , when the test did not . 

Secondly that they had sufficient reason for the altering of the government they have declared ; and because the reason thereof is not impleaded but the authority , therefore i shall wave that . 

Thirdly , they had an opportunity hereunto by the power of the army , as you very well know , for the thing was done , and they had been unfaithful in their trust , having such a means at hand to save the nation , had they not made use thereof accordingly , so that you see the grounds why we cannot grant that the present authority did come by their authority by unjust means , though they got it by force of arms , and that against the consent of the major vote of the parliament ; for here were votes against votes , the former contrary to the latter , those importing the people's good , these their hurt , those made when the parliament was free , these when they were under new fears of bringing in the late King by force of arms ; those votes becked with reason and arguments * certified by the parliament to the whole nation ; these grounded upon pleasure . We know that a parliament May vote and revoke , and revote again and again , order , unorder , and reorder , ordain , repeal , and reordain , the same things over , and over , all conducing in their best apprehensions to common safety ; and faithfulness to their trust , May require them so to do , because it is the end , viz. common safety , and not the means , viz. their votes , orders , ordinances &c. that must prostrate them ; and as the case May stand , we May be bound in conscience to submit thereunto ; but when they have praepossessed our reason and judgement not by bare votes , orders , and ordinances , but by strong and effectual reasons and arguments against treating with the than King , as bringing upon them ( and consequently the whole nation ) all the blood that hath been shed in these wars , yea , as plucking up the foundatation of ever settling a peace with him which should be just and sure ; yea , that it tended to the apparent destruction of the persons which have engaged , and loss of the ends for which both the nations of England and Scotland did engage in these wars , rendering themselves thereby ( According to their own declaration ) base and dishonourable , being in that condition as they were in to treat under the gallows : to treat as traitors , their cause being not justified , nor the declarations against them as rebels recalled ; yea , and fools too , being possessed of the sword according to their right not to secure it to themselves and posterity , before they treated of any thing , that neither they nor their posterity Might be put to play another bloody game for the same thing : when we say , they themselves did thus praepossess our judgements , should those of them that did still remain faithful unto the nation , suffer the rest ( Because the major vote ) having an opportunity in their hands thus to ruin themselves and friends , and must the persons submit unto such votes so conducing , because the major part turn base and dishonourable ; yea , fools , and take upon them the guilt of traitors ; must the minor part of a contrary mind be concluded , and not hinder and prevent such things if they can ? Can a parliament vote down their own reasons and arguments which they have argued up in the minds and judgements of others ? doubtless the persons ought to acquiesce rather in those votes enforced by reason then in those contrary votes evidenced merely by voting ; there they have their reason , here their will . Can we think that it is the duty of the army , or others in parliament , or out of parliament , to content themselves with , and to submit unto the mere will and pleasure of the parliament in such things as according to their ownjudgements and reasons , yea , and according to the argued , demonstrated grounds and principles of reason of those very persons that ( After without showing any reason for what they did ) decline the same , that in such a case ▪ they should submit , having an effectual opportunity ( A well resolved power and strength ) to prevent the same ? No surely . They that told us that a kingdom must not be ruined at the mere will and pleasure of a King have taught us to infer the like touching the mere will and pleasure of a parliament ; if it be not salus regis , it cannot be voluntas parliamenti , but salus populi , that is the supreme law ; surely he that did never appoint that the lives of million of men should be prostrated to the mere arbitrary will and pleasure of a •…ing , did never ordain that they should be thus subjected to the reasonless vote of a parliament ; but if a King should rise up against a persons to enforce his pleasure upon them by the sword to their apparent destruction , the persons May rise up in arms and resist him ( For so you ministers have instructed the nation ) will it not then follow , that if a parliament should do the like by a vote , that in such a case the like resistance is alike lawful ? neither will it here avail to say , who shall judge ? for it is already answered , that the parliament themselves did judge and determine the matter , and that not simply by bare votes , but by many reasons , and a very large declaration was published by them , importing their many reasons to the satisfaction of the persons therein ; and therefore if a parliaments reason , according to common principles shall rise up against a a parliaments votes impugning the same , especially when the life or death of a nation , or the honest party thereof is concerned therein , it behoves the persons to rise up , and join with their reasons to oppose their votes ; so that you see why we cannot grant that the present authority had no authority for what they did , though a minor party of that authority chosen by the persons ; which is the first answer to the first part of your objection . 

Secondly , though it should be granted that thosethat are in present authority did unlawfully usurp their authority : will it therefore follow that their authority itself is unlawful , and that it is unlawful to obey it , in lawful things ? what will be the consequences of such an inference ? Surely there is a distinction to be made between lawful authority , and the persons therein , and the means whereby they were invested therein ; if their authority was unlawful because acquired by force of arms , contrary to the vote of those that had it lawfully invested in them ; where shall we find a lawful authority in the world , when generally , if not universally all the parts of the world in respect of their governors are so ruled , viz. by force ? would you in a sober grave Christian and dispassionate manner consult with the holy scriptures , you cannot but know how that many Kings of Israel and Judah under the old testament did ( In regard of their right from man ) acquire their governments by force and power ; you know well how Jeroboam ( By the advantage of the distemper of the ten tribes raised by the tyrannical threatenings of Rehoboam , that his little finger should be thicker than his father's loins , and that he would turn his father's whips into scorpions , just as the last King did multiply oppressions and cruelties upon the nation above what his father did ) did join himself with the ten tribes ; and the said tribes having killed Adoram ( With stones ) being sent by Rehoboam to purify them , took the said Jeroboam and made him King by force of arms , and so alienated the crown from the house of David , and there was a deadly feud always after between Rehoboam and Jeroboam ( As is now between the royalists and parliamenteers ) in their successors : and yet we find not that God was displeased , either with the men of Israel , or the men of Judah for their obedience to their respective Kings : afterward Baasha , the son of Abiah , raiseth war against Nadab , the son of Jeroboam , and killed him , & got the crown himself and reigned in his stead ; after Baasha his death Elah his son reigned in his stead , and his servant Zimri kills him , and got the crown in his stead ; in his time Omri by the power of the sword still gets the crown , and forceth Zimri desperately to burn himself ; after this the kingdom of Israel was divided ; one half of the persons take Tibni the son of Ginah and make him King : the other half followed Omri , and then they tried who had the longest sword sti•… , and at last Tibni , and his party being foiled , Omri got all , and reigned alone ; after Omri Ahab his son reigned in his stead ; Ahab he takes a wicked idolatrous Jezabel ( As the late King of England did in the like case ) to be his Queen ; she prevails with him ( As the case still runs parallel ) to rear up altars for the service of Baal , ( As he did in Somerset's house , and elsewhere upon the like account ) multiplying idolatrous worship and service above his predecessors ; then the prophets of the Lord lifted up their voices against him for his wickedness , ( As you know the faithful ministers did against the late King , you yourselves being some of them that did so ) whom he imprisons and persecutes with a perfect hatred ( As you very well know the said late King of England did abominate from his heart all Puritan preachers , which was one of his characters in all men's mouths ; ) well ; abundance of mischief did this wicked Jezabel the Queen work in Israel , especially against the faithful prophets of the Lord , for their opposition of her priests ; at last Ahab following the counsels of his false prophets , contrary to the advice of the faithful prophets of the Lord , lost his life at Ramoth Gilead ( As the late King did his head at White-hall ; ) the time would fail to run through all instances of the Kings of Israel and Judah in this kind . If you look into the new testament , you know that Christ was born when the sceptre was got by force of arms from Israel and Judah , who •…ere subject to the Romans , and paid tribute to Cesar , Augustus Cesar being then Emperor ; Herod the son of 〈◊〉 had the honour of being the governor of the Jews who had the honor•…ble name of King bestowed upon him by the said Augustus Caesar's , which title ( •…s Josephus re•… ) 〈◊〉 •…fied by the senat•… of Rome ; yet to signify that all was at the pleasure of the Sal•…augustus Cesar , he commands a tax to be levied upon all the Jews , and upon all his dominions , as appears in the holy scriptures , and he exacts tribute from all the Israelites , as he did by his officers from Christ himself , who came to Peter ( Thinking its like to entrap his Master ) and asked him , what say , doth not your mast•…-pa•… tribute Sir ? Why , yes , Sir , saith Peter , he doth ; and it is observable that Christ reasons with Peter upon this argument , viz that they of right aught to be free , and that it was usurpation , and by mere force and power of the said Emperor that it was exact•… ▪ we are children Peeter , and indeed of right we are fre•… ; nevertheless Peter , it is but a civil thing , take such a course for so much money ; and when thou hast it , give it for us both ; let the books be crossed , let it be discharged ; and the false lying Jews when they falsely accused him , said of him , thinking if any thing would hang him that would do it ; this fellow ( Say they of the Lord Jesus ) 〈◊〉 •…ound perverting the nation : viz. of the Jews , and forbidding to pay tribute 〈◊〉 Cesar ; which was a most false and scandalous accusation ; fo•…•…e himself did pay tribute ( As you see before ) you see Christ himself and his •…ii sciples did yield obedience , and that without any •…uple in things lawful unto that authority that was acquire•…•…yn mere forc•… of arms ▪ again , you know , that after Christ , the apostles lived •…nder the same usurpation by the Roman Emperors maintained by force ; yet you know , how that they did not only themselves subject , but left their minds in this behalf in holy wri•… , exhorting the churches whom they had planted to subject unto them i•… l•…ful things ; and that not only Paul teacheth the be•…ing r•… subjection , of whom it May be replied , that the rom•… 〈◊〉 were their own proper governors ; but the same p•…ul instructeth Ti•…othy also to lay down rules for all the churches of Christ whatsoever touching their deportment in their assemblies , in reference to their rulers , never questioning how they •…ame into this authority , viz. that they should pray for king•… , and for all that are in authority , that under them they May lead a peaceable and quiet life , in all godliness and honesty , affirming it to be both good and acceptable in the sight of God ; this was their judgement , that if so be they could live a peaceable and quiet life under their rulers in all goodliness and honesty , such rulers should not only be submitted unto , but earnestly prayed for , that God would bless them and prosper them . Why then should you hesitate in your yielding obedience to the present governors ? cannot you live under them a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty ? what hinders you ? had you ever such freedom ( Speak your own consciences ) under any government , or governors before ? what strains of idolatry , what ceremonies are imposed upon you ? May you not preach and pray , and pray and preach , and that not only in private but in public as oft as you will ( Provided you disturb not the civil peace of the nation ) and May you not do this not only by the toleration and connivance , but by the approbation and countenance of those that are in authority ? and let any history produce when you or the rest of the persons of God had the like liberty , and respects from the rulers of England before : yea , and let any history produce instances of the like ingratitude , scorn and contempt cast upon the ruling powers , especially from the grand professors of the ministers of the gospel as yourselves are , bedashing them with the blood of the •…ing , and the imputation of murderers from day to day , scorning all their commands , acts , orders , though requiring things at your hands in themselves agreeable to your professed principles and practices , when they command you to fast and pray for success against your known and avowed enemies , yea the very * rebels in in Ireland , you will not ; when they command you to give thanks for success against them , you pine and mourn , and murmur , and will not give thanks , to the very amazement of all that know you , behaving yourselves in your prayers ; in your sermons , after such a froward ; peevish peltish manner , as if you had been the sons of the prophet Jonah , begotten by him in his angry fits ; never did such jonasnes of spirit appear in so many professors of the ministry in this nation ; nay , do you not pray against the present governors , preach against them , work all underhand mischiefs against them , tamper in the parliament , in the city in the army ( Pro•…uring their beheading , that so the body of i•… Might fall to the ground ) and all , if it was possible to pull them from their seats of government ? surely Christ Jesus and his apostles ( Whose ministers and successors you profess yourselves to be ) were of another spirit ; again , the time would fail if we should insist but upon the tithes of those instances of governors , both in our own , and other countries , who got the government by mere power , and of all the persons of God that did always obey them in lawful things ; and whereas the covenant is pleaded by you for your justification in this behalf ; though enough and enough is answered in this kind , that shift of covenant and plea of covenant being indeed almost worn out , it is most notoriously known that that very covenant was founded and grounded in a quite contrary sense to what you now urge it , viz. to justify your taking up arms against him that had lawful authority over you , though he did not use it lawfully , as you all very well know ; and why May not others plead covenant in the like case ? if you will but a little consider the exhortation of the assembly of divines to the taking of the solemn league and covenant , ordered by the house of Commons the ninth of feb. 1643. to be printed and published ; you shall see that this very covenant was founded in that which now you call usurpation in the parliament , viz. a covenanted resolution of fighting against the King , and his Lords and Commons ( Be they either the major or minor part of the parliament , it matters not ) that contrary to their trust , did embondage and enslave the persons , and endeavoured the same ; and this practice justified in an instance brought in by the said assembly of divines in these words , neither hath this practice or doctrine , viz. of joining by force of arms against undeserving governors been deemed seditious or unwarrantable by the Princes that have sat upon the English throne , but justified and defended by Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory , with the expense of much treasure , and blood in the united provinces of Netherlands , not only without but against the unjust violence of Philip of Spain ; King James followed her steps , so far as to approve of their union , and to enter into a league with them as free states ▪ which is continue by his majesty now reigning unto this day ( Speaking of the late King ) who both by his expedition for the relief of Roche•…in France , and his strict confederacy with the Prince of Orange , and the state's general , notwithstanding all the importunity of Spain to the contrary , hath set to his seal , that all that hath been done by his royal ancestors , in maintenance of those who had so engaged and combined themselves , was just and warrantable ; and what had become of the religion , laws , and liberties of our sister nation of Scotland , had they not entered into such a solemn league and covenant ( Or if you will engagement ) at the beginning of the late troubles there ? but instar omnium , to give you one instance more of your own party , we hope that will be authentic with you ( And that is of the Scots ( Of happy memory , if your memories will serve you but for two or three years together ) who you know when that the major part of the parliament of Scotland did vote the sending into this nation and against the same , an army under Duke Hamilton contrary unto all their former vows , treaties , covenants , &c. ( As the major part of the English parliament did vote a treaty with the late King contrary to their former resolutions , votes , orders , to the hazard of incurring the guilt of all the blood and loss of the ends of the late war ) yet you know a minor party did oppose them , and by their own strength & the aid of the now Lord general , whom they indeed have required most ( What shall we say ? ) scot-like , did depose the said major part of the said parliament ( As the now governing party did here in England ) & by the said power and force , were themselves established in the room thereof ( As the example still runs parallel here ) and yet did you not approve of them , pray for them , bless God for their happy success against their enemies ? can you imagine men so thick-skuld so stupefied as not to observe your partiality ? or have you a dispensation to make election and reprobation of actions of the self same nature , disposition , circumstances , tendencies , and to reward them in some with honour and glory : and in others with shame and contempt ? to say unto some men , for these actions , well done you blessed of the Lord : and unto others for the like ( Every way the like ) go ye cursed , receive a portion prepared for truce-breakers , covenant-breakers , usurpers of authority : or can you make the same things good and evil , light and darkness , lawful and unlawful , and that in the very self same respects , references , and relations ? was it lawful for the Hollanders , and the Netherlanders , and the Scots by force of arms to remove their governors upon presumed just reasons : and not for the English to do the like , having as much , if not sevenfold more reason than these had so to do ? Or is it lawful for the subjects in the forenamed places to obey their governors established by mere force and power ; and not for the English to obey their governors in lawful things , because so established ? 

In the third place , have you not protection by this government ? and doth not protection oblige unto subjection in lawful things ? is it not such a piece of inhumanity , as is not to be mentioned , but with utter abhorrency , viz. for a man to seek to destroy that which preserveth him ? is it not Judas like to betray those in authority into the hands of the rude multitude ( As he did his Lord ) who through much difficulty and hardship endeavour to save and preserve you ? did not you as well as others ( Nay were not you the leaders of others who did ) but as yesterday , spread your garments and palm branches before those in authority who ( Contrary to the commands of the late King , his party of Lords and Commons ) did adhere unto the common interest of the persons , and those that would not join with him , by whom you have been protected every since , and cried out unto them hosanna , hosanna ; and shall you not only now in your own persons oppose them , but still be leaders of the persons and rude multitude , to withstand them , crying out in your pulpits in effect , crucify them , crucify them ? doth not your non submission , unto our governors in lawful things disoblige them unto your protection ? non submission in such cases renders you no subjects , but enemies , no friends , but foes ; and is it policy for a state to protect their enemies , and that in their work of generation and multiplying their parties by sermons and prayers calculated for that purpose ? 

Fourthly , you do not only receive the benefit of protection , but also you claim the benefit of provision established by our present rulers in all cases of self-accommodation ; and is not this likewise an obligement unto acknowledgement and subjection ? If any of you be injured or wronged , you fly to the law , and the present ministers of justice under our present rulers for relief and satisfaction ; if it be but in case of non payment of tithe or any thing else , without hesitancy you will seek a remedy from our present rulers : is it equitable or just that you should have the benefit and interest of the present government in all matters accommodations : and yourselves be lawless and not at all commanded in lawful things ? surely the provision of peace , of right , &c. which the law makes , is for the subject , and not for the opposite ; or is this ingenuity becoming the ministers of the gospel to render evil for good , cursing for blessing , to give vinegar and gall for milk and honey ? i mean trouble , ruin , and destruction unto our present governors for that peace , plenty , and preservation which through God's mercy you enjoy under them . 

Fifthly , if you who are the teachers of the persons May take liberty of casting behind your backs the lawful commands of our present authority , why May not all others do the like ? and if so , then should we have no government at all ( As the case stands ) and would not this public liberty be public licentiousness ? would not every man's lust be every man's law , and every neighbour prove a tiger each to other ? and would not such liberty quickly prove the greatest slavery when the lawless multitude shall command all ? what would become of your order and men of your function in this case , suppose you should charm up among the common persons a spirit of scorn and contempt upon our governors , and prevail with them to rise up as one man against them , and so wrest the government out of their hands and cut their throats ( For that 's the English of your insinuations ) ? do you suppose that you can charm them into a reverential and awful respect of your cloth , and that while they cry out concerning our present governors crucify them , crucify them , they will in an awful manner ( As the giddy men of Naples to Massileano ) observe your nod , obey your commands , go when you bid them go , and come when you bid them come , and fall down before the Presbyterian clergy , saying , hath Masters and worship you ? be not deceived ; though you think happily that you will for the present make use of the malignant and royal party to lift up presbytery and intend to make them hewers of wood and drawers of water unto you and your party ; yet had you but your eyes in your head , you should quickly perceive that rebus mutatis de vobis fabula narrabitur , and the revenge of blood should as severely be taken from your party as you now happily expect from another party ; were it not better we should have any government than none at all ? that of the great Turk , then of the rabble rout ? will not men's wants be measured by their wills and their appetites be their purveyors ? distracted irregularity is the consequence of anarchy , and such licentious liberty the greatest tyranny ; well , though you rather choose the hazards of more bloody fierce and cruel wars , and take pleasure in trumpeting up the persons hereunto by your preachments , and letters , and tamperings , then obey the present government in lawful things ; yet how you will be able to stand before the Lord , when he maketh inquisition for blood , let God and your own consciences secretly debate and determine . 

To shut up all , let the response of your consciences in three questions , witness your designs in the presence of the Lord . 

First , whether if the great Turk had made war with this nation , and by force of arms destroyed the late King , altered the government , established Mahumetism only for the persons of his own nation , set up himself as supreme only in things civil , but should have made a law that the Christians of the Presbyterian way and government only ( And no others ) should be tolerated in their serving of God according to their judgements , and enjoy their houses , lands , and estates ; no man upon pain of death should kill them or rob them , that they should meet as often as they pleased in public or private , and exercise themselves in the worship of God , no man daring to molest them : provided always they should subscribe an engagement never to interrupt the public peace nor raise up the persons against them , but that they should promise to obey them in all civil and lawful things not violating their professed principles , &c. whether in such a case you would not willingly and gladly subscribe that engagement and exhort others to do the like , and bless God with all your hearts for such mercy , and favour showed unto you , yea and pray for their preservation , and rather desire the Lord to reward their kindness for that grace , by preserving them , and converting them unto himself , then to preach and pray , and write , and tamper , and strive , and struggle to ruin and destroy them as you now do our present governors ? 

Secondly , whether if this present parliament ( Thus constituted , every way thus acting as they do and have done ) had by the joint concurrence and unanimous assistance of our present army , lifted up presbytery according to your own orders and prescriptions , subjecting all men within their jurisdiction to the same , suppessing ( As you should direct them ) all those dissenting brethren or others whom you now call heretics , sectaries , &c. whether in such a case you would not have prayed for them , and preached them up as the great repairers of Zion and builders of the house of God , the Davids , the Solomons , the Zerubbabels of our age , the nursing fathers of the church of God : whether you would not have cursed all those that cursed them , and blessed those that blessed them : whether you would not have represented their act of justice upon the late King as the most glorious piece of justice that ever was acted upon the face of the earth , and the return of the many prayers oft put up by you , that God would return your prayers upon his heart or upon his head ? that his execution was nothing else but the fullfilling of the many promises made of old touching the honour of his saints in the latter days , that they should bind Kings in chains and nobles in fetters of iron ; that they were the Gideon's , the Joshuah's , the Calebs of Israel , that pull down the pride of Princes , and cause the feet of his saints to tread upon the necks of Kings , &c. and whether in case any party in this nation , or from other countries should have combined against the governors of the nation thus acting for you , you would not have exhorted all men upon pain of Meroz curse , to come out and help the Lord against the mighty &c.  

Thirdly , whether in case you yourselves had the same power over your dissenting brethren as they have over you ; and that your party did sit upon the high places of government in the commonwealth , you would thus suffer them openly to pray against you , to preach against you , scorn your commands , orders and ordinances ; to stir up the persons by all possible means in city , in country and elsewhere , and all this while treat them kindly , continue them their liberties , protect them from violence , give them an equal share of all the privileges and government of the law , &c.  

The Lord ( The righteous judge of heaven and earth ) judge between you and us in these things . 

Finis . 





a omnis potestes fundata est in voluntate . b constitutio populi liber•… constat in 〈◊〉 quo se constituit populus . c salus populi suprema lex . d magistratus est custos & administrator communium bonorum non pr•…priorum . e eo modo quo quid constituitur , eodem modo & dissolvi potest . f psalm . 82. 6. •…01s . 〈◊〉 . 〈◊〉  

t•…lle peri•… , & vaga pros•…iet fraevis natura remotis . iob. 1. 10.  Decla . 4 mar. 1647. in answer to the papers of the Scotch commissioners . * Feb 11. 1647.  decl. of the 4 of March , 1647 p. 24.  febru. 11. 1647.  1 Kings 12.  1 Kings 15.  1 Kings 16.  ibid.  Luke 2. 1.  matt. 17. 24 , 25.  Luke 23. 2.  rom. 13.  1 tim. 21. 2 , 3.  * you May expect another lecture upon that subject only . tolle periclun — & vaga prosiliet fraenis natura remotis . 



























































































