A Collection of some Attempts made to the North-east , and North-west , For the finding a Passage to japan , China , etc.  

As also somewhat relating to the satisfaction of all Inquirers into Captain john Wood's present Voyage in search of a Passage by the North-pole , etc.  

By JOSEPH MOXON , Hydrographer to the king 's most Excellent Majesty . I Formerly set forth a small Pamphlet entitled , A brief Discourse of a Passage by the North-pole to Japan , China , etc. with a small Map of the Countries about the Pole : Which Pamphlet of mine , when it came to the sight of that worthy and ingenious Commander , my good friend , Capt. john Wood , had the luck to be so acceptable to him , that upon the Consideration of my Arguments , he resolved to use his interest with the King , to set him forth in a Ship upon this Discovery : And now he is , Ihope , happily upon it , if by this time he hath not found it . But that Draft being adjudged by some Gentlemen , of my acquaintance , too small for their more nice inquiries into the Attempts that have formerly been made to find a Passage both by the North-east , and also by the North-west , they solicited me to set forth one so large as conveniently I could upon a Royal sheet of Paper , with some brief Notes and Observations upon the proceedings of such English Commanders that have attempted to find a Passage either way : and also because they knew I used to keep frequent Conferences and Consultations with Capt. Wood , to describe the Track of his intended Voyage : To gratify whom , and to satisfy others that daily inquire of me concerning his Voyage , I have herein complied with their requests , and set forth this Draft , and the Relations of former Voyages to the North-east and Northwest , with two Passages taken out of Dutch Journals relating to a farther confirmation of a Passage , and also the Track he intended to sail before he set forth . 

The First therefore we find recorded in Hackluit , folio 265. was Sir Hugh Willoughby to the North-east , who set forth from Deptford , May 10. 1553. with three Ships , viz. the Bona Esperanza , the Edward Bonadventure , and the Bona Confidentia , and sailed as far as Sir Hugh Willoughby's Land in the Latitude of 72 ; from whence he returned Southward into Lapland , where in the Haven of Arzina he intended to winter ; but he and all his company perished there with extremity of cold . 

The Second was Capt. Stephen Burrough , in a Pinnace called the Searchthrift , to the North-east , who set forth from Radclif , April 23. 1556 , and sailed almost to Novae Zembla , where finding bad wind and weather , and the Winter drawing on , he returned home . 

The Third was Sir Martin Frobrisher to the Northwest , who set forth from Blackwall with two small Barks of 25 Tuns apiece , and a Pinnace of 10 Tuns , june 15. 1577 , and sailed 60 leagues up Frobrisher-straits , where he lost his Boat and five of his men by the Savages , which were never heard of since ; but the abundance of Ice and extremity of Cold forced him to return home . 

The Fourth was Sir Martin Frobrisher's second Voyage to the North-west , who set forth from Blackwall , May 26. 1577. with three Ships , viz. the Aid , the Michael , and the Gabriel , and sailed into Iackman's Sound in Frobrisher's straits , jaded their Ships with supposed Gold-oar , and so returned home again . 

The Fifth was Sir Martin Frobrisher's third Voyage to the North-west , who set forth from Harwich , May 31. 1578 , with fifteen Ships , and sailed to Liecester's Point in Frobrisher's straits : Here they intended to inhabit with 120 men , and to leave them three Ships for their use ; yet they did not , but only jaded their Ships as before with supposed Oar , and so returned home to England again . 

The Sixth was Capt. Arthur Pet , and Capt. Charles jackman to the North-east , who set forth from Harwich with two Barks , viz. the George , and the William , May 30. 1580 , and sailed about five or six leagues beyond the Weygats ; but by extremity of cold and frost about the 25th of july they were forced to return . The 22 of August in their return , being off Colgoyeve , the George , of which Capt. Pet was Commander , lost the sight of the William , in which Capt. jackman was Commander , who never returned , but doubtless there perished . 

The Seventh was Capt. john Davis to the North-west , who set forth from Dartmouth with two Barks , viz. the Sunshine of 50 Tuns , and the Moonshine of 35 Tuns , june 7. 1585. , and sailed into Davis Strait , and then returned home . 

The Eighth was Capt. john Davis' second Voyage to the Northwest , who set forth from Dartmouth with four Ships , viz. the Mermaid 100 Tuns , the Sunshine 60 Tuns , the Moonshine 35 Tuns , and the North-star 10 Tuns , May 7. 1578 , and sailed as far as the Latitude of 66. 17.  Long. from London 70 deg . 

The Ninth was Capt. john Davis' third Voyage to the North-west , who set forth from Dartmouth with three Ships , viz. the Elizabeth , the Sunshine , and a Clinker called the Helen of London , May 19 1587. , and sailed into the Latitude of 73 deg . on the Westside of Groynland , which he named London-coast , and then returned home . 

The Tenth was Capt. George Waymouth to the North-west , who set forth with two Flyboats , one of 70 Tuns , the other of 60 Tuns , Victualled for 18 months by the Muscovia and Turkey Companies , May 2. 1602 , and sailed into the Latitude of 63 d. 55 m. towards London-coast , where his men began to mutiny , and so he returned home . 

The Eleventh was Capt. john Knight to the North-west , at the cost and charge of the Muscovia Company and the East-india Merchants , who set forth from Gravesend , April 18. 1606 , and sailed no farther than the Latitude of 56 deg . 48 min. for there a violent storm took him , so as his Ship bulged , and he going on shore to endeavour to mend his Ship , was never heard of more ; but with much ado the Ship returned home . 

A POLAR DRAFT 

Of all the Discovered Lands about the North Pole ▪ Wherein is noted the Discovery of such Englishmen that have endeavoured to find a Passage to Japan ▪ China etc. by y e North East And North West . 

As also a Track of the present Attended Voyage of that Noble minded Commander Cap. t. John Wood upon the Discovery aforesaid . 

By Joseph Moxon Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty . 

The Thirteenth was Sir Thomas Button to the North-west , who set forth with two Ships , the Resolution , and the Discovery , Victualled for 18 months , about the beginning of May 1612 , and sailed into Button's Bay , where he wintered in a small River called Port Nelson , in Lat. 57 10.  But the next year he continued his search of a Passage in the same Bay , and Coasted to and from till he came into the Latitude of 62 deg . 57 min. and then the year being spent , he returned home . 

The Fourteenth was Capt. Gibbons to the North-west , who set forth with a Ship called the Discovery , in the year 1614 ; but sailed no farther than the mouth of Hudson's straits , where he was frozen in for 20 weeks in Lat. 57 , in a little Bay which his men called Gibbons his Hole ; and the season being thus spent , he was forced to return . 

The Fifteenth was Capt. Bilot to the North-west , in the Discovery , Burden 55 Tuns , in the year 1615 ; who sailed as far as Cape Comfort in the Lat. of 65 deg . 25. min. being to the Northwards of Button's Bay , and so returned home . 

The Sixteenth was Mr. William Baffin to the North-west , set forth at the charge of Sir Dudley Diggs , Sir Tho. Smith , Mr. john Wolstenholme Esq and Alderman jones , in the Discovery , 1616 ; he sailed round that great Bay called Baffin's Bay , into the Latitude of 79 deg . and finding no Passage , returned home . 

The Seventeenth and Eighteenth were Capt. Luke Fox , and Capt. Thomas james , who set forth 1631 , who searched round Hudson's Bay , and Button's Bay : But their Voyages being the last that have been made to the North-west upon a Discovery , I have with prick●lines , traced down in the Draft itself , therefore I refer you to it . 

Capt. james was forced to winter in james his Bay , where he suffered great hardships , and the loss of some of his men by extremities of cold and frosts ; but the next year returned with his Ship home . 

Here you may perceive , that all the Attempts made to the North-west , were made in several Bays ; and indeed the whole Sea itself , where the Passage was expected to be found , is but one great Bay , which receives great quantities of Ice out of many freshwater Rivers that empty themselves into it , and so this Sea or great Bay delivers it into Hudson's straits , which makes that so unpassable . And the attempted Passage by the North-east is found but a great freshwater Bay , which also receives the Ice of many freshwater Rivers into it , and so makes that unpassable : as appears by the Copy of that Letter sent from Muscovy to Amsterdam , and from Amsterdam to Mr. Oldenburgh , Secretary to the Royal Society , which he published in Transact . 101 ▪ which I also set forth in my Brief Discourse of the Passage by the North-pole to Japan , China , etc. to either of which I refer you . 

Besides these performed by English men , there have been other attempts made for the finding of a Passage to japan , China , etc. both by the Danes , and Dutch ; but the Dutch have made the fairest Progress therein : For one William Barents being satisfied that no Passage was between Nova Zembla and the Main , steered his Course to the Northwards of Nova Zembla , and sailed into the Tartarian Sea about 2 or 300 leagues beyond Nova Zembla ; and had doubtless sailed through , had not the Dutch East-india Company ( against whose interest it was ) corrupted him , and taken him off the prosecution . 

They have also made such other Navigations from the East-indieses , as may in my opinion satisfy any considerate understanding person of a Passage ; and more especially the Navigations of two Ships , whose Journals have come to my hands . One was a Ship sent from Batavia , to discover beyond japan to the Northwards , because of reports they had in Batavia of Gold and Silver-mines to be in Yedso , or some Countries or Islands about it ; which ship having sailed somewhat beyond Yedso , in their Journal they write , that to their great amazement they found themselves in the Tartarian Ocean . This Sentence I did perceive , by the scope of the whole Journal , was written without design , nay , not so much as reflection upon a Passage ; and therefore I think it may be accepted for truth . 

The other Navigation was of a Ship sent from Batavia , and intended for japan to trade ; but by contrary winds was driven to Corea , a little to the Westward of japan , where a violent storm arising , the Ship was broken to pieces , and of 64 men in her , only 36 escaped shipwreck , and were made Slaves of by the Coreans : but after 13 year's slavery there was no more than 16 of these men left alive , and 8 of them escaped in a Boat , and got to japan among their Countrymen . Hendrick Hamel of Gorcum was the Book-keeper to the Ship , and kept the Journal of their Voyage , and Passages that happened to them in their Slavery ; which Journal and Passages was afterwards printed at Rotterdam , together with A brief Description of the Kingdom of Corea ; with its Laws , Maxims , and Policies both Civil and Military : And in this Description of Corea , he relates as follows : That on the West - side trends the Coast of China , or the Bay of Nankin ; and that its North - end is fastened to China with a mighty huge Mountain , which makes Corea no Island but a Peninsula , because that on the North-east - side is nothing but an open Sea , in which is found every year many Whales with French and Holland Harping-irons in their bodies . There is also in the months of December , January , February , and March , great quantities of Herrings caught , which in the two first months are very like the Holland's Herrings , and in the two other months are much lesle , like the Pan-herrings in Holland ; so that of necessity it must follow , that between Japan and Corea there must be a Passage to the Weygats . [ Note , this Writer should have said , A Passage to Nova Zembla , or Greenland : For a Passage through the Weygats is since contradicted by the Discovery made by the express order of the Czar of Muscovy , as appears by the Letter aforesaid sent to Mr. Oldenburg . ] And we have , saith he , often enquired of the Coreans that inhabited on the North-east - side of Corea , if there were any more Land on the North-east - side : but they answered us , no , there is nothing but an open Sea.  

London : Printed for joseph Moxon , and sold at his shop on Ludgate-hill at the sign of Atlas ; and by james Moxon , in the Strand near Charing-cross , right against King Henry the Eighths-inne . 1676.  

