truth seeks no corners : or advice from a non-interessed soldier to his loving fellow-soldiers that were under Fleetwood and Lambert . 

London , printed by Thomas creak . 1660.  

Gentlemen , and fellow-soldiers , 

Having for these twenty years , been employed in martial discipline , and carefully observed the practices of some officers late of the army , with grief i express the many injuries and unparralleled cruelties exercised on persons deserving so much honour and affection from them as you have done ; is the only cause that drew me to this ! And no sinister or byast-interest whatsoever ; having always valued the peace and welfare of the nation , far above my own concernments . And now perceiving that there are strong endeavours once more to make these nations and yourselves miserable , by continuation of a war ; and that there are not wanting those who labour to persuade you that your interest lies in adhering to some officers late of the army ; who have made shipwreck of all oaths and engagments , through whose breach of faith you are become contemptible to all nations ; who are so far from making a reconciliation towards God or man by an unfeigned repentance , and turning from the evil of their practices , that they with their instruments , palliate their fowl enormities , endeavouring by all means possible to destroy the honour of all your actions , by adhering to them whose power is will , whose justice is cruelty , whose laws are confusion , whose religion is the seat of rebellion , whose design can have no other end then tyranny , and to involve you and yours in perpetual slavery . Therefore fellow soldiers , let us look back and survey their by past practices , and we shall find there was never oath or promise kept farther than served their own interest . Did not most of those officers ( By God's mercy ) now cashiered the army , purchase your debentures ( The price of blood ) from two shillings to a noble in the pound , to enrich themselves , and perpetuate your slavery . And through their cruelty many of our fellow soldiers , which were wounded in battle and made unservicable , with wives and children starved in the streets for want of bread , while they Lorded it over you , tyrantlike . 

Now examine yourselves whether when you have demanded your pay , you were not had before court marshal's , and hanged to all your shames , while they robbed you and the commonwealth of your deuce . And let me further desire you to consider what you can expect ; who have always been made the scorn and contempt of those whom you have advanced by your valour . The premises being duly and christianly considered , i as a friend and fellow soldier , have made bold to write to you these lines , that you Might the better see your condition , if you should suffer yourselves again to be captivated by the specious pretences of an interested sort of persons , who rage and roar ( Like their father the devil ) wanting your assistance to help them to devour . 

Therefore my earnest request to you is , that you would as you are Christians and Englishmen , bewail the blood you have already spilt in your own country , and with souls fitted for the receipt of mercy , humbly prostrate yourselves before the god of mercy , beseeching him to distil into your souls by the influence of his holy spirit , grace : whereby you May be fitted to be made partakers of so great a mercy and deliverance , as the Lord himself is now a working in the three , wounded , bleeding , and miserable nations , which is his own blessing , peace , the fruits whereof though but in the bud , should raise your souls to that pitch , that you should with all cheerfulness humbly submit to his gracious hand of providence , who seems mercifully once more to shine upon these nations , by restoring unto us our native rights as men , and my dear fellow-soldiers , let not railing rabshekeys prevail over you , in persuading you that you shall lose your rights as Christians , for the Lord himself will plead the cause of the humble and meek , but the stiffnecked and rebellious he will destroy . 

i shall conclude with this exhortation , that you would seriously consider , and ponder in your hearts this truth , that if you comply not , and submit not with the nations public interest , and just power now made choice of by common consent of the persons , but follow a few private ambitious restless persons , whose gain is their godliness , whose glory is their shame , you will run yourselves on the rock of ruin , and make your names infamous to all posterity : and which is most deplorable , run headlong to your own eternal ruin . 

The which that you May prevent , with one heart yield consent and obedience to the people's free choice in parliament ; and let all that love England's peace say amen . 

Postscript . 

Fellow-soldiers , this paper is presented to you from a lover and friend , who hath always honoured you for your valour ; and has a more real affection for you , than the cruelty of your taskmasters will suffer him that is your friend to discover . If any one shall say the penman of this is a lover of general Monck , 't is true i am : though i never received any favour from him ; for his faithfulness , mercifulness , prudence , justice , valour , and constancy , command no less from all just men & lovers of their country ; whom the Lord preserve in all his just designs . Thus prays a lover of his country . 

E. s.  

Finis . 







