CLITO : A POEM ON THE Force of Eloquence . 

Neque enim ulla non propria Oratoris est Res , quae quidem ornate dici graviterque debeat . Hujus est in dando Consilio de maximis rebus cum dignitate explicata Sententia ; ejusdem & languentis populi Incitatio , & effraenati Moderatio . Eadem facultate & Fraus hominum ad perniciem , & Integritas ad salutem vocatur . Quis cohortari ad Virtutem ardentius , quis a Vitiis acrius revocare , quis vituperare Improbos asperius , quis laudare Bonos ornatius , quis Cupiditatem vehementius frangere accusando potest ? quis Moerorem levare mitius consolando ? 

Cic. de Oratore , lib. 2. cap. 9  



LONDON , Printed , and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster . M.DCC  

PREFACE . 

THE following Poem , whereof Mr. TOLAND is the Author , was handed about a good while in Manuscript before I could get a sight of it ; though , by reason of the differing Characters and judgements it underwent , I left no stone unturned to procure it . And I must confess that after a Friend had at last obliged me with it , I could discover none of those monstrous , pernicious , most terrible , and intolerable things which some weak-sighted or envious people reported . But there 's something so new and singular in the management of it that highly pleased me ; and I verily believe that one or two of my acquaintance were frighted , not so much at the Contents , as at the Writer's poetical Liberty in his ranting and Almanzor-like strain , as if they thought he would in good earnest buckle on his Armour , or fasten Wings to his shoulders , and go about to perform in person what he would gladly leave others the honour of achieving at his persuasion , contenting himself with such a moderate part of the Action as might probably fall to one man's share . But taking my leave of these Gentlemen , I think myself bound rather to offer my excuses to him for making this publication without his consent . I know Poetry is not his Business , how much soever it may be his Diversion ; and that particularly this Scheme of his Studies was never intended to be communicated to the World. I am wholly ignorant what induced him first to write it , or why he did it in Verse , which is a Talon on which he was never heard to value himself beyond a Song or such slight performances . But this I learned , that having given Copies of it to a few private Friends , and these ( as it commonly happens ) to their Friends , it came at last into the hands of more persons than were friendly , honest , or judicious , as I need not tell those who heard the strange representations that were made of it ; though I cannot see how it should be displeasing to any , but such as are angry at bottom that Liberty and Religion are preferred to Slavery and Superstition . At lest there 's nothing of it inconsistent with our own established Government and Church , of both which we may without vanity affirm that they are the most excellent of their kinds : no National Religion being lesle interested , or more rational ; and no other Commonwealth being now so free , or having so good a Foundation and Disposition to attain all the perfections of Government . Therefore , after I had fully assured myself that the Poem was of his composition , I knew no better way of doing him the office of a true Friend , than by letting every body see how little ground there was for the Complaints of his peevish Accusers . By CLITO is meant a certain eminent Man , who is no more supposed to have held this Discourse , or to be of all these Opinions , than the principal persons in Plato's or Cicero's Dialogues to have said whatever we read of 'em there , though introduced for the dignity of the Subject , and as a mark of the Author's esteem . Mr. TOLAND himself is understood by ADEISIDAEMON , which signifies Unsuperstitious , and is a Name these same Lines demonstrate to be very proper . Whether VICTORINA be only a Fiction , or the designation of a real Mistress , good manners will not let us too curiously inquire : but be this as it will , such a Character was absolutely necessary to assuage that Divinity , which ( as the Poets speak ) inspired him with so much fury before . All the rest is plain enough , and consequently there needs no longer Preface to so short a Book . 

W. H.  

CLITO . 

CLITO the Wise , the Generous , and Good , 
Better than whom none ever understood 
Or Things or Words , would yet distinctly know 
How far the Force of Eloquence could go 
To teach Mankind those Truths which they mistake , 
And who the noble Task durst undertake . 
To him ADEISIDAEMON thus replies : 
OH thou , whose Age my younger Years supplies 
With virtue 's Precepts , and my Contry's Love , 
What Laws below , or Powers there be above , 
Made bold by thy Example , and the Fame 
Of ancient Heroes ( whose immortal Name 
Might serve alone all Errors to reform ) 
I shall the welcome Labour thus perform . 
IN common Words I vulgar things will tell , 
And in Discourse not finely speak , but well . 
My Phrase shall clear , short , unaffected be , 
And all my Speech shall like my Thoughts be free ; 
Not grave enough to fright the Young away , 
Nor yet for elder Company too gay . 
BUT when the Crowd I 'm chosen to persuade 
By long Orations for the purpose made ; 
Or by what reaches more with more success , 
The laboured Compositions of the Press : 
then shall my fertile Brain new Terms produce , 
Or old Expressions bring again in use , 
Make all Ideas with their Signs agree , 
And sooner Things than Words shall wanting be . 
Harmonious Sounds th' attentive Ear shall please , 
While artful Number's Passions lay or raise ; 
Commanding Vigour shall my Thoughts convey , 
And Softness seal the Truth of all I say : 
I 'll soothe the raging Mob with mildest words , 
Or sluggish Cowards rouse to use their Swords . 
As furious Winds sweep down whate'er resists , 
So shall my Tongue perform whate'er it lists , 
With large impetuous Floods of Eloquence 
Tickle the Fancy , and bewitch the Sense ; 
Make what it will the justest Cause appear , 
And what 's perplexed or dark look bright and clear . 
Not that I would the wrongful side defend ; 
He best protects who 's ablest to offend : 
As the same Force which serves to kerb our Foes , 
Can hurt those Friends who on our Love repose , 
And for whose sake we would our Lives expose . 
THUS armed , thus strong , thus fitted to persuade , 
I 'll Truth protect , and Error strait invade , 
Dispel those Clouds that darken human sight , 
And bless the World with everlasting Light. 
A noble Fury does possess my Soul , 
Which all may forward , nothing can control ; 
The fate of Being's , and the hopes of Men , 
Shall be what pleases my creating Peneus  
WHO formed the Universe , and when and why , 
Or if all things were from Eternity ; 
What Laws to Nature were prescribed by JOVE ; 
Where lies his chiefest residence above ; 
Or if he 's only but the world 's great Soul ; 
Or parts the Creatures are , and God the whole 
From whence all Being's their Existence have , 
And into which resolved they find a Grave ; 
How nothing's lost , though all things change their Form , 
As that 's a Fly which was but now a Worm ; 
And Death is only to begin to be 
Some other thing , which endless change shall see ; 
( Than why should men to die have so great fear ? 
Thomas nought's Immortal , all Eternal are . ) 
Whether the Stars be numerous Suns , or no , 
And what 's their use above , or Power below ; 
What Planets are inhabited , what not ; 
How many new emerged , what old forgot ; 
If the dull Earth does turn about the Sun , 
Or that bright PHOEBUS' round this Globe does run ; 
Whence the magnetic Force ; how Winds can blow ; 
What makes the Ocean duly ebb and flow ; 
How come th'alternat Seasons of the Year , 
And why the weather 's warm , cold , dull , or clear ; 
How Animals and Plants increase their kind , 
And what 's the source of Life , of Soul or Mind ; 
How Stones and Metals , Sands or Shells are framed , 
Shall only after me be rightly named . 
Thus quick as Thought I unconfined will fly 
Thro' boundless Space , and vast Eternity ; 
Nature to me appears in no disguise , 
Nor can one Atom scape my prying Eyes . 
OH Glorious LIBERTY ! for thee I 'll prove 
The firmest Patron that ever Tongue did move ; 
I 'll always execute what you decree , 
And be the fatal scourge of Slavery . 
Ambitious Tyrants , proud and useless Drones , 
I 'll first expose , then tumble from their Thrones : 
Some their foul Crimes shall expiate by Death , 
And some in Exile draw their hated Breath . 
Their warlike Troops I shall with ease disband , 
And conquer those who all besides command ; 
i  known a Senate with some magic words 
To Forks and Spades transform their bloody Swords : 
Those hect'ring Braves , who vaunt their Force so loud , 
A Patriot's Tongue can humble with the Crowd . 
Our fearless Youth ( if these are at an end ) 
Will their own Rights by their own Arms defend , 
And punish Nations when they dare offend . 
But , by the Soul of him who JULIUS killed , 
When I perceive that Oracle fulfilled , 
Which was to me pronounced by men Divine , 
That All goes well when Whigs and Tories join ; 
I 'll sing the Triumphs of the good Old Cause , 
Establish Justice , reinthrone the Laws , 
Restore the Nation to its perfect health , 
then Power usurped destroy , and form a Commonwealth . 
BUT what in faint Ideas I conceive , 
A matchless Hero will by Facts achieve ; 
That Freedom he restored he will maintain , 
Encourage Merit , and lewd Vice restrain . 
Our Laws , Religion , Arms , our Coin and Trade , 
All flourish under him , before decayed ; 
In this more safe , more mighty , and renowned , 
Than if ten thousand Successors he crowned : 
For oft a just and valiant Prince's Name 
Degenerate Sons by horrid Crimes defame . 
Her BRUTUS' Rome had not so long adored , 
If he had made himself her Sov'rain Lord. 
OH Godlike BRUTUS ! for thy Contry's good 
thou didst not shrink to shed thy children's Blood ! 
And sure at home if thou were 't so severe , 
thou 'dst never labour for a Foren Heir . 
But more than Tongues can speak , or Pens improve , 
The World and I expect from William's Love , 
His People's Darling , Heavens' peculiar care , 
The Branch of Peace , and Thunderbolt of War.  
THRICE happy they who see thy Youth renewed , 
OH potent Britain ! thy worst Foes subdued , 
The proudest Kingdoms for thy Friendship sue , 
And all free States their Safety place in you . 
Their products East and West shall send to thee , 
Both Indys gladly will thy Handmaids be ; 
The North unlocks her adamantin Door , 
And what the South conceals thou shalt explore . 
Thy mighty Fleets our Honour will regain , 
And the flag 's Triumph e'ery where maintain . 
Thy Sons shall reap fresh Laurels near and far , 
Umpires of Peace and Leaders still in War. 
High Heaven alone shall over thy Buildings sway , 
And that alone be fairer thought than they ▪ 
Submissive Kings shall on thy Senate wait , 
While Nations thence expect to hear their Fate . 
Let Learning then , and Manners be thy care , 
The Proud to humble , the Distressed to spare , 
And to free those who slavish Fetters wear . 
BUT what if Tyrant's never were heard of more ? 
What serves it equal Freedom to restore , 
So long as other Monsters , worse than they , 
Rule all Mankind with a despotic Sway ? 
These are fit Objects of a Hero's rage ; 
But where 's the HERC'LES to redeem the Age ? 
no longer thus the World shall be misled 
By him that 's falsely called th' unerring Head. 
His Triple Crown I scornfully will spurn , 
And his proud Seat to heaps of Rubbish turn , 
Fright all his Vassals into Dens and Caves , 
then smoke to death the sacrilegious Slaves . 
The swarming Herds of crafty Priests and Monks , 
The Female Orders of Religious Punks , 
Cardinals , Patriarches , Metropolitans , 
Franciscans , jesuits , Dominicans , 
And such like barbarous Names Ecclesiastic , 
Such superstitious , villainous , fantastic , 
Cozening Rogues I 'll evermore disturb , 
Sense shall their Doctrines , Force their Malice kerb . 
Nor will I here desist ; all Holy Cheats 
Of all Religions shall partake my Threats , 
Whether with sable Gowns they show their Pride , 
Or under Cloaks their Knavery they hide , 
Or whatsoever disguise they choose to wear 
To gull the People , while their Spoils they share . 
As much as we revere those worthy men 
Who teach what 's peaceful , necessary , plain ; 
So much we should such Hypocrites impeach , 
As only Jargon , Strife , and Impire preach . 
Religion's safe , with PRIESTCRAFT is the War , 
All Friends to Priestcraft , Foes of Mankind are . 
Their impious Fanes and Altars I 'll overthrow , 
And the whole Farce of their feigned Saintship show ; 
Their pious Tricks disclose ; their murdering Zeal , 
And all their awful Mysteries reveal ; 
Their lying Prophets , and their juggling Thiefs 
Discredit quite ; their foolish Books ( as Leaves 
From Trees in Autumn fall ) I 'll scatter wide , 
And show those Fables which they fain would hide . 
WHEN i  performed these Feats , new Danger calls ; 
From Earth I 'll soar , and scale high Heaven's Walls 
To pull false Gods from thence , that Men may see 
there 's but one , true , all-perfect DEITY . 
Sound Reason is the Law that likes him best , 
Of Good and Ill the never-erring Test. 
His sacred Temple's e'ery good Man's Heart , 
Where his choice Gifts he freely does impart ; 
But they deserve and share his first Applause , 
Who stake their Lives in their dear Contry's Cause . 
An honest Mind is the best Prayer he needs ; 
Paid with good Works , for him no Victim bleeds . 
With Forms and Postures he is never pleased , 
Nor is his Wrath with Bribes to be appeased : 
But , happy in himself , he neither wants 
Aught we can give ; nor greater Blessings grants 
Than solid Sense , and an industrious Pain , 
riches with this , Wisdom with that to gain . 
FROM this high Steep with hasty flight I 'll bend , 
And to the Bosom of the Earth descend ; 
To those dark Shades I 'll introduce the day , 
And the vain Terrors of Hell's Court display . 
But wicked Deeds shall not unpunished go , 
Thomas not as Priests and Poets falsely show . 
Those Old-wives Tales , imaginary Fears , 
The Cause of Horror , and the Source of Tears , 
I 'll soon destroy ; extinguish all their Flames , 
Dry up their Rivers , break their rattling Chains , 
Poison their Serpents , fright each hideous Form , 
Cerberus choke , and Pluto's Castle storm , 
Legions of Fiends to Atoms I 'll reduce , 
And leave bad Men no Temter for excuse , 
But such lewd Thoughts as their vain Fancy draws , 
Rebels to Reason's just and easy Laws . 
The best Repentance is to sin no more , 
And to the Owners what   lost restore . 
hell 's always flaming in a villain 's Mind , 
who 's self-condemned , abhorred of all Mankind , 
And still suspicious of a Foe behind . 
virtue 's its own Reward ; nor Rage of Foes , 
Nor Frowns of Friends can Virtue discompose . 
Thomas Malice , Fraud , and Envy may combine , 
Spite of their Fury Innocence will shine . 
An honest man , when thousands treat him ill , 
His conscious Virtue will support him still , 
Till undeceived the World repairs his Fame , 
Life yields him Honour , Death a glorious Name . 
THUS powerful Eloquence shall teach the Wise 
Vile and absurd Inventions to despise ; 
And Fools will mend when abler men exhort , 
Or by strict Laws are kept from doing hurt . 
But as no Rule without exception is , 
So Fools in LEARNING come not under this : 
For neither Brains nor Books make them improve , 
Nor Laws restrain , so much they Mischief love . 
The easiest things they speak in Terms uncouth , 
And emty notions hug for solid Truth . 
Sworn Foes to Reason , whose resistless Light 
Condemns their Pride and Ignorance to Night : 
Slaves to Authority , the Bane of Schools , 
Because all Times have Precedents for Fools ▪ 
If in right ways I cannot such direct , 
I 'll spoil their Trade , their Vanity detect . 
As sick men ordered by their Doctor's Bills 
To breathe that Air which quickly cures or kills ; 
So shall my Words like Thunderbolts be hurled , 
And will confound or mend the erring World.  
BUT , when from Cares and public Business free , 
Bright VICTORINA my loved Theme shall be , 
The softest Words the sweetest Things will tell , 
And all I write or speak be fine and well . 
When she inspires , I must great things pursue ; 
If she approved , what Wonders could I do ? 
I should than all to come discover more , 
And would eclipse those Lights which shined before . 
But her dear Image calms my raging Breast , 
All should be still to lodge so fair a Guest , 
Who hating me , I 'm cursed ; or loving , ever blessed . 
THUS far I spoke ; and CLITO all approved , 
Except what last was said of her I loved . 
He did not blame my Passion , and allowed 
A virtuous Woman's Heart might well be wooed ; 
But that her Hate ( like other Ills ) the Wise 
Should soften first , or , missing that , despise : 
For Cowards loose by a too quick Despair 
what 's gained by nobler Souls who persevere , 
And in Success or Merit Victors are . 
WE part ; and each went where he wished to be , 
I to my Study , to his Garden Herald  
FINIS . 

JUSTUM & tenacem propositi virum 
Non civium Ardour prava jubentium , 
Non vultus instantis Tyranni , 
Mente quatit solida ; neque Auster 
Dux inquieti infidus Adriae , 
Nec fulminantis magna Jovis manus : 
Si fractus illabatur orbis , 
Impavidum ferient ruinae . 
Horat. lib. 3. odd . 3.  

