To the high court of parliament of the commonwealth of England , Scotland , and Jreland . 

The humble petition of a great number of imprisoned freemen for debt , of the city of London , which yet lie in Ludgate , under the cruel rigour of the Norman yoke of bondage and slavery , by the cruelty and oppression of their obdurate creditors . 

Showeth , 

That imprisonment of the body for debt , is contrary to the law of God , to reason . Justice , and charity , and to the common-law of this nation , as appeareth by several statutes ; the restraint of men and woman's persons in prison paying no debts but defrauding the creditors , and satisfying the tyrannical wills of the said creditor , lawyer , and gaoler . 

That some of your petitioners where committed before the 20th of October , 1653.  And although very poor , by reason of loss of trade , as also by suretyship ; yet by the injurious practices of their adversaries , combining with deceitful lawyers are by indirect proceedings in the law , unjustly detained to 〈◊〉 utter ruin of them and their families . 

O••e•ss of your petitioners , are confined close prisoners for small matters of Controver••• , only out of the cruelty of their adversaries , and so still remain under their vexatious imprisonment . 

O•••erss of your petitioners , are detained by outlawries and other prosses at the state's s•ite , and cannot obtain their just liberties . 

The premises piously considered , your poor petitioners humbly pray ; that your honours , would speedily break this cruel sinful yoke by the rule of righteousness , justice , and mercy , and to cause an act of parliament to be p•st for all such as are now in prison , to examine , hear , and determine all causes and d•fferenceses whatsoever , between creditors and prisoners , with small charges ; so that all differences concerning prisoners , May be adjudged and determined ( As also charities of , and belonging to prisons , which hath been unjustly detained , or misemployed ) speedily , without pleading of council , least your petitioners perish ; and that there May be provision made in the said act , that all debtors to prisoners May be compelled to make restitution unto them without any further charge in law ; so as all prisoners May be forthwith freed and discharged from their imprisonments . 

That so not only we , our wives , children , and friends , but this whole nation , May have just cause to bless God for you , and to eter•ize your names to posterity ; for the speedy accomplishment whereof , your distressed petitioners do daily pray , &c.  








