THE Double Descent . 

A POEM . 

This hour 's the very Crisis of your Fate , 
Your Good or Ill , your Infamy or Fame , 
And all the Colour of your Life depends 
On this Important NOW — 
Dryden's Spanish Friar , Act. 4.  



LONDON , Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry . 1692.  

THE Double Descent , A POEM . 

I  

't is so — I feel the warm Poetic Fire 
Glow in my Breast , and vig'rous Thoughts Inspire , 
In flowing Dress I see the Muse descend 
And by her Smiles assures me that she will 
For Thoughts as yet unborn , some kind assistance lend . 
But tell me Muse , what shall I sing ? 
What Subject shall my empty Pages fill ? 
To what New Measures shall I touch the String 
Of Great Apollo's charming Lyre ? 
II  

In Love's soft Numbers I was never skilled , 
Nor Amorous Odes or Stanza's written ; 
To rugged Satyr I am more inclined , 
But I am now forbid the Thought , 
And must some other Subject find : 
But as of old great Archimedes mind 
Was with some Mathematic Raptures filled , 
When he cried out 't is found , 't is found , so I 
The Lofty Subject now Descry , 
I must in Lines Prophetic tell the Story 
Of Albion's great , and William's greater Glory . 
III  

Ungrateful We — have we the Time forgot , 
When Laws and Liberties were trampled on ? 
And England's brightest Glory gone ? 
When Romish Wolves unboundedly did rove 
Through every Field , through every Grove , 
And silly Sheep became their Lot ; 
When all our Hopes to lowest Ebb were brought , 
The Great Nassau , that Son of Fame , 
Like mighty Belgic Lion came 
And quickly chased these Ravenous Beasts of Prey 
From Albion's happy Cliffs away , 
Dispelled the Mists of night , and showed us perfect day . 
iv.  

Nor stopped he there , but bravely ventures on , 
In parts abroad to gain a Victor's Crown , 
Great Minds in this , like heavenly Bodies are , 
Which move about the Sphere , 
They never stand still — alas ! our little Isle , 
Enough of Laurel could not show , 
To grace and to adorn his manly brow , 
He must to Foreign Parts for Triumphs go , 
And on the Rhine , the Sambre and Moselle , 
Erect large Trophies to his mighty Name , 
Which shall remain as Deathless as his Fame . 
v.  

One mighty Work is yet undone , 
A Work in Embryo and not yet begun ; 
What , did I say the Platform was not laid , 
That English Arms might France Invade ? 
You are to blame , my over hasty Muse , 
If his quick piercing Judgement you accuse ; 
For know long since in Nassau's hidden thought , 
The great Design , the glorious Scheme is wrought , 
And France is Conquered ever the Battle fought : 
For though his Princely Thoughts have been observed 
To be like Night all secret and reserved , 
Yet when in Action they themselves display , 
What was like darkness hid , is active as the day . 
VI  

It is Resolved — nor shall thy Fate , OH France ! 
Resist his Vow , nor all thy mighty Force , 
So much all Europe's and the World's discourse ; 
no , though from Flanders all thy Troops advance , 
Or thy New Conquests should disgorge and spew 
From ragged Walls their starved and tattered Crew , 
To make a formidable band , 
Which will like Locusts overspread the Land ; 
All this , and more than this will never do : 
Thy Fate is certain , and thy Doom is sealed , 
Nor will the Saints , which to thy aid 
thou hast in vain so often Prayed , 
Hear thy Complaints , or smallest Succours yield , 
With Incense though his Altar's smoke , 
In vain St. Denis you invoke , 
And what must still increase thy fears , 
Thou once his Head he lost , he now has lost his Ears . 
VII . 

Methinks I see the mighty Soul of War , 
The Fortunate , the brave Nassau , 
Born to teach Tyrants Martial Law , 
Sitting at Helm of a rich Naval Carr , 
By Moderns styled a Man of War , 
Whilst pressing Waves o'er one another crowd , 
Striving who first should bear the precious Load , 
And the blue Triton's Trumpets sound 
From shore to shore on either side rebound : 
See in a lofty Chariot drawn , 
Neptune the Regent of the Sea , 
His Looks all gay as when on Morning's dawn , 
He stole from Thetis kind embrace ; 
See him give up the Badge of Majesty , 
His Trident with Prostration low , 
To great Nassau , as rightly judging he 
Was than himself more fitter for the place , 
And how to govern did much better know . 
VIII . 

See on the Coast of Normandy , 
Upon the Beach and on the Sand , 
The gaping Troops all wondering stand , 
Of rabble rout a mghty Host , 
could they but fight as well as they can boast : 
But by perpetual Slavery 
Their minds so spiritless are grown , 
Don Quixot who with lifeless Puppets fought , 
Not sooner could a Victory obtain , 
Than could of Men a handful o'er this mighty Train . 
Alas , their Souls are not their own , 
Their all is for a trifle bought , 
And   exchanged their Liberty 
For welcome Bonds , and doubly welcome Poverty . 
IX . 

So looked the silly Indians , when they saw 
The Spansh Fleet approach their shore ; 
The Ships they fancied Monsters all , 
And thought they lived because they heard 'em roar ; 
But what amazement did it draw , 
When from their sides they saw an Army crawl , 
Some prostrate on their Knees did fall , 
But thousands durst not longer stay , 
But swift as Wind ran hastily away . 
X.  

The French with Indians may compare , 
If not in Folly , yet at least in Fear ; 
The Common sort are of a Race , 
So poor , so spiritless and base , 
That they the Dignity of Man disgrace , 
Freedom and Slavery with them , 
Are understood to be the same . 
But there are yet some quick , discerning few , 
Who know the Price of Liberty , 
And out of Duty , not of Blindness true , 
Yet Wish and Pray against the Tyranny : 
These often have with passionate regret 
Obseru●d their country 's sinking state , 
And mourned and wished that Heaven would send 
Some kind Deliv'rer for their Friend : 
Of a Descent when these shall hear , 
Thomas they may Counterfeit a Fear , 
Yet inwardly rejoice and sing , 
Since by Britana's fate they plainly see , 
Nassau's great Aim is Liberty ; 
To knock their Fetters off , and set them free , 
And them from Egypt to a Land of Canaan bring . 
XI . 

He Lands , the mighty Hero Lands , when straight the Air 
Is filled with shouts of Joy and shouts of Fear : 
His Troops well Disciplined like one Man seem , 
And all resolve to stand and fall with him : 
Of a Resistance some faint show is made , 
But all as if they viewed Medusa's Head , 
Are Charmed — As was Britania heretofore , 
When some time since he Landed on her shore : 
He soon the mighty difference quickly showed , 
Between the cruel , and the just and good , 
His business was to Save and not Invade . 
XII . 

Swift as the Lightning , flies the News to Court , 
A sad , a terrible Report , 
For long Debates they have no time to spare , 
no Spanish Councils they desire , 
Their Votes , must like their humours be , as quick as Fire ; 
Scarce can they in their Seats be warm , 
But comes another fresh Alarm , 
That the Arrear Ban did not stay 
One Brush , but tacked about and ran away , 
And that some thousands of the better sort , 
In Troops did hourly to the Foe Resort , 
Which like a furious Torrent gust along , 
And nothing stopped it in its way , 
But that it would without delay , 
Down to the very Gates of Paris throng . 
XIII . 

This News their looks with consternation fills , 
With thousand doubts and fears Oppressed , 
A hurricane arises in the Breast 
Of mighty Lewis , who with passion swells : 
And am I then so despicable grown ? 
( Says he ) and these disorders too so near the Throne ; 
Must all my hopes be ruined by a Man , 
Who is at best but Nature's smallest span ; 
I thought no Head on Earth had equalled mine , 
But he does all my Counsels undermine , 
sees through the dark recesses of my Soul ; 
Ob Lovis ! best of Friends and Counsellors , 
Who to my Interest didst devote thy Hours ; 
What made the angry Fates to snatch thee hence ? 
thou man of deep Intrigue , thou man of mighty Sense ; 
With ease thou threatening Dangers didst control , 
And by unparallelled disguise and artifice , 
Spoil all the Measures of my Enemies . 
Say , my best Friends , what Methods shall I take ? 
As yet unknown , a mighty Fund to raise , 
i  tried a thousand several ways ; 
Ten thousand places I have lately Sold , 
Made Cobbler's Gentlemen , for Gold ; 
And if a greater Sum they could advance , 
Equal 'em with the Peers of France ; 
This I have done , but when I think the whole 
Is now in Danger , how it wracks my thought ? 
And I am into wild confusion brought ; One 
One way , as yet , is unessayed , 
The Cloisters Plunder , and the Church Invade ; 
Shall useless Plate upon their Altars lie , 
While Lewis has an Enemy ? 
Thomas Poverty they all profess , 
Yet have they riches in such store , 
The great Mogul has scarcely more . 
I 'll bring their Worship to an humble dress , 
And the Religious , Poor shall be , 
Not in Profession , but reality , 
But Pardon , Holy Church , this rude address , 
Mothers , their Sons should Succour in distress . 
FOURTEEN . 

Now leave we them in different projects warm , 
Distracted , just like Sailors in a Storm ; 
Now here , now there , from Prow to Poop they run , 
And all their Work each minute but begun , 
To view the Progress of his Arms , 
Who Mankind with his Virtues Charms , 
In more than Roman Triumph while he Rides , 
He their low Adoration Chides ; 
Tells them , he came to Save and to Protect , 
To Heaven they only should allow Respect , 
The influencing Cause of such a good Effect , 
Yet they their Acclamations give not o'er , 
But still they more forbid , they shout the more ; 
So when our Saviour heretofore , 
By power Miraculous did Heal 
A Man , and charged him to Conceal 
The secret , and to no man tell his Name ; 
Thomas he returns of Gratitude did pay , 
Yet could not that command obey , 
But over all Judea spread his glorious Fame . 
xv.  

To men in Greenland , who a long half year 
Have not of Light the least appearance seen ; 
The Sun more welcome cannot be ; 
To Criminanls' Reprieves , to Captives Liberty , 
Not half so grateful do appear 
As great Nassau's Descent , — who long has been 
The Obstacle of Europe's Tyranny : 
Through mighty Cities see him pass , 
While num'rous crowds his Chariot-wheels attend 
And all applaud and all commend ; 
With herbs and flowers the Virgins strue the ways , 
And think enough his worth they cannot praise ; 
Nay , the Religious of each Order strive 
Who in most studied Panegricks shall 
The largest Praises to his Virtue give ; 
Thomas his Religion they dislike , 
Yet his Great Actions , and his Name , 
Echoed through all the world by Fame . 
Their Minds with mighty Veneration strike ; 
The Aged with their Crutches crawl , 
And Bedrid Man before he dies , 
Is willing for to bless his Eyes , 
With sight of him who Gives to Europe Law , 
And little Babes are taught to Lisp Nassau . 
XVI . 

So when the Great Deliverer of Old , 
Moses , the Meek , the Just and Bold , 
To Israel Tribes his Large Commission show , 
Proved by his Wonder-working Rod , 
They all with awful Reverence bowed ; 
But when he led them through the Sea , 
With Manna fed them , and by mighty stroke 
Fetched Water from the hardened Rock ; 
Their wonder came almost t'idolatry ; 
There then were Murmurers a few , 
As Korah , Dathan , and his Crew : 
And they a Dismal Exit met : 
Yet on the Gallic Shore there 's scarcely one , 
But who approves the Business done ; 
Yet if there should be some , who with Regret 
Their country 's New-gained Freedom see , 
And wish Returns of Slavery , 
May they meet Dathan and Abirams Fate . 
XVII . 

News of Revolts come every hour to Court , 
Which did Adullam's Cave resemble , 
For those who made Oppression but their sport , 
Or did with guilt and horror Tremble , 
To that as to a Sanctuary fly ; 
Who would a Twig to drowning Man deny ? 
Few Noblemen , but those whose weighty crimes 
Had rendered them the Odium of the times , 
Appear — What course shall mighty Lewis take , 
Since his great Friends him and his cause forsake ; 
He sees the Clouds grow black , and further spread , 
And fears the Storm will break upon his Head : 
Where shall he go , or whether shall he fly ? 
To what Dark corner of the Earth , 
Famous for giving Tyrant's Birth , 
Retire , and in confusion sigh and die ? 
Thomas Mother Church does Prodigals receive , 
Yet his Repentance she can never believe , 
Who daily sends to Infidel's Relief , 
Equals the Turban , with the Coul , 
Thinks Christianity endures no loss , 
If the Half-moon stand rival with the Cross ; 
Let him , like Cain in ancient times , 
Guilty of more Nefarious crimes , 
Than ever his were , through Deserts roll , 
Since his Oppressions , Cruelties , 
Were infinitely more than his ; 
Cain was condemned for shedding filial Blood , 
He spilt a drop , but this has caused a Flood . 
XVIII . 

He comes , the Conqueror comes , Nasau the brave , 
To Gates of Paris , infamously known , 
For Blood and Massacres once done , 
From both of which , was Born , that place to save , 
Where from all parts Addresses come , 
Not such as heretofore were made , 
When Lives and Fortunes solemnly were laid 
At Prince's Foot — And all was Masquerade , 
All show , and just to nothing came the Sum ; 
But grateful Sense of what they owe 
To his all Powerful Arms , since now , 
Too sensibly they taste and see 
The Fruits of welcome Liberty , 
With such surprise , as one born blind surveys , 
After his cure , the sun 's bright rays ; 
They see the Halcyon Days appear , 
And Peace and Plenty once more flourish there : 
If after all these mighty Wonders done , 
The great Nassau accepts the Crown , 
By double Title now his own , 
How greatly 't will his Fame advance , 
When not in compliment alone , 
But in reality he 's known 
To be the Just , the only King of France ! 
( 19 ) 

Leave , leave , a while , my Muse , the Dazzling Sight 
Of Nassau's Glory , — to surveyed , 
A noisy , vain , imaginary Scene ; 
For such a Project is no more , 
A French Descent upon the English Shore ; 
The Quarrel is maintained with just such Odds , 
As when the Giants fought with Gods : 
I view , methinks , with Pity and Delight , 
The foolish trifling vain Essay , 
And see the Phantoms vanish quite away , 
As do the Figures in the Fairy Queen . 
( 20 ) 

Behold , upon the British Waves appears , 
( Some few men's Hopes , but no Man's Fears ; ) 
A Gallic Fleet , which calls the yielding Stream , 
As if she proudly came to claim , 
By Force , the English Diadem . 
Ah , foolish France ! how plainly shall we see , 
How silly thy Pretences be , 
To aim at Universal Monarchy ? 
See how the very Elements conspire ; 
And Winds , and Waves in closest League , 
Combine to frustrate thy Desire ; 
To mar thy whole Design , and spoil the Grand Intrigue . 
( 21 ) 

But should we grant by Magic Spells , 
By Exorcisms , or something else , 
Thy Priests should charm the very Waves to Peace , 
And make the Winds their noisy Blusters cease : 
( For what great Wonders can't they do , 
Who make their God , and eat him too ? ) 
Should with calm Breezes , and a merry Gale , 
Thy whole ( but not invincible ) Armada sail , 
With so much Pleasure and Delight , 
As if it came to Triumph , not to Fight ; 
Yet on fair Albion's Shores , by Heaven's Command , 
Whole Troops of Guardian Angels stand ; 
Who with a Look can drive thee from the Shore , 
cause thee to make more shameful a Retreat , 
Than Spanish Fleet in Eighty Eight ; 
When to the British Coast its threatening Face it bore . 
( 22 ) 

But should they Land ! — and that 's a grand Suppose ; 
What then will be their Fate , Who knows ? 
If Causes by Effects we guests , 
To Delphic Oracles we need not go , 
Of this Descent th' Event we know ; 
And without Magic tell the whole Success ; 
So quick a Slaughter would be made 
Of those , who durst our Shoar invade , 
One Man would scarce be left alive , 
( Who by good Luck did all the rest survive , ) 
With Sorrow , Passion , and Regret , 
In France , to tell his Fellow-soldier's Fate . 
( 23 ) 

The FRENCH — Although indeed no Terror lie 
In the Word French , yet there 's a strange , 
And almost unaccountable Antipathy , 
Against 'em does in English Bosoms range ; 
Should Goths and Vandals , Turks and Saracens , 
People who make it still their Trade , 
Their Neighbour's Kingdoms to invade ; 
Or a strange Nation come we know not whence , 
These might perhaps much more increase our Fear , 
When their tall Ships upon our Coast appear ; 
But not our Rage by half so much incense , 
Not Fire and Water more Aversion bear , 
Than lies between the English and Monsieur . 
( 24 ) 

Suppose they should through Clouds of Fire and Smoke , 
Scent from our Fleet — those thundering Sons of Oak , 
Rush through , and make a bold Attempt to Land , 
Not only Horse and Foot , a numerous Band , 
Their proud usurping Force would quell ; 
But Women , ignorant in Arms , 
Dreadless of Dangers , and of Harms , 
With Kitchen-weapons , Spit and Fork , 
Would do a deal of Murth'ring Work : 
If these the Enemy repel , 
't is fit they should the Glory share , 
And each as Badge of Honour wear , 
Close by her Side a frenchman 's Nose or Ear.  
( 26 ) 

Had the Descent ( so much the town 's Discourse ) 
Intended been for any Land but ours , 
What Consternation would it not create ? 
What great Convulsions in the State ? 
Whereas altho' the threatening danger 's near , 
no Face puts on the Livery of Fear . 
Gay are our Days , and pleasant all our Hours , 
Plenty and Pleasure all our Care ; 
But Preparations yet are made , 
The Foe to welcome , if he should invade ; 
For 't is a Truth on Record still , 
And owned by all the Sons of Sense , 
't is lawful to use Self-defence , 
Let Nonresistance Sparks say what they william  
( 26 ) 

But yet before fair Albion they invade , 
Specious Pretences must be made ; 
INVADE US ! — no , the Word they scorn , 
They were for nobler Projects born ; 
They only come to save our Land 
From being by the Dutch trepanned , 
To set a Prince once more upon the Throne , 
By Subject's Villainies undone , 
On a right Basis our Religion settle , 
And separate the Dross from Loyal Metal ; 
Law , Right and Justice to restore ; 
With twenty other fine Pretences more . 
( 27 ) 

Blessed Regulators of a blessed Cause , 
When French Dragoons shall give to England Laws ; 
What sort of Creatures are there in the Nation , 
Who wish and pray for such a Reformation ? 
In that Enquiry go not yet too far , 
For in this Town a numerous Crowd there are , 
Wretches impatient of their Liberty ; 
Who , though they all might live at ease , 
Are utter Enemies to Peace , 
And long for Wooden Shoes and Slavery ; 
To utter Ruin would their Country bring , 
To Reinstate an Idol-king ; 
And when with Flames they see the Nation burn , 
Not drop a Tear , or Sigh and mourn ; 
But Nero-like , tune up their Harps and sing : 
With them all sober Reason's Stuff ; 
But they are now grown Satyr-proof , 
And all their mind 's impregnable like warlike Buff.  
( 28 ) 

But leaving them to Racks of Hope and Fear , 
To be succeeded by a wild Despair : 
See , see my Muse , the lowering Cloud , 
Which threatened Storms of Fire and Blood , 
Quite vanquished from our Hemisphere ; 
From every side loud Acclamations ring 
Long live the warlike King , and beauteous Queen : 
Soft charming Music fills the Air , 
Now calm , unruffled , and serene 
Music which cheers the listening Ear , 
Whilst Guardian Angels in a Choir , 
Whom Love and Reverence inspire , 
In a full Anthem Albion's Paises sing . 
FINIS . 

