The law of freedom in a platform : or , true magistracy restored . Humbly presented to Oliver Cromwell , general of the commonwealth's army in England . And to all Englishmen my brethren whether in church-fellowship , or not in church-fellowship , both sorts walking as they conceive according to the order of the gospel : and from them to all the nations in the world . Wherein is declared , what is kingly government , and what is commonwealths government . 

By Jerrard Winstanley . 

In thee , oh England , is the law arising up to shine , 
If thou receive and practise it , the crown it will be thine . 
If thou reject , and still remain a froward son to be , 
Another land will it receive , and take the crown from thee . 


Revel. 11. 15.  — — dan. 7. 27.  

London , printed by j. m. for the author , and are to be sold by Giles Calvert at the black spread-eagle at the West end of Paul's . 1652.  

To his excellency Oliver Cromwell , general of the commonwealths army in England . 

Sir , 

God hath honoured you with the highest honour of any man since Moses time , to be the head of a persons , who have cast out an oppressing Pharaoh : for when the Norman power had conquered our forefathers , he took the free use of our English ground from them , and made them his servants . And God-hath made you a successful instrument to cast out that conqueror , and to recover our land and liberties again , by your victories , out of that Norman hand . 

That which is yet wanting on your part to be done , is this , to see the oppressor's power to be cast out with his person ; and to see that the free possession of the land and liberties be put into the hands of the oppressed commoners of England . 

For the crown of honour cannot be yours , neither can those victories be called victories on your part , till the land and freedoms won be possessed by them who adventured person and purse for them . 

Now you know Sir , that the kingly conqueror was not beaten by you only as you are a single man , nor by the officers of the army joined to you ; but by the hand and assistance of the commoners , whereof some came in person , and adventured their lives with you ; others stayed at home , and planted the earth , and paid taxes and freequarter to maintain you that went to war . 

So that whatsoever is recovered from the conqueror , is recovered by a joint consent of the commoners : therefore it is all equity , that all the commoners who assisted you , should be set free from the conqueror's power with you : as David's law was ; the spoil shall be divided between them who went to war , and them who stayed at home . 

And now you have the power of the land in your hand , you must do one of these two things : first , either set the land free to the oppressed commoners , who assisted you , and paid the army their wages : and then you will fulfil the scriptures and your own engagements , and so take possession of your deserved honour . 

Or secondly , you must only remove the conqueror's power out of the King's hand into other men's , maintaining the old laws still : and then your wisdom and honour is blasted for ever ; and you will either lose yourself , or lay the foundation of greater slavery to posterity than you ever knew . 

You know that while the King was in the height of his oppressing power , the persons only whispered in private chambers against him : but afterwards it was preached upon the house tops , that he was a tyrant and a traitor to England's peace ; and he had his overturn . 

The righteous power in the creation is the same still : if you , and those in power with you , should be found walking in the King's steps , can you secure yourselves or posterities from an overturn ? Surely no . 

The spirit of the whole creation ( Who is God ) is about the reformation of the world , and he will go forward in his work : for if he would not spare Kings , who have sat so long at his right hand , governing the world , neither will he regard you , unless your ways be found more righteous than the Kings . 

You have the eyes of the persons all the land over , nay i think i May say all neighbouring nations over , waiting to see what you will do : and the eyes of your oppressed friends , who lie yet under kingly power , are waiting to have the possession given them of that freedom in the land , which was promised by you , if in case you prevailed . Lose not your crown ; take it up , and wear it . But know , that it is no crown of honour , till promises and engagements made by you be performed to your friends . he that continues to the end , shall receive the crown . now you do not see the end of your work , unless the kingly law and power be removed as well as his person . 

Jonah's gourd is a remembrancer to men in high places . 

The worm in the earth gnawed the root , and the gourd died , and Jonah was offended . 

Sir , i pray bear with me ; my spirit is upon such a lock that i must speak plain to you , lest it tell me another day , if thou hadst spoke plain , things Might have been amended . 

The earth wherein your gourd grows is the commoners of England . 

The gourd is that power which covers you , which will be established to you by giving the persons their true freedoms , and not otherwise . 

The root of your gourd is the heart of the persons , groaning under kingly bondage , and desiring a commonwealths freedom in their English earth . 

The worm in the earth , now gnawing at the root of your gourd , is discontents , because engagements and promises made to them by such as have power , are not kept . 

And this worm hath three heads : the first is a spirit waiting opportunities till a blasting wind arise to cause your gourd to wither ; and yet pretends fair to you , &c.  

Another spirit shelters under your gourd for a livelihood , and will say as you say in all things ; and these are called honest , yet no good friends to you nor the commonwealth , but to their own bellies . 

There is a third spirit , which is faithful indeed , and plain dealing , and many times for speaking truth plainly he is cashiered , imprisoned , and crushed : and the oppressions laid upon this spirit kindles the fire which the two former waits to warm themselves at . 

Would you have your gourd stand for ever ? Then cherish the root in the earth ; that is , the heart of your friends , the oppressed commoners of England , by killing the worm . And nothing will kill this worm , but performance of professions , words , and promises , that they May be made free men from tyranny . 

It May be you will say to me , what shall i do ? i answer , you are in place and power to see all burdens taken off from your friends the commoners of England . you will say , what are those burdens ? 

I will instance in some , both which i know in my own experience , and which i hear the persons daily complaining of , and groaning under , looking upon you and waiting for deliverance . 

Most persons cry , we have paid taxes , given freequarter , wasted our estates , and lost our friends in the wars , and the taskmasters multiply over us more than formerly . I have asked divers this question , why do you say so ? 

Some have answered me , that promises , oaths , and engagements have been made as a motive to draw us to assist in the wars ; that privileges of parliament and liberties of subjects should be preserved , and that all popery , and episcopacy , and tyranny should be rooted out ; and these promises are not performed : now there is an opportunity to perform them . 

For first , say they , the current of succeeding parliaments is stopped , which is one of the greatest privileges ( And people's liberties ) for safety and peace ; and if that continue stopped , we shall be more offended by an hereditary parliament , than we were oppressed by an hereditary King . 

And for the commoners , who were called subjects , while the kingly conqueror was in power , have not as yet their liberties granted them ; i will instance them in order , according as the common whisperings are among the persons . 

For say they , the burdens of the clergy remains still upon us , in a threefold nature . 

First , if any man declare his judgement in the things of God , contrary to the clergies report , or the mind of some high officers , they are cashiered , imprisoned , crushed , and undone , and made sinners for a word , as they were in the Popes and Bishops days ; so that though their names be cast out , yet their high commission courts power remains still , persecuting men for conscience sake , when their actions are unblameable . 

Secondly , in many parishes there are old formal ignorant episcopal priests established ; and some ministers , who are bitter enemies to commonwealth's freedom , and friends to monarchy , are established preachers , and are continually buzzing their subtle principles into the minds of the persons , to undermine the peace of our declared commonwealth , causing a disaffection of spirit among neighbours , who otherwise would live in peace . 

Thirdly , the burden of tithes remains still upon our estates , which was taken from us by the Kings , and given to the clergy , to maintain them by one labours : so that though their preaching fill the minds of many with madness , contention , and unsatisfied doubting , because their imaginary and ungrounded doctrines cannot be understood by them , and yet we must pay them large tithes for so doing ; this is oppression . 

Fourthly , if we go to the lawyer , we find him to sit in the conqueror's chair , though the Kings be removed , maintaining the King's power to the height , for in many courts and cases of law , the will of a judge & lawyer rules above the letter of the law , and many cases and suits are lengthened to the great vexation of the clients , and to the lodging of their estates in the purse of the unbounded lawyer : so that we see , though other men be under a sharp law , yet many of the great lawyers are not , but still do act their will , as the conqueror did ; as i have heard some belonging to the law say , what cannot we do ? 

Fifthly , say they , if we look upon the customs of the law itself , it is the same it was in the King's days , only the name is altered ; as if the 〈◊〉 of England had paid their taxes , freequarter , and shed their blood , not to reform , but to baptize the law into a new name , from kingly law , to state law ; by reason whereof , the spirit of discontent is strengthened , to increase more suits of law , then formerly was known to be : and so as the sword pulls down kingly power with one hand , the King's old law builds up monarchy again with the other . 

And indeed the main work of reformation lies in this , to reform the clergy , lawyers , and law ; for all the complaints of the land are wrapped up within them three , not in the person of a King . 

Shall men of other nations say , that notwithstanding all those rare wits in the parliament and army of England , yet they could not reform the clergy , lawyer , and law , but must needs establish all as the Kings left them ? 

Will not this blast all our honour , and make all monarchial members laugh in their sleeves , to see the government of our commonwealth to be built upon the kingly laws and principles ? 

I have asked divers soldiers what they fought for ; they answered , they could not tell ; and it is very true , they cannot tell indeed , if the monarchial law be established without reformation : but i wait to see what will be done ; and i doubt not but to see our commonwealths government to be built upon his own foundation . 

Sixthly , if we look into parishes , the burdens there are many . 

First , for the power of Lords of manors remains still over their brethren , requiring fines and heriots ; beating them off the free use of the common land , unless their brethren will pay them rent ; exacting obedience , as much as they did , and more , when the King was in power . 

Now faith the persons , by what power do these maintain their title over us ? Formerly they held title from the King , as he was the conqueror's successor : but have not the commoners cast out the King , and broke the band of that conquest ? Therefore in equity they are free from the slavery of that lordly power . 

Secondly , in parishes where Commons lie , the rich Norman freeholders , or the new ( More covetous ) gentry , over-stock the Commons with sheep and cattle ; so that inferior tenants and poor labourers can hardly keep a cow , but half starve her ; so that the poor are kept poor still , and the common freedom of the earth is kept from them , and the poor have no more relief than they had when the King ( Or conqueror ) was in power . 

Thirdly , in many parishes two or three of the great ones bears all the sway , in making assessments over awing constables and other officers ; and when time was to quarter soldiers , they would have a hand in that , to ease themselves , and over-burden the weaker sort ; and many times make large sums of money over and above the justices warrant in assessments , and would give no account why , neither durst the inferior persons demand an account , for he that spoke should be sure to be crushed the next opportunity ; and if any have complained to committees or justices , they have been either wearied out by 〈◊〉 and waiting , or else the offence hath been by them smothered up ; so that we see one great man favoured another , and the poor 〈◊〉 have no relief . 

Fourthly , there is another grievance which the persons are much troubled at , and that is this ; country persons cannot sell any corn or other fruits of the earth in a market town , but they must either pay toll , or be turned out of town : now say they , this is a most shameful thing , that we must part with our estates in taxes and freequarter to purchase the freedom of the land , and the freedom of the towns , and yet this freedom must be still given from us , into the hands of a covetous Norman toll-taker , according to the King's old burdensome laws , and contrary to the liberty of a free commonwealth . 

Now saith the whisperings of the persons , the inferior tenants and labourers bears all the burdens , in labouring the earth , in paying taxes and freequarter beyond their strength , and in furnishing the armies with soldiers , who bear the greatest burden of the war ; and yet the gentry , who oppress them , and that live idle upon their labours , carry away all the comfortable livelihood of the earth . 

For is not this a common speech among the persons , we have parted with our estates , we have lost our friends in the wars , which we willingly gave up , because freedom was promised us ; and now in the end we have new taskmasters , and our old burdens increased : and though all sorts of persons have taken an engagement to cast out kingly power , yet kingly power remains in power still in the hands of those who have no more right to the earth then ourselves . 

For say the persons , if the Lords of manors and our taskmasters hold title to the earth over us from the old kingly power , behold that power is beaten and cast out . 

And two acts of parliament are made . The one to cast out kingly power , backed by the engagement against King and house of Lords . The other to make England a free commonwealth . 

And if Lords of manors lay claim to the earth over us , from the armies victories over the King ; then we have as much right to the land as they , because our labours , and blood , and death of friends , were the purchasers of the earth's freedom as well as theirs . 

And is not this a slavery , say the persons , that though there be land enough in England , to maintain ten times as many persons as are in it , yet some must beg of their brethren , or work in hard drudgery for day wages for them , or starve , or steal , and so be hanged out of the way , as men not fit to live in the earth , before they must be suffered to plant the waste land for their livelihood , unless they will pay rent to their brethren for it ? well , this is a burden the creation groans under ; and the subjects ( So called ) have not their birthright freedoms granted them from their brethren , who hold it from them by club law , but not by righteousness . 

And who now must we be subject to , seeing the conqueror is gone ? 

I answer , we must either be subject to a law , or to men's wills . If to a law , than all men in England are subjects , or aught to be , thereunto : but what law that is to which every one ought to be subject is not yet established in execution . If any say the old King's laws are the rule , than it May be answered , that those laws are so full of confusion , that few knows when they obey and when not , because they were the laws of a conqueror to hold the persons in subjection to the will of the conqueror ; therefore that cannot be the rule for every one : besides , we daily see many actions done by state officers , which they have no law to justify them in , but their prerogative will . 

And again if we must be subject to men , than what men must we be subject to , seeing one man hath as much right to the earth as another , for no man now stands as a conqueror over his brethren by the law of righteousness ? 

You will say , we must be subject to the ruler , it is true , but not to suffer the rulers to call the earth theirs and not ours , for by so doing they betray their trust , and run into the line of 〈◊〉 and we lose our freedom , and from thence 〈◊〉 and wars arise . 

A ruler is worthy double honour when he rules well , that is , when he himself is subject to the law , and requires all others to be subject thereunto and makes it his work to see the laws obeyed , and not his own will , and such rulers are faithful , and they are to be subjected unto us therein , for all commonwealths rulers are servants to , not Lords and Kings over the persons . But you will say , is not the land your brothers ? and you cannot take away 〈◊〉 man's right by claiming a share therein with him . 

I answer , it is his either by creation right , or by right of conquest : if by creation right he call the earth his and not mine ; then it is mine as well as his , for the spirit of the whole creation , who made us both , is no respecter of persons . 

And if by conquest he call the earth his and not mine , it must be either by the conquest of the Kings over the commoners , or by the conquest of the commoners over the Kings . 

If he claim the earth to be his from the King's conquest , the Kings are beaten and cast out and that title is undone . 

If he claim title to the earth to be his from the conquest of the commoners over the Kings , than i have right to the land as well as my brother , for my brother , without me , nor i without my brother , did not cast out the Kings , but both together assisting with person and purse , we prevailed , so that i have by this victory as equal a share in the earth which is now redeemed as my brother , by the law of righteousness . 

If my brother still say he will be landlord ( Through his covetous ambition ) and i must pay him rent , or else i shall not live in the land , than does he take my right from me , which i have purchased by my money in taxes , free quarter and blood . And oh thou spirit of the whole creation , who hath this title to be called King of righteousness , and Prince of peace ; judge thou between my brother and me , whether this be righteous , &c.  

And now , say the persons , is not this a grievous thing that our brethren that will be landlords right or wrong , will make laws , and call for a law to be made to imprison , crush , nay put to death , any that denies God , Christ , and scripture ; and yet they will not practise that golden rule , do to another as thou wouldst have another do to thee , which God , Christ , and scriptures , hath enacted for a law ? are not these men guilty of death by their own law , which is the words of their own mouth ? is it not a flat denial of God and scripture ? 

Oh the confusion and thick darkness that hath overspread our brethren is very great , i have no power to remove it , but lament it in the secrets of my heart ; when i see prayers , sermons , fasts , thanksgiving , directed to this god in words and-shews , and when i come to look for actions of obedience to the righteous law , suitable to such a profession , i find them men of another nation , saying , and not doing ; like an old courtier saying your servant , when he was an enemy . I will say no more , but groan and wait for a restoration . 

Thus Sir , i have reckoned up some of those burdens which the persons groan under . 

And i being sensible hereof was moved in myself , to present this platform of commonwealths government unto you , wherein i have declared a full commonwealths freedom , according to the rule of righteousness , which is God's word . It was intended for your view above two years ago , but the disorder of the times caused me to lay it aside , with a thought never to bring it to light , &c.  Likewise i hearing that m. Peter's and some others propounded this request , that the word of God Might be consulted with to find out a healing government , which i liked well , and waited to see such a rule come forth , for there are good rules in the scripture if they were obeyed and practised : thereupon 

I laid aside this in silence , and said , i would not make it public ; but this word was like fire in my bones ever and anon , thou shalt not bury thy talon in the earth , therefore i was stirred up to give it a 〈◊〉 , and to pick together as many of my scattered papers as i could find , and to compile them into this method , which i do here present to you , and do quiet my own spirit . 

And now i have set the candle at your door , for you have power in your hand , in this other added opportunity , to act for common freedom if you will ; i have no power . 

It May be here are some things inserted which you May not like , yet other things you May like , therefore i pray you read it , and be as the industrious bee , suck out the honey and cast away the weeds . 

Though this platform be like a piece of timber rough hewed , yet the discreet workmen May take it , and frame a handsome building out of it . 

It is like a poor man that comes clothed to your door in a torn country garment , who is unacquainted with the learned citizens unsettled forms and fashions ; take of the clownish language , for under that you May see beauty . 

It May be you will say , if tithes be taken from the priests and impropriators , and copyhold services from Lords of manors , how shall they be provided for again ; for is it not unrighteous to take their estates from them ? 

I answer , when tithes were first enacted , and lordly power drawn over the backs of the oppressed , the Kings and conquerors made no scruple of conscience to take it , though the persons lived in sore bondage of poverty for want of it ; and can there be scruple of conscience to make restitution of this which hath been so long stolen goods ? It is no scruple arising from the righteous law , but from 〈◊〉 , who goes away sorrowful to hear he must part with all to follow righteousness and peace . 

But though you do take away tithes , and the power of Lords of manors , yet there will be no want to them , for they have the freedom of the common stock , they May send to the storehouses for what they want , and live more free than now they do , for now they are in care and vexation by servants , by casualties , by being cheated in buying and selling , and many other encumbrances , but than they will be free from all , for the common storehouses is every 〈◊〉 , not any ones . 

Is not buying and selling a righteous law ? No , it is the law of the conqueror , but not the righteous law of creation : how can that be righteous which is a cheat ? 〈◊〉 is not this a common practice , when he hath a bad horse or cow , or any bad commodity , he will send it to the market , to cheat some simple plain hearted man or other , and when he comes home , will laugh at his neighbour's hurt , and much more &c.  

When mankind began to buy and sell , than did he fall from his innocency ; for than they began to 〈◊〉 and cozen one another of their creation birthright : as for example ; if the land belong to three persons , and two of them buy and sell the earth , and the third give no consent , his right is taken from him , and his posterity is engaged in a war . 

When the earth was first bought and sold , many gave no consent : as when our crown lands , and Bishops lands were sold , some foolish soldiers yielded , and covetous officers were active in it , to advance themselves above their brethren : but many , who paid taxes and freequarter for the purchase of it , gave no consent , but declared against it , as an unrighteous thing , depriving posterity of their birthrights and freedoms . 

Therefore this buying and selling did bring in , and still doth bring in , discontents and wars , which have plagued mankind sufficiently for so doing . And the nations of the world will never learn to beat their swords into plowshares , and their spears into pruning hooks , and leave of warring , until this cheating device of buying and selling be cast out among the rubbish of kingly power . 

But shall not one man be richer than another ? 

There is no need of that ; for riches make men vainglorious , proud , and to oppress their brethren ; and are the occasion of wars . 

No man can be rich , but he must be rich , either by his own labors , or by the labors of other men helping him : if a man have no help 〈◊〉 his neighbour , he shall never gather an estate of hundred and thousands a year : if other men help him to work , then are those riches his neighbours , as well as his ; for they be the fruit of other men's labors as well as his own . 

But all rich men live at ease , feeding and clothing themselves by the labors of other men , not by their own ; which is their shame , and not their nobility ; for it is a more 〈◊〉 thing to give then to receive : but rich men receive all they have from the labourers hand , and what they give , they give away other men's labors , not their own ; therefore they are not righteous actors in the earth . 

But shall not one man have more titles of honour then another ? 

Yes : as a man goes through offices , he rises to titles of honour , till he comes to the highest nobility , to be a faithful commonwealths man in a parliament house . Likewise he who finds out any secret in nature , shall have a title of honour given him , though he be a young man . But no man shall have any title of honour till he win it by industry , or come to it by age , or office-bearing . Every man that is above sixty years of age shall have respect as a man of honour by all others that are younger , as is showed hereafter . 

Shall every man Count his neighbour's house as his own , and live together as one family ? 

No : though the earth and storehouses be common to every family , yet every family shall live apart as they do ; and every man's house , wife , children , and furniture for ornament of his house , or any thing which he hath fetched in from the storehouses , or provided for the necessary use of his family , is all a propriety to that family , for the peace thereof . And if any man offer to take away a man's wife , children , or furniture of his house , without his consent , or disturb the peace of his dwelling , he shall suffer punishment as an enemy to the commonwealths government ; as is mentioned in the platform following . 

Shall we have no lawyers ? 

There is no need of them , for there is to be no buying and selling ; neither any need to expound laws ; for the bare letter of the law shall be both judge and lawyer , trying every man's actions : and seeing we shall have successive parliaments every year , there will be rules made for every action a man can do . 

But there is to be officers chosen yearly in every parish , to see the laws executed according to the letter of the laws ; so that there will be no long work in trying of offences , as it is under kingly government , to get the lawyer's money , and to enslave the commoners to the conqueror's prerogative law , or will . The sons of contention , Simeon and Levi , must not beat rule in a free commonwealth . 

At the first view , you May say , this is a strange government : but i pray judge nothing before trial . Lay this platform of commonwealths government in one scale , and lay monarchy , or kingly government , in the other scale , and see which give true weight to righteous freedom and peace . There is no middle path between these two ; for a man must either be a free and true commonwealths man , or a monarchial tyrannical royalist . 

If any say , this will bring poverty ; surely they mistake : for there will be plenty of all earthly commodities , with less labour and trouble then now it is under monarchy . There will be no want , for every man May keep as plentiful a house as he will , and never run into debt , for common stock pays for all . 

If you say , some will live idle ; i answer , no : it will make idle persons to become workers , as is declared in the platform ; there shall be neither beggar nor idle person . 

If you say , this will make men quarrel and fight : 

I answer , no : it will turn swords into plowshares , and settle such a peace in the earth , as nations shall learn war no more . Indeed the government of Kings is a breeder of wars , because men being put into the straits of poverty , are moved to fight for liberty , and to take one another's estates from them , and to obtain mastery . Look into all armies , and see what they do more , but make some poor , some rich ; put some into freedom , and others into bondage : and is not this a plague among mankind ? 

Well , i question not but what objections can be raised against this commonwealths government , they shall find an answer in this platform following . I have been something large , because i could not contract myself into a lesser volume , having so many things to speak of . 

I do not say , nor desire , that every one shall be compelled to practise this commonwealths government ; for the spirits of some will be enemies at first , though afterwards will prove the most cordial and true friends thereunto . 

Yet i desire , that the commonwealths land , which is the ancient Commons and waste land , and the lands newly got in , by the armies victories , out of the oppressor's hands , as parks , forests , chases , and the like , May be set free to all that have lent assistance , either of person , or purse , to obtain it ; and to all that are willing to come in to the practice of this government , and be obedient to the laws thereof : and for others , who are not willing , let them stay in the way of buying and selling , which is the law of the conqueror , till they be willing . 

And so i leave this in your hand , humbly prostrating myself and it before you , and remain 

novemb. 5. 1651.  A true lover of commonwealths government , peace , and freedom , Jerrard Winstanley . 

To the friendly and unbiased reader . 

Reader , 

It was the apostles advice formerly , to try all things , and to hold fast that which is best . This platform of government which i offer , is the original righteousness and peace in the earth , though he hath been buried under the clods of kingly covetousness , pride and oppression a long time . 

Now he begins to have his resurrection , despise it not while it is small ; though thou understand it not at the first sight , yet open the door , and look into the house , for thou Mayst see that which will satisfy thy heart in quiet rest . 

To prevent thy hasty rashness , i have given thee a short compendium of the whole . 

First , thou knowest that the earth in all nations is governed by buying and selling , for all the laws of Kings hath relation thereunto . 

Now this platform following declares to thee the government of the earth without buying and selling , and the laws are the laws of a free and peaceable commonwealth , which casts out every thing that offends ; for there is no pricking briar in all this holy mountain of the righteous law , or peaceable ruler . 

Every family shall live apart , as now they do ; every man shall enjoy his own wife , and every woman her own husband , as now they do ; every trade shall be improved to more excellency than now it is ; all children shall be educated , and be trained up in subjection to parents and elder persons more than now they are : the earth shall be planted , and the fruits reaped , and carried into storehouses by common assistance of every family : the riches of the storehouses shall be the common stock to every family : there shall be no idle person nor beggar in the land . 

And because offences May arise from the spirit of unreasonable ignorance , therefore was the law added . 

For if any man abuse his neighbour , by provoking words , by striking his person , by offering offence to his neighbour's wife or children , or to his house or furaiture there in , or to live idle upon other men's labours , here are laws to punish them sharply , and officers to see those laws executed , according to the right order of commonwealths government , for the peace of every familyin the land . 

This commonwealths government unites all persons in a land into one heart and mind : and it was this government which made Moses to call Abraham's seed , one house of Israel , though they were many tribes and many families : and it May be said , blessed is the persons , whose earthly government is the law of common righteousness . 

While Israel was under this commonwealths government , they were a terror to all oppressing Kings in all nations of the world ; and so will England be , if this righteous law become our governor : but when the officers of Israel began to be covetous and proud , they made a breach , or as Isaiah said , the rulers of the persons caused them to err ; and than the government was altered , and fell into the hand of Kings , like other nations , and then they fled before their enemies , and were scattered . 

The government of Kings , is the government of the scribes and Pharisees , who Count it no freedom , unless they be Lords of the earth , and of their brethren : but commonwealths government is the government of righteousness and peace , who is no respecter of persons . 

Therefore reader here is a trial for thy sincerity ; thou shalt have no want of food , raiment , or freedom among brethren in this way propounded : see now if thou 〈◊〉 be content , as the scriptures say , having food and raiment , therewith be content , and grudge not to let thy brother have the same with thee . 

Dost thou pray and fast for freedom , and give God thanks again for it ? Why know that God is not partial ; for if thou pray , it must be for freedom to all ; and if thou give thanks , it must be because freedom covers all persons , for this will prove a lasting peace . 

Every one is ready to say , they fight for their country , and what they do , they do it for the good of their country . Well , let it appear now that thou hast fought and acted for thy country's freedom : but if when thou hast power to settle freedom in thy country , thou tukest the possession of the earth into thy own particular hands , and makest thy brother work for thee , as the Kings did , thou hast fought and acted for thyself , not for thy country ; and here thy inside 〈◊〉 is discovered . 

But here take notice , that common freedom , which is the rule i would have practised , and not talked on , was thy pretence ; but particular freedom to thyself was thy intent . 〈◊〉 or else thou wilt be shamed , when knowledge doth spread to cover the earth , even as the waters cover the seas . And so farewell . 

J. w.  

The law of freedom in a platform ; or , true magistracy restored , 

Chap. i.  

The great searching of heart in these days , is to find out where true freedom lies , that the commonwealth of England Might be established in peace . 

Some say , it lies in the free use of trading , and to have all patents , licenses , and restraints removed : but this is a freedom under the will of a conqueror . 

Others say , it is true freedom to have ministers to preach , and for persons to hear whom they will , without being restrained or compelled from or to any form of worship : but this is an unsettled freedom . 

Others say , it is true freedom to have community with all women , and to have liberty to satisfy their lusts and greedy appetites : but this is the freedom of wanton unreasonable beasts , and tends to destruction . 

Others say , it is true freedom , that the elder brother shall 〈◊〉 landlord of the earth , and the younger brother a servant : and this is but a half freedom , and 〈◊〉 murmurings , wars , and quarrels . 

All these , and such like , are freedoms : but they lead to bondage , and are not the true foundation-freedom which settles a commonwealth in peace . 

True commonwealths freedom lies in the free enjoyment of the earth . 

True freedom lies where a man receives his nourishment and preservation , and that is in the use of the earth : for as man is compounded of the four materials of the creation , fire , water , earth , and air ; so is he preserved by the compounded bodies of these four , which are the fruits of the earth ; and he cannot live without them : for take away the free use of these , and the body languishes , the spirit is brought into bondage , and 〈◊〉 length departs , and ceaseth his motional action in the body . 

All that a man labors for , saith Solomon , is this , that he May enjoy the free use of the earth , with the fruits thereof . eccles. 2. 24.  

Do not the ministers preach for maintenance in the earth ? the lawyers plead causes to get the possessions of the earth ? Doth not the soldier fight for the earth ? And doth not the landlord require rent , that he May live in the fullness of the earth by the labour of his tenants ? 

And so , from the thief upon the high way to the King who sits upon the throne , do not every one strive , either by force of arms , or secret cheats , to get the possessions of the earth one from another , because they see their freedom 〈◊〉 in plenty , and their bondage lies in poverty ? 

Surely then , oppressing Lords of manors , exacting landlords , and tythe-takers , May as well say , their brethren shall not breathe in the air , nor enjoy warmth in their bodies , nor have the moist waters to fall upon them in showers , unless they will pay them rent for it : as to say , their brethren shall not work upon earth , nor eat the fruits thereof , unless they will hire that liberty of them : for he that takes upon him to restrain his brother from the liberty of the one , May upon the same ground restrain him from the liberty of all four ; viz. fire , water , earth , and ayr. . 

A man had better to have had no , then to have no food for it ; therefore this restraining of the earth from brethren by brethren , is oppression and bondage ; but the free enjoyment thereof is true freedom . 

I speak now in relation between the oppressor and the oppressed ; the inward bondages i meddle not with in this place , though i am assured that if it be rightly searched into , the inward bondages of the mind , as 〈◊〉 , pride , hypocriste , envy , sorrow , fears , desperation , and madness , are all occasioned by the outward bondage , that one sort of persons lay upon another . 

And thus far natural experience makes it good , that true freedom lies in the free enjoyment of the earth . 

If we look into the old scriptures , 

We find , that when Israel had conquered the nations , he took 〈◊〉 of the enemy's land , and divided it by lot among the tribes , Counting the enjoyment of the earth their perfect freedom . 

In the beginning of their wars they first sent spies to view the land of Canaan , ( numb 13. 23. to 33. ) for the enjoyment of that was the freedom they aimed at ; for being so long in the barren wilderness , and children multiplying upon them , they wanted land to live upon , deut. 1. 28.  

And when the spies returned , and showed them the fruits of the land , and had declared what a fruitful land it was , they were encouraged and restless till they were come thither ; and when they heard bad tidings of the land , their hearts fell , and they were discouraged . 

And when the spirit of wisdom , courage and providence in them had subdued those giants , and had given the house of Israel the land of Canaan , the rulers and chief officers of Israel's army did not divide the land among themselves ; but being faithful spirited men , they forthwith divided the land by lot , to every tribe his portion without exception . 

And when Israel entreated the King of Syhon , to suffer him to pass through his land , he would not suffer him , but gathered all his persons together and sought with Israel ; and the Lord gave Syhon into Israel's hand : and he took possession of his land . 

So that we see by scripture proof likewise , the land is that which every one place their freedom in . 

If we look into the practice of Kings , and conquerors , 

Since the scriptures of Moses were writ , we find they placed their freedom in the enjoyment of the free use of the earth . 

When William Duke of Normandy had conquered England , he took possession of the earth for his freedom , and disposed of our English ground to his friends as he pleased , and made the conquered English his servants , to plant the earth for him and his friends . 

And all Kings , from his time to King Charles , were successors of that conquest ; and all laws were made to confirm that conquest . 

For there are his old laws and statutes yet to be read , that do show how he allowed the conquered English but three pence , and four pence a day for their work , to buy them bread of their taskmasters ; but the freedom of the earth he and his friends kept in their own hands . 

And as Kings , so the old gentry , and the new gentry likewise , walking in the same steps , are but the successors of the Norman victory . 

But are not the Normans and their power conquered , by the commoners of England ; and why then should we not recover the freedom of our land again , from under that yoke and power . 

Then further , the Norman conqueror made laws , whereby this English earth should be governed , and appointed two national officers to see those laws performed . 

The first officer was the lawyer ; and his work is conversant about nothing , but the disposing of the earth , and all courts of judicature , and snits of law , is about the ordering of the earth ; according to his law made by him and his party . 

The next officer was the national clergy ; and their work was to persuade the multitude of persons to let William the conqueror alone with a quiet possession and government 〈◊〉 the earth , and to call it his and not theirs , and so not to rebel against him . 

And they were to tell the persons , 〈◊〉 they would acknowledge William Duke of Normandy and his 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 be their Lord , King and ruler , and would be obedient to his government ; then they should live in the haven , that is , in peace ; and they should quietly enjoy their land which they rented , their houses and fruits of their labors without disturbance . 

But if they would not acknowledge him to be their Lord , King and ruler , nor submit to his government , than they should be cast into hell ; that is , into the sorrows of prisons , poverty , whips , and death : and their houses and riches should be taken from them , &c.  

And this was a true prophetical and experimental doctrine : for do we not see , that the laws of a King , while a King , had the power of life and death in them ? And he who fell under the power of this Lord , must pay the uttermost farthing , before he was released . 

And for their pains for thus preaching , the King established by his laws , that they should have the tenth of the increase of all profits from the earth , ( 1 sam. 8. 15.  ) placing their freedom where he placed his own , and that is in the use of the earth brought into their hands by the labors of the enslaved men . 

But in after times , when this national ministry appeared to the persons to be but hirelings , and as the persons grew in knowledge they discovered their hypocrisy more and more , as they do in these days : then this clergy ( The spirit of the old Pharisees ) began to divine and to deceive the persons by a show of holiness , or spititual doctrine , as they call it , difficult to be understood by any but themselves ; persuading the persons to believe or fancy , that true freedom lay in hearing them preach , and to enjoy that heaven , which they say , every man who believes their doctrine , shall enjoy after he is dead : and so tell us of a heaven and hell after death , which neither they nor we know what will be : so that the whole world is at a loss in the true knowledge thereof , as Solomon said , who shall bring him to see what shall be after he is dead ? Eccles. 3. 22.  & 6. 11.  

The former hell of prisons , whips and gallows they preached to keep the persons in subjection to the King : but by this divined hell after death , they preach to keep both King and persons in awe to them , to uphold their trade of tithes and new razed maintenance : and so having blinded both King and persons , they become the god that rules : this subtle divining spirit is the whore that sits upon many waters : this is Nahash the Amonite , that would not make peace with Israel , unless Israel would suffer him to put out their right eyes , and to see by his , 1 sam. 1 1. 2.  

For so long as the persons call that a truth which they call a truth , and believe what they preach , and are willing to let the clergy be the keepers of their eyes and knowledge ; that is as much as Nahash did , put out their eyes to see by theirs , than all is well , and they tell the persons they shall go to heaven . 

But if the eyes of the persons begin to open , and they seek to find knowledge in their own hearts , and to question the ministers doctrine , and become like unto wise-hearted Thomas , to believe nothing but what they see reason for : 

Then do the ministers prepare war against that man or men , and will make no covenant of peace with him , till they consent to have their right eyes put out , that is , to have their reason blinded , so as to believe every doctrine they preach , and never question any thing , saying , the doctrine of faith must not be tried by reason : no , for if it be , their mystery of iniquity will be discovered , and they would lose their tithes . 

Therefore no marvel though the national clergy of England and Scotland , who are the tything priests and Lords of blinded men's spirits , stuck so close to their Master the King , and to his monarchial oppressing government ; for say they , if the persons must not work for us , and give us tithes , but we must work for ourselves , as they do , our freedom is lost : i , but this is but the cry of an Egyptian taskmaster , who Counts other men's freedom his bondage . 

Now if the earth could be enjoyed in such a manner as every one Might have provision , as it May by this platform i have offered , then will the peace of the commonwealth be preserved , and men need not act so hypocritically as the clergy do , and others likewise to get a living : but when some shall enjoy great possessions , and others who have done as much or more for to purchase freedom , shall have none at all , and be made slaves to their brethren , this begets offences . 

The glory of Israel's commonwealth is this , they had no beggar among them . 

As you read , when they had conquered the Canaanites , and won that land , by the purchase of the blood and labour , and by a joint assistance throughout the whole tribes of Israel ; the officers and leaders of the persons did not sell the land again to the remainder of their enemies , nor buy and sell it among themselves , and so by cheating the persons set up a new oppression upon a new account ; neither did they fall a parting the land before the crowning victory was gotten : but they forbore the disposing of the land till the war was over , and all the tribes stuck close together till all the fighting work was done . 

And when they saw the enemy's heart was broke , and that now they were the Masters of the field , than they quietly took possession of the land as a free reward for all their hazards and labour . 

The officers and leaders were careful to keep promise and engagements to the persons , and there was no treachery found in them , as to enrich themselves with the commonwealths land , and to deprive others of the price of their blood , and freequarter , and taxes . 

But they made canon with all the crown lands therein , and all other forfeited lands , which was gotten by a joint assistance of person and purse of all the tribes . The scriptures say , they made this canon land a common treasury of livelihood to the whole commonwealth of Israel , and so disposed of it , as they made provision for every tribe , and for every family in a tribe , nay for every particular man in a family , every one had enough , no man was in want , there was no beggary among them . 

They did not divide this land only to particular men who went out to war , but they who stayed at home had an equal share ; they did not make one brother a Lord of manor and landlord , and other brothers to be servants to them : but seeing the enemies were beaten , not by the counsellors only , not by the leaders of the army only , but by the common soldiers also ; and not only by them , but by the labourers who stayed at home to provide victuals and freequarter : therefore did the counsellors and chief officers of the army agree to make provision for every one that assisted , either by person or purse ; and this was pure righteousness . 

And to those families in a tribe which had many persons in it , to them they allotted more land ; and to those families which had less number of persons , they allotted less land : so that not only the tribes in general , but every family and person in a tribe , younger brother as well as elder brother , he who wrought at home to provide food , as well as he that went to war , all had sufficient , there was no want , the oppression of beggary was not known among them ; all burdens were taken of , and Israel in all his tribes and families was made a free commonwealth in power , as well as in name , 1 sam. 30. 24.  josh. 16. 17 , & 18.  chapters . 

And thus the land was divided , and the whole land was the common stock , every one had a brotherly freedom therein , for the freedom of the one was the freedom of the other , there was no difference in that , they were men of true faithful and public spirits , notfalse-hearted . 

And so likewise when Esther prevailed with King Ahasuerus for freedom , she did not seek her own freedom and interest , but the freedom of all her kindred and friends ; for common freedom was that which men of righteous spirits always sought after . 

All that i shall say is this , oh that those who pretend to set up a gospel-commonwealth in England , Scotland , and Ireland , would not be worse than Moses , but rather exceed Moses , knowing that if this our English commonwealths government carry perfect freedom in his hand , then shall the law go forth from England to all the nations of the world . 

This foundation being laid from the example of Israel's commonwealth , and testimony of God's word , i shall proceed how the earth shall be governed for the peace of a commonwealth : but by the way , to prevent mistake , i shall insert 

A short declaration to take of prejudice . 

Some hearing of this common freedom , think there must be a community of all the fruits of the earth whether they work or no , therefore strive to live idle upon other men's labours . 

Others , through the same unreasonable beastly ignorance , think there must be a community of all men and women for copulation , and so strive to live a bestial life . 

Others think there will be no law , but that every thing will run into confusion for want of government ; but this platform proves the contrary . 

Therefore because that transgression doth and May arise from ignorant and rude fancy in man , is the law added . 

That which true ringhteousness in my judgement calls community , is this , to have the earth set free from all kingly bondage of Lords of manors , and oppressing landlords , which came in by conquest ; as a thief takes a true man's purse upon the highway , being stronger than he . 

And that neither the earth , nor any fruits thereof , should be bought or sold by the inhabitants one among another , which is a slavery the kingly conquerors have brought in , therefore he set his stamp upon silver , that every one should buy and sell in his name . 

And though this be , yet shall not men live idle ; for the earth shall be planted and reaped , and the fruits carried into barns and storehouses by the assistance of every family , according as is showed hereafter in order . 

Every man shall be brought up in trades and labours , and all trades shall be maintained with more improvement , to the enriching of the commonwealth , more than now they be under kingly power . 

Every tradesman shall fetch materials , as leather , wool , flax , corn , and the like , from the public storehouses to work upon without buying and selling ; and when particular works are made , as cloth , shoes , hats , and the like , the tradesmen shall bring these particular works to particular shops , as it is now in practice , without buying and felling . And every family as they want such things as they cannot make , they shall go to these shops , and fetch without money , even as now they fetch with money , as hereafter is showed how in order . 

If any say , this will nurse idleness ; i answer , this platform proves the contrary , for idle persons and beggars will be made to work . 

If any say , this will make some men to take goods from others by violence , and call it theirs , because the earth and fruits are a common stock ; i answer , the laws or rules following prevents that ignorance : for though the storehouses and public shops be commonly furnished by every family's assistance , and for every family's use , as is showed hereafter how : yet every man's house is proper to himself , and all the furniture therein , and provision which he hath fetched from the storehouses is proper to himself ; every man's wife and every woman's husband proper to themselves , and so are their children at their dispose till they come to age . 

And if any other man endeavour to take away his house , furniture , food wife , or children , saying , every thing is common , and so abusing the law of peace , such a one is a transgressor , and shall suffer punishment , as by the government and laws following is expressed . 

For though the public storehouses be a common treasury , yet every man's particular dwelling is not common , but by his consent , and the commonwealths laws are to preserve a man's peace in his 〈◊〉 , and in his private dwelling , against the rudeness and ignorance that May arise in mankind . 

If any man do force or abuse women in folly , pleading community , the laws following do punish such ignorant and unrational practice ; for the laws of a commonwealth are laws of moderate diligence , and purity of manners . 

Therefore i desire a patient reading of what hereafter follows ; and when you have heard the extent of commonwealths government or freedom , then weigh it in the balance with kingly government or bondage , and see whether brings most peace to the land , and establish that for government . 

For you must either establish commonwealths freedom in power , making provision for every ones peace , which is righteousness ; or else you must set up monarchy again . 

Monarchy is twofold ; either for one King to rule , or for many to rule by kingly principles ; for the King's power lies in his laws , not in the name : and if either one King rule , or many rule by King's principles , much murmuring , 〈◊〉 , troubles and quarrels May and will arise among the oppressed persons upon every gained opportunity . 

But if common freedom be found out , and ease the oppressed , it prevents murmurings and quarrels , and establishes universal peace in the earth . 

Therefore seeing the power of government is in the hands of such as have professed to the world a godly righteousness , more purely than that of oppressing Kings , without doubt their faithfulness and wisdom is required to be manifested in action , as well as in words . 

But if they who profess more righteousness and freedom in words then the King's government was , and yet can find out no government to ease the persons , but must establish the King's old laws , though they give it a new name ; i will leave the sentence , worthy such a profession and such a persons , to be given by the heart of every rational man : and so i shall proceed how the earth should be governed for the peace of a commonwealth . 

Chap. ii  

What is government in general . 

Government is a wise and free ordering of the earth , and the manners of mankind by observation of particular laws or rules , so that all the inhabitants May live peaceably in plenty and freedom in the land where they are born and bred . 

In the government of a land there are three parts , viz. laws , sit officers , and a faithful execution of those laws . 

First , there must be suitable laws for every occasion , and almost for every action that men do ; for one law cannot serve in all 〈◊〉 , but every season and every action have their particular laws attending thereupon for the preservation of right order : as for example ; 

There is a time to plow , and the laws of right understanding attends upon that work ; and there is a time to reap the fruits of the earth , and the laws of right observation attending thereupon . 

So that true government is a right ordering of all actions , giving to every action and thing its due weight and measure , and this prevents confusion , as Solomon speaks , there is a time for all things ; a time to make promises and engagements , and a time to see them performed ; a right order in times of war , and a right order in times of peace ; every season and time having its law or rule suitable , and this makes a healthful government , because it preserves peace in a right order . 

Secondly , there must be fit officers , whose spirits are so humble , wise , and free from covetousness , as they can make the established laws of the land their will ; and not through pride and vainglory , make their wills to rule above the rules of freedom , pleading prerogative . 

For when the right ordered laws do rule , the government is healthful ; but when the will of officers rule above law , that government is diseased with a mortal disease . 

Thirdly , there must be a faithful execution of those laws ; and herein lies the very life of government : for a right order in government lies not in the will of officers without laws , nor in laws without officers , nor in neither of them without execution : but when these three go hand in hand , the government is healthful ; but if any one of these be wanting , the government is diseased . 

There is a twofold government , a kingly government , and a commonwealth's government . 

What is kingly government or monarchy ? 

Kingly government governs the 〈◊〉 by that cheating art of buying & selling , and thereby becomes a man of contention , his hand is against every man , and every man's hand against him : and take this government at the best , it is a diseased government , and the very city Babylon , full of confusion : and if it had not a club law to support it , there would be no order in it , because it is the 〈◊〉 and proud will of a conqueror , enslaving a conquered persons . 

This kingly government is he who beats pruning hooks and blows , into spears , guns , swords , and instruments of war ; that he Might take his younger brothers creation birthright from him , calling the 〈◊〉 his , and not his brothers , unless his brother will hire the earth of him , so that he May live idle and at ease by his brother's labours . 

Indeed this government May well be called the government of highway men , who hath stolen the earth from the younger brethren by force , and holds it from them by force ; he sheds blood not to free the persons from oppression , but that he May be King and ruler over an oppressed persons . 

The seituation of this monarchial government 

Lies in the will of Kings , alias conquerors , setting up Lords of manors , exacting landlords , tithing priests , and covetous lawyers , with all those pricking briars attending thereupon , to be taskmasters to oppress the persons , lest they should rise up in riches and power to disthrone him , and so to share the earth with him , redeeming their own creation rights again , which this kingly government withholds from mankind in all nations ; for he is the great man of sin , who is now revealed , who sits in the temple of God , ruling above all that is called God , and both by force and cheating policy takes the people's freedoms from them , exod. 1. 8. 2 thes. 2. 8. 9  

This kingly government is he that makes the elder brethren freemen in the earth , and the younger brethren slaves in the earth , before they have lost their freedom by transgression to the law . 

Nay he makes one brother a Lord , and another a servant , while they are in their mother's womb , before they have done either good or evil : this is the mighty ruler , that hath made the election and rejection of brethren from their birth to their death , or from eternity to eternity . 

He calls himself the Lord God of the whole creation , for he makes one brother to pay rent to another brother for the use of the water , earth , and air , or else he will not suffer him by his laws and lawyers to live above ground , but in beggary , and yet he will be called righteous . 

And whereas the scriptures say , that the creator of all things ( God ) is no respecter of persons , yet this kingly power doth nothing else but respect persons , preferring the rich and the proud ; therefore he denies the scriptures , and the true God of righteousness , though he pray and preach of the scriptures , and keep fasts and thanksgiving-days to God , to be a cloak to hide his oppression from the persons , whereby he shows himself to be the great Antichrist , 〈◊〉 mystery of iniquity , that makes war with Christ and his saints under pretence of owning him . 

The great lawgiver of this kingly government , 

Is covetousness , ruling in the heart of mankind , making one brother to covet a full possession of the earth , and a lordly rule over another brother , which he will have , or else he will enslave or kill his brother ; for this is Cain , who killed Abel : and because of this , he is called the great red dragon , the god of this world , the oppressor , under which the whole creation hath 〈◊〉 a long time , waiting to be delivered from him . 

The rise of kingly government is twofold . 

First , by a politic wit , in drawing the persons out of common freedom into a way of common bondage ; for so long as the earth is a common treasury to all men , kingly covetousness can never reign as King : therefore his first device was , to put the persons to buy and sell the earth and the fruits one to another ; for this would beget discontents , and muddy the waters . 

And when this spirit of monarchy hath drawn the persons into the way of buying and selling , and the persons begin to vex one another , than began his opportunity to reign . 

For in that man wherein this kingly spirit seats himself , he tells the persons that are wronged , well , I 'll ease you , and I 'll set things to rights : and then he went about to establish buying and selling by law , whereby the persons had some ease for a time , but the cunning Machavilian spirit got strength thereby to settle himself King in the earth . 

For after some time the persons through ignorance began to multiply suits of law one against another , and to quarrel and fight : now saith this subtle spirit , come follow me , to one sort of persons that are oppressed , and stick to me , and we will fight with those who wrong you ; and if we conquer them , than we will govern the earth as we please , and they shall be our servants , and we will make them work for us . 

Thereupon one sort of persons followed one head , and another sort of persons followed another head , and so wars began in the earth , and mankind fell a fighting , one part conquering and enslaving another : and now man is fallen from his innocency , and from the glory of the spirit of common freedom , love and peace , into enmity ; every one striving to be King one over another ; every one striving to be a landlord of the earth , and to make his brother his servant to work for him . 

But still here is disorder , therefore this subtle spirit of darkness goes further , and tells the persons , you must make one man King over you all , and let him make laws , and let every one be obedient thereunto : and when the persons consented thereunto , they gave away their freedom , and they set up oppression over themselves . 

And this was the rise of kingly power ; first , by policy , drawing the persons from a common enjoyment of the earth , to the crafty art of buying and selling : secondly , to advance himself by the power of the sword , when that art of buying and selling had made them quarrel among themselves . 

So that this spirit of monarchy it is the spirit of subtlety and covetousness , filling the heart of mankind with enmity and ignorance , pride and vainglory , because the strong destroys the weak ; and so one scripture calls this the power and government of the beast , another scripture calls it the god of this world , or the devil : for indeed the monarchial spirit is the power of darkness , for it is the great thick cloud , that hath hide the light of the sun of righteousness from shining in his full strength a long time . 

And though this kingly spirit doth call buying and selling a righteous thing , thereby to put the simple younger brother upon it , yet he will destroy it as he pleaseth , by patents , licenses , or monopolising . 

Or else he will at his pleasure take away the riches which his younger brother hath got by trading , and so still lift up himself above his brother . 

And as he rise to the throne by the crafty art of buying and selling , and by the sword , so he is maintained upon the throne by the same means . 

And the persons now see , that kingly power is the oppressor , and the maintainers thereof are called oppressors by the ancient writers of the bible . 

This kingly power is the old heaven , and the old earth , that must pass away , wherein unrighteousness , oppression and partiality dwells . 

For indeed we never read , that the persons began to complain of oppression , till kingly government rose up , which is the power of covetousness and pride ; and which Samuel sets forth to be a plague and a curse upon the persons in the first rise of it . 

He will take your sons and your daughters to be his servants , and to run before his charets , to plant his ground , and to reap his harvest : he will take your fields , your vineyards and oliveyards , even the best of them , and give to his servants as pleaseth him : he will take the tenth of your seed , and of your vineyards , and give to his officers , or ministers . 1 sam. 8.  

And this was that god , who appointed the persons to pay tithes to the clergy . 

And many other oppressions did the kingly government bring upon the persons , as you May read at large in Samuel . 

Read 1 sam. 8. from vers. 10. to 19  

The winter 's past , the spring time now appears , 
Be gone thou kingly tyrant , with thy cavaliers . 
Thy day is past , and sure thou dost appear 
To be the bondman's son , and not the freeborn heir . 


Matt. 15. 13.  

What is commonwealths government ? 

Commonwealths government governs the earth without buying and selling ; and thereby becomes a man of peace , and the restoter of ancient peace and freedom : he makes provision for the oppressed , the weak and the simple , as well as for the rich , the wise and the strong : he beats swords and spears into pruning hooks and blows ; he makes both elder and younger brother freemen in the earth . Micah 4. 3 , 4. isai. 33. 1.  & 65. 17 , to 25.  

All slavertes and oppressions , which have been brought upon mankind by Kings , Lords of manors , lawyers , and landlords , and the divining clergy , are all cast out again by this government , if it be right in power , as well as in name . 

For this government is the true restorer of all long lost freedoms , and so becomes the joy of all nations , and the blessing of the whole earth : for this takes off the kingly curse , and makes Jerusalem a praise in the earth . Therefore all you , who profess religion and spiritual things , now look to it , and see what spirit you do profess , for your profession is brought to trial . 

If once commonwealths government be set upon the throne , than no tyranny or oppression can look him in the face and live . 

For where oppression lies upon brethren by brethren , that is no commonwealths government , but the kingly government still ; and the mystery of iniquity hath taken that peacemakers name to be a cloak to hide his subtle covetousness , pride , and oppression under . 

Oh England , England , wouldst thou have thy government sound and healthful ? then cast about , and see , and search diligently to find out all those burdens that came in by Kings , and remove them ; and then will thy commonwealths government arise from under the clods , under which as yet it is buried , and covered with deformity . 

If true commonwealths freedom lie in the free enjoyment of the earth , as it doth , than whatsoever law or custom doth deprive brethren of their freedom in the earth , it is to be cast out as unsavoury salt . 

The situation of commonwealths government 

Is within the laws of common freedom , whereby there is a provision for livelihood in the earth , both for elder and younger brother ; and not the one enslaving the other , but both living in plenty and freedom . 

The officers , laws , 〈◊〉 customs hereafter mentioned , or such like , according to such a method , May be the foundation and pillars of commonwealths government . 

This government depends not upon the will of any particular man , or men ; for it is seated in the spirit of mankind , and it is called the light , or son of righteousness and peace . the tyrants in all ages have made use of this man's name , while he hath lain buried , to cover their cheating mystery of iniquity : for if common freedom were not pretended , the commoners of a land would never dance after the pipe of self-seeking wits . 

This commonwealths government May well be called the ancient of days ; for it was before any other oppressing government crept in . 

It is the moderator of all oppression ; and so is like Moses and Joseph in 〈◊〉 court , and in time will be the restorer of long lost freedoms to the creation , and delights to plant righteousness over the face of the whole earth . 

The great lawgiver in commonwealths government 

Is the spirit of universal righteousness dwelling in mankind , now rising up to teach every one to do to another as he would have another do to him , and is no respector of persons : and this spirit hath been killed by the pharisaical kingly spirit of self-love , and been buried in the dunghill of that enmity for many years past . 

And if these be the days of his resurrection to power , as we May hope , because the name of commonwealth is risen and established in England by a law , than we or our posterity shall see comfortable effects . 

In that nation , where this commonwealths government shall be first established , there shall be abundance of peacce and plenty , and all 〈◊〉 of the earth shall come flocking thither to see his beauty , and to learn the ways thereof ; and the law shall go forth from that Zion , and that word of the Lord from that Jerusalem , which shall govern the whole earth . Micah 4 , 1 , 2.  

There shall be no tyrant Kings , Lords of manors , tithing priests , oppressing lawyers , exacting landlords , nor any such like pricking briar in all this holy mountain of the Lord God our righteousness and peace ; for the righteous law shall be the rule for every one , and the judge of all men's actions . 

David desired rather to be a door keeper in this house of God , or commonwealths government , then to live in the tents of wickedness , which was the kingly oppressing courts . 

If any go about to build up commonwealths government upon kingly principles , they will both shame and lose themselves ; for there is a plain difference between the two governments . 

And if you do not run in the right channel of freedom , you must , nay you will , as you do , face about , and turn back again to Egyptian monarchy : and so your names in the days of posterity shall stink and be blasted with abhorred infamy for your unfaithfulness to common freedom ; and the evil effects will be sharp upon the backs of posterity . 

Therefore seeing England is declared to be a free commonwealth , and the name thereof established by a law ; surely than the greatest work is now to be done , and that is to escape all kingly cheats in setting up a commonwealths government , that the power and the name May agree together ; so that all the inhabitants May live in peace , plenty , and freedom , otherwise we shall show our government to be gone no further but to the half day of the beast , or to the dividing of time , of which there must be an over-turn . dan. 7. 25.  rev. 12. 14.  

For oppression was always the occasion why the spirit of freedom in the persons desired change of government . 

When Samuel's sons took bribes , and grew rich upon ; the common purse , and forgot to relieve the oppressed , that made the persons forsake the government by judges , and to desire a kingly government , 1 sam.  

And the oppressions of the kingly government have made this age of the world to desire a commonwealth government , and the removal of the Kings ; for the spirit of light in man loves freedom , and hates bondage . 

And because the spirit in mankind is various within itself ; for some are wise some are foolish , some idle , some laborious , some rash , some mild , some loving and free to others , some envious and covetous , some of an inclination to do as they would have others do to them : but others seek to save themselves , and to live in fullness , though others perish for want . 

Therefore because of this was the law added , which was to be a rule and judge for all men's actions , to preserve common peace and freedom ; as Paul writ , the law was added because of transgression , one against another . 

The haven gates are now set open for English man to enter : 
The freedoms of the earth's his due , if he will make adventure . 


Chap. iii  

Where began the first original of government in the earth among mankind ? 

The original root of magistracy is common preservation , and it rose up first in a private family : for suppose there were but one family in the world , as is conceived , father Adam's family , wherein were many persons . 

Therein Adam was the first governor or officer in the earth , because as he was the first father , so he was the most wise in contriving , and the most strong for labour , and so the fittest to be the chief governor . for this is the golden rule , 

Let the wise help the foolish , and let the strong help the weak . Psa. 35. 10.  rom. 15. 1 , 2.  

But some May say here , that Adam was under no law , but his will was a law to him and his household ; therefore from the root from whence magistracy first rose , it is clear , that officers are to be under no law , but their own wills , and the persons are to be subject thereunto . I answer : 

The law of necessity , that the earth should be planted for the common preservation and peace of his household , was the righteous rule and law to Adam , and this law was so clearly written in the hearts of his persons , that they all consented quietly to any counsel he gave them for that end . 

Therefore not Adams will only , but the will of his persons likewise , and the law of common preservation , peace and freedom , was the righteous law that governed both Adam and his household . 

But yet observe , that from the father in a family was the first rise of magisterial government , because children wanting experience of their own preservation , therefore such as are experienced , are to propound the law of government to them : and therefore from Adam to this day , the law of common preservation is the rule and foundation of true magistracy : and it is the work of all magistrates to help the weak and the foolish . 

There are two root from whence laws do spring . 

The first root you see is common preservation , when there is a principle in every one to seek the good of others , as himself , without respecting persons : and this is the root of the tree magistracy , and the law of righteousness and peace : and all particular laws found out by experience , necessary to be practised for common preservation , are the boughs and branches of that tree . 

And because , among the variety of mankind , ignorance May grow up ; therefore this original law is written in the heart of every man , to be his guide or leader : so that if an officer be blinded by covetousness and pride , and that ignorance rule in him , yet an inferior man May tell him where he goes astray ; for common preservation and peace is the foundation rule of all government : and therefore if any will preach or practise fundamental truths , or doctrine , here you May see where the foundation thereof lies . 

The second root is self preservation : when particular officers seek their own preservation , ease , honour , riches , and freedom in the earth , and do respect persons that are in power and riches with them and regard not the peace , freedom , and preservation of the weak and foolish among brethren . 

And this is the root of the tree tyranny , and the law of unrighteousness , and all particular kingly laws found out by covetous policy to enslave one brother to another , whereby bondage , tears , sorrows and poverty are brought upon many men , are all but the boughs and branches of that tree , tyranny ; and such officers as these are fallen from true magigistracy , and are no members thereof , but the members of tyranny , who is the devil and Satan . 

And indeed this tyranny is the cause of all wars and troubles , and of the removal of the government of the earth out of one hand into another , so often as it is , in all nations . 

For if magistrates had a care to cherish the peace and liberties of the common persons , and see them set free from oppression , they Might sit in the chair of government , and never be disturbed . 

But when their sitting is altogether to advance their own interest , and to forget the asslictions of Joseph , or their brethren that are under bondage : this is a so 〈◊〉 of their own downfall , and oftentime proves the plague to the whole land . 

Therefore the work of all true magistrates is to maintain the common law , which is the root of right government , and preservation and peace to every one ; and to cast out all self-ended principles and interests , which is tyranny and oppression , and which breaks common peace . 

For 〈◊〉 the disorderly actings of officers break the peace of the commonwealth more , than any men whatsoever . 

All officers in a true magistracy of a commonwealth are to be chosen officers . 

In the first family , which is the foundation from whence all families sprang , there was the father , he is the first link of the chain magistracy . The necessity of the children that sprang from him doth say , 

Father , do thou teach us how to plant the earth , that we May live , and we will obey . By this choice , they make him not only a father , but a Master and ruler . And out of this root springs up all magistrates and officers , to see the law executed , and to preserve peace in the earth , by seeing that right government is observed . 

For here take notice , that though the children Might not speak , yet their weakness and simplicity did speak , and chose their father to be their overseer . 

So that he who is a true commonwealths officer , is not to step into the place of magistracy by policy , or violent force , as all Kings and conquerors do ; and so become oppressing tyrants , by promoting their selfended interests , or Machiavilian cheats , that they May live in plenty , and rule as 〈◊〉 over their brethren . 

But a 〈◊〉 commonwealths officer is to be a chosen one , by them who are in 〈◊〉 , and who judge him fit for that work . 

And thus a father in a family is a commonwealths officer , because the necessity of the young children choose him by a joint consent , and not otherwise . 

Secondly , in a bigger family , called a parish , the body of the persons are confused and disordered , because some are wise , some foolish , some subtle and cunning to deceive , others plainhearted , some strong , some weak , some rash , angry , some mild and quiet-spirited . By reason whereof offences do arise among brethren , and their common peace is broken . 

Therefore as necessity hath added a law to limit men's manners , because of Transgressiens' one against another . 

So likewise doth the necessity of common peace move the whole body of the parish to choose two , three , or more , within that circuit , to be their overseers , to cause the unruly ones , for whom only the law was added , to be subject to the law , or rule , that so peace May be preserved among them in the planting of the earth , reaping the fruits , and quiet enjoyment . 

Thirdly , in every county , shire , or land , wherein the families are increased to a larger commonwealth , the necessity of the persons moves them still to choose more overseers and officers to preserve common peace . 

And when the persons have chose all officers , to preserve a right order in government of earth among them ; then doth the same necessity of common peace move the persons to say to their overseers and officers , 

Do you see our laws observed for our preservation and peace , and we will assist and protect you : and this word assist and protect , 〈◊〉 , 

The rising up of the persons by force of arms to defend their laws and officers against any invasion , rebellion , or resistance , 〈◊〉 to beat down the turbulence of any foolish or self-ended spirit that endeavours to break their common peace . 

So that all true officers are chosen officers , and when they act to satisfy the necessity of them who chose them , than they are faithful and 〈◊〉 servants to that commonwealth , and then there is a rejoicing in the city . 

But when officers do take the possession of the earth into their own hands , lifting themselves up thereby to be Lords over their Masters , the persons , who chose them ; and will not suffer the persons to plant the earth , and reap the fruits for their livelihood , unless they will hire the land 〈◊〉 them , or work for day-wages for them , that they May live in ease and plenty , and not work . 

These officers are fallen from true magistracy of a commonwealth , and they do not act righteously ; and because of this , sorrows and tears , poverty and bondages are known among mankind ; and now that city mourns . 

And surely if it be carefully looked into , the necessity of the persons never chose such officers , but they were either voluntary soldiers 〈◊〉 officers chosen by them , who run before they were called ; and so by policy and force they sat down in the chair of government , strengthening one sort of persons to take the free use of the earth from another sort ; and these are sons of bondage , and they act in darkness : by reason whereof the prophet Esay cries out , darkness hath covered the earth , and thick darkness the persons ; for the leaders of the persons have caused them to err : i fear so , oh England , &c.  

All officers in a commonwealth are to be chosen new ones every year . 

When public officers remain long in place of judicature , they will degenerate from the bounds of humility , honesty , and tender care of brethren , in regard the heart of man is so subject to be overspread with the clouds of covetousness , pride , and vainglory : for though at the first entrance into places of rule they be of public spirits , seeking the freedom of others as their own ; yet continuing long in such a place , where honours and greatness is coming in , they become selfish , seeking themselves , and not common freedom ; as experience proves it true in these days , according to this common proverb , 

Great offices in a land and army have changed the disposition of many sweet spirited men . 

And nature tells us , that if water stand long , it corrupts ; whereas running water keeps sweet , and is fit for common use . 

Therefore as the necessity of common preservation moves the persons to frame a law , and to choose officers to see the law obeyed , that they May live in peace : 

So doth the same necessity bid the persons , and cries aloud in the ears and eyes of England , to choose new officers , and to remove the old ones , and to choose state-officers every year : and that for these reasons ; 

First , to prevent their own evils : for when pride and fullness take hold of an officer , his eyes are so blinded therewith , that he forgets he is a servant to the commonwealth , and strives to lift up himself high above his brethren , and oftentimes his fall proves very great ; witness the fall of oppressing Kings , Bishops , and other state-officers . 

Secondly , to prevent the creeping in of oppression into the commonwealth again : for when officers grow proud and full , they will maintain their greatness , though it be in the poverty , ruin , and hardship of their brethren ; witness the practice of Kings and their laws , that have 〈◊〉 the commoners of England a long time . 

And have we not experience in these days , that some officers of the commonwealth are grown so mossy for want of removing , that they will hardly speak to an old acquaintance , if he be an inferior man , though they were very familiar before these wars began ? &c.  

And what hath occasioned this distance among friends and brethren , but long continuance in places of honour , greatness and riches ? 

Thirdly , let officers be chosen new every year in love to our posterity ; for if burdens and oppressions should grow up in our laws and in our officers for want of removing , as moss and weeds grow in some land for want of stirring , surely it will be a foundatian of misery , not easily to be removed by our posterity , and then will they curse the time that ever we their forefathers had opportunities to set things to rights for their ease , and would not do it . 

Fourthly , to remove officers of state every year will make them truly faithful , knowing that others are coming after who will look into their ways ; and if they do not do things justly , they must be ashamed when the next officers succeed : and when officers deal faithfully in the government of the commonwealth , they will not be unwilling to remove : the peace of London is much preserved by removing their officers yearly . 

Fifthly , it is good to remove officers every year , that whereas many have their portions to obey , so many May have their turns to rule , and this will encourage all men to advance righteousness and good manners in hopes of honour ; but when money and riches bears all the sway in the rulers hearts , there is nothing but tyranny in such ways . 

Sixthly , the commonwealth hereby will be furnished with able and experienced men , fit to govern , which will mightily advance the honour and peace of our land , occasion the more watchful care in the education of children , and in time will make our commonwealth of England the lily among the nations of the earth . 

Who are fit to choose , and fit to be chosen officers in a commonwealth . 

All uncivil livers , as drunkards , quarrelers , fearful ignorant men , who dare not speak truth , lest they anger other men ; likewise all who are wholly given to pleasure and sports , or men who are full of talk ; all these are empty of substance , and cannot be experienced men , therefore not fit to be chosen officers in a commonwealth , yet they May have a voice in the choosing . 

Secondly , all those who are interessed in the monarchial power and government , ought neither to choose nor be chosen officers to manage commonwealths affairs , for these cannot be friends to common freedom : and these are of two sorts . 

First , such as have either lent money to maintain the King's army , or in that army have been soldiers to fight against the recovering of common freedom , these are neither to choose , nor be chosen officers in the commonwealth as yet , for they have lost their freedom ; yet i do not say that they should be made servants , as the conquered usually are made servants , for they are our brethren and what they did , no doubt , they did in a conscionable zeal , though in ignorance . 

And seeing but few of the parliaments friends understand their common freedoms , though they own the name commonwealth , therefore the parliaments party ought to bear with the ignorance of the King's party , because they are brethren , and not make them servants , though for the present they be suffered neither to choose nor be chosen officers , left that ignorant spirit of revenge break out in them to interrupt our common peace . 

Secondly , all those who have been so hasty to buy and sell the commonwealth's land , and so to entangle it upon a new account , ought neither to choose nor be chosen officers , for hereby they declare themselves either to be for kingly interest , or else are ignorant of commonwealths freedom , or both , therefore unfit to make laws to govern a free commonwealth , or to be overseers to see those laws executed . 

What greater injury could be done to the commoners of England , then to sell away their land so hastily , before the persons knew where they were , or what freedom they had got by such cost and bloodshed as they were at ? And what greater ignorance could be declared by officers , then to sell away the purchased land from the purchasers , or from part of them , into the hands of particular men to uphold monarchial principles ? 

But though this be a fault , let it be bore withal , it was ignorance of brethren ; for England hath lain so long under kingly slavery , that few knew what common freedom was : and let a restoration of this redeemed land be speedily made by them who have the possession of it . 

For there is neither reason nor equity , that a few man should go away with that land and freedom which the whole commoners have paid taxes , freequarter , and wasted their estates , healths and blood to purchase out of bondage , and many of them are in want of a comfortable livelihood . 

Well , these are the men that take away other men's rights from them , and they are members of the covetous generation of self-seekers , therefore unfit to be chosen officers , or to choose . 

Who then are fit to be chosen commonwealths officers ? 

Why truly , choose such as have a long time given testimony by their actions to be promoters of common freedom , whether they be members in church fellowship , or not in church fellowship , for all are one in Christ . 

Choose such as are men of peaceable spirits , and of a peaceable conversation . 

Choose such as have suffered under kingly oppression , for they will be fellow-feelers of others bondages . 

Choose such as have adventured the loss of their estates and lives to redeem the land from bondage , and who have remained constant . 

Choose such as are understanding men , and who are experienced in the laws of peaceable and right ordered government . 

Choose men of courage , who are not afraid to speak the truth ; for this is the shame of many in England at this day , they are drowned in the dunghill mud of slavish fear of men ; these are covetous men , not fearing God , and their portion is to be cast without the city of peace amongst the dogs . 

Choose officers out of the number of those men that are above forty years of age , for these are most likely to be experienced men ; and all these are likely to be men of courage , dealing truly , and hating covetousness . 

And if you choose men thus principled , who are poor men , as times go , for the conqueror's power hath made many a righteous man a poor man ; then allow them a yearly maintenance from the common stock , until such time as a commonwealths freedom is established , for then there will be no need of such allowances . 

What is the reason that most persons are so ignorant of their freedoms , and so few fit to be chosen commonwealths officers ? 

Because the old kingly clergy , that are seated in parishes for lucre of tithes , are continually distilling their blind principles into the persons , and do thereby nurse up ignorance in them ; for they observe the bent of the people's minds , and make sermons to please the sickly minds of ignorant persons , to preserve their own riches and esteem among a charmed , befooled and befotted persons . 

Chap. iv.  

What are the officers names in a free commonwealth ? 

In a private family , a father , or Master , is an officer . 

In a town , city , or parish A peacemaker . 
A fourfold office of overseers . 
A soldier . 
A taskmaster . 
An executioner . 


In a county or shire A judg.  
The peacemakers of every town within that circuit . 
The overseers and soldiers attending thereupon . 
this is called either the judges court , or the county senate . 

In a whole land A parliament . 
A commonwealths ministry . 
A postmaster . 
An army . 


All these offices are like links of a chain , they arise from one and the same root , which is necessity of common peace , and all their works tend to preserve common peace , therefore they are to assist each other , and all others are to assist them , as need requires , upon pain of punishment by the breach of the laws : and the rule of right government being thus observed , May make a whole land , nay the whole fabric of the earth , to become one family of mankind , and one well governed commonwealth ; as Israel was called one house of Israel , though it consisted of many tribes , nations and family . 

The work of a father or Master of a family . 

A father is to cherish his children till they grow wise and strong , and then as a Master he is to instruct them in reading , in learning languages , arts and sciences , or to bring them up to labour , or employ them in some trade or other , or cause them to be instructed therein , according as is showed hereafter in the education of mankind . 

A father is to have a care that as all his children do assist to plant the earth , or by other trades provide necessaries ; so he shall see that every one have a comfortable livelihood , not respecting one before another . 

He is to command them their work , and see they do it , and not suffer them to live idle ; he is either to reprove by words , or whip those who offend , for the rod is prepared to bring the unreasonable ones to experience and moderation : 

That so children May not quarrel like beasts , but live in peace , like rational men , experienced in yielding obedience to the laws and officers of the commonwealth , every one doing to another as he would have another do to him . 

The work of a peacemaker . 

In a parish or town May be chosen three , four or six peacemakers , or more , according to the bigness of the place ; and their work is twofold . 

First , in general to sit in council to order the affairs of the parish , to prevent troubles , and to preserve common peace , and here they May be called councillors . 

Secondly , if there arise any matters of offence between man and man , by reason of any quarrels , disturbance , or foolish actings , the offending parties shall be brought by the soldiers before any one or more of these peacemakers , who shall hear the matter , and shall endeavour to reconcile the parties , and make peace , and so put a stop to the rigor of the law , and go no further . 

But if the peacemaker cannot persuade or reconcile the parties , than he shall command them to appear at the judges court at the time appointed to receive the judgement of the law . 

If any matters of public concernment fall out wherein the peace of the city , town or country in one county is concerned , than the peacemakers in every town thereabouts shall meet , and consult about it ; and from them , or from any six of them , if need require , shall issue forth any order to inferior officers . 

But if the matters concern only the limits of a town or city , than the peacemakers of that town shall from their court send forth orders to inferior officers for the performing of any public service within their limits . 

Thirdly , if any proof be given that any officer neglects his duty , a peacemaker is to tell that officer between them two of his neglect ; and if the officer continue negligent after this reproof , the peacemaker shall acquaint either the county senate , or the national parliament therewith , that from them the offendor May receive condign punishment . 

And it is all to this end , that the laws be obeyed ; for a careful execution of laws is the life of government . 

And while a peacemaker is careful to oversee the officers , all officers and others shall assist him , upon pain of forfeiture of freedom , or other punishment , according to the rules following . 

One thing remember , that when any offendor is brought before any of these chief peacemakers , than this is to be noted , that the offendor hath rejected mercy once before by refusing to yield obedience to the overseers , as is explained further hereafter . 

The work of an overseer . 

In a parish or town there is to be a fourfold degree of overseers , which are to be chosen yearly . 

The first is an overseer to preserve peace , in case of any quarrels that May fall out between man and man : for though the earth with her fruits be a common treasury , and is to be planted and reaped by common assistance of every family , yet every house , and all the furniture for ornament therein , is a propriety to the indwellers ; and when any family hath fetched in from the storehouses or shops either clothes , food , or any ornament necessary for their use , it is all a propriety to that family . 

And if any other family or man come to disturb them , and endeavour to take away furniture , which is the ornament of his neighbour's house , or to burn , break , or spoil wilfully any part of his neighbour's houses , or endeavour to take away either the food or clothing which his neighbour hath provided for his use , by reason whereof quarrels and provoking words May arise : 

This office of overseers is to prevent disturbance , and is an assistance to the peacemaker ; and at the hearing of any such offence , this overseer shall go and hear the matter , and 〈◊〉 to persuade the offendor , and to keep peace ; and if friendship be made , and subjection be yielded to the laws for the peace of the commonwealth , the offendor is only to be reproved for his rashness by this overseer ; and there is an end . 

But if the offendor be so violent , that he will not refrain his offence to his neighbour at this overseers persuasion , but remain stiff and stubborn , this overseer shall then give out an order to the soldier to carry the body of the offendor before the council of the peacemakers , or before any one or more of them . 

And if the offendor will not yield obedience to the laws of peace by the persuasion of the chief peacemakers neither , than this is to be noted to be the second time that this offendor hath refused mercy . 

Then shall the peacemaker appoint him a day , and command him to appear before the judges court , either in the city or country , where the offence is given , and there he shall receive sentence according to the rigor of the law . 

And if an overseer should make peace , and do not send the offendor to the peacemakers court , yet this shall be noted the first time of such a ones disobedience to the laws . 

And all this is to prevent quarrels and offences ; and the chief peacemakers or counsellors May not always be at hand at the beginning of such disturbance , therefore this overseer is an assistance thereunto , and is a member of that court . 

One man shall not take away that commodity which another man hath first laid hands on , for any commodity for use belongs to him that first laid hands of it for his use ; and if another come and say , i will have it , and so offences do arise , this overseer shall go to them , or give order to the soldier to bring the offendor to him , and shall endeavour to make peace , either by giving the commodity to him who first laid hands on it , or else by taking the commodity from both , and bid them go to the storehouses and fetch more , seeing the storehouses are full , and afford plenty of the same commodities , giving the offendor a sharp reproof for offering to break the peace , noting this to be the first time that such a one offered violence to break the laws of peace . 

And all persons whatsoever shall assist the overseers herein ; and if any person strike or affront by words this overseer , he shall give order to the soldier to carry him before the peacemakers , and from them the offendor shall receive a command to appear before the judges court , where he shall receive the sentence of the law without mitigation . 

For when a peacemaker or counsellor doth appoint an offendor to appear before the judges court , such an offendor hath refused mercy twice . 

All this is to be done in case of small offences ; but if any offence be offered by any which comes within compass of death , there shall be no peacemaker to be a mediator aforehand , but the offendor shall be tried by the law . 

The second office of overseership is for trades . 

And this overseer is to see that young persons be put to Masters , to be instructed in some labour , trade , science , or to be waiters in storehouses , that none be idly brought up in any family within his circuit . 

Likewise this overseer is to assist any Master of a family by his advice and counsel in the secrets of his trades , that by the experience of the elders , the young persons May learn the inward knowledge of the things which are , and find out the secrets of nature . 

And seeing there are variety of trades , there are to be chosen overseers for every trade , so many overseers as the largeness of the town and city requires ; and the employment of this overseer is not to work ( Unless he will himself , ) but to go from house to house to view the works of the persons of every house belonging to his trade and circuit , and to give directions as he sees cause , and see that no youth be trained up in idleness , as is said . 

And if this overseer find any youth more capable and fit for another trade then his own , he shall speak to some overseers of another trade , who shall provide him a Master , with the consent of his father , and appoint him what family to live in . 

And if the father of a family be weak , sick , or naturally foolish , wanting the power of wisdom and government , or should be dead before his children should be instructed ; then the overseers of this trade , wherein the father was brought up , are to put those children into such families , where they May be instructed , according to the law of the commonwealth . 

One man May be an overseer for twenty or thirty families of shoemakers ; another for smiths , another for weavers of cloth , another for the keepers of storehouses or shops : for every trade is to have an overseer for that particular trade . 

And truly the government of the halls and companies in London is a very rational and well ordered government ; and the overseers of trades May very well be called Masters , wardens , and assistants of such and such a company , for such and such a particular trade . Only two things are to be practised to preserve peace . 

The first is , that all these overseers shall be chosen new ones every year . and secondly , the old overseers shall not choose the new ones , to prevent the creeping in of lordly oppression : but all the Masters of families , and freemen of that trade , shall be the choosers , and the old overseers shall give but their single voice among them . 

And as there are to be overseers for trades in towns and cities : 

So there are to be chosen overseers in the country parishes , to see the earth planted ; and in every parish in the country May be chosen four or six overseers of husbandry , to see the ground planted within their circuits , and to see that the work of husbandry be done orderly , and according to reason and skill . 

Some overseers to look after the shepherds , and appoint out such men as are skilled in that work . Some overseers to look after the herdsmen . some overseers of them who look to horses . and some for the daries . and the work of these overseers is to see , that every family send in their assistance to work , both in ploughing and dressing the earth , in that season of the year , in seed time ; and in reaping the fruits of the earth , and housing them in storehouses in time of harvest . 

Likewise they are to see , that all barns belonging to any family , or more public storehouses belonging to a parish , be kept in sufficient repair , likewise they are to see , that every family do keep sufficient working tools for common use , as plows , carts , and furniture , according as every family is furnished with men to work therewith : likewise pickaxes , spades , pruning-hooks , and any such like necessary instrument . 

Likewise it is the work of this overseership to see , that schoolmasters , postmasters , and ministers , do their several offices , according to the laws . 

Likewise this overseership for trades shall see , that no man shall be a housekeeper , and have servants under him , till he hath served under a Master seven years , and hath learned his trade : and the reason is , that every family May be governed by stayed and experienced Masters , and not by wanton youth . 

And this office of overseership keeps all persons within a peaceable harmony of trades , sciences , or works , that there be neither beggar nor idle person in the commonwealth . 

The third office of overseership is to see particular tradesmen bring in their works to storehouses and shops , and to see the waiters in storehouses do their duty . 

As there are particular trades requiring strength , and some men are strong to perform such works ; so there are some weak in body , whose employment shall be to be keepers of storehouses and shops , both to receive in commodities , and deliver out again , as any particular family , or man , wants and comes for them . 

As for example : 

When leather is tanned , it shall be brought into the storehouses for leather ; and from thence shoemakers , and harness makers , and such like , May fetch it as they need . 

So for linen and Woolen cloth , it is to be brought by the weavers into the storehouses or shops , from whence particular families of other trades May fetch as they need : and so for any commodity , as in the law for storehouses is declared . 

Now the work of this overseership is of the same nature with the other for trades ; only this is to be employed only about the oversight of storehouses and shops . 

And they are to see that particular tradesmen , as weavers of linen and Woolen cloth , spinners , smiths , hatters , glover's , and such like , do bring in their works into the shops appointed : and they are to see that the shops and storehouses within their several circuits , be kept still furnished . 

That when families of other trades want such commodities as they cannot make , they May go to the shops and storehouses where such commodities are , and receive them for their use , without buying or selling . 

And as this officer sees the particular tradesmen to furnish the shops and storehouses , so they shall see that the keepers of the shops and storehouses be diligent to wait , both to receive in , and deliver out again , according to the law , any commodity under their charge . 

And if any keeper of a shop and storehouse neglect his duty of his place , through idleness , or vain conversation , or pride , whereby just offence is given , the overseers shall admonish him and reprove him : if he amend , all is well ; if he doth not , he shall give order to the soldiers to carry him before the peacemakers court : and if he reform upon the reproof of that court , all is well : but if he doth not reform , he shall be sent unto by the officers to appear before the judges court , and the judge shall pass sentence , that he shall be put out of that house and employment , and sent among the husbandmen to work in the earth : and some other shall have his place and house till he be reform . 

Likewise this overseer shall see to it , that the keepers of shops and storehouses do keep their houses in sufficient repair : and when any house wants repair , the keepers thereof shall speak to any of the overseers for trades , and they shall appoint either brick-layers , masons , smiths , or carpenters forthwith to take the work in hand and finish it . 

fourthly , all ancient men , above sixty years of age , are general overseers . 

And wheresoever they go , and see things amiss in any officer or tradesman , they shall call any officer or others to account for their neglect of duty to the commonwealths peace : and these are called elders . 

And every one shall give humble respect to these , as to fathers , and as to men of the highest experience in the laws , for the keeping of peace in the commonwealth . 

And if these see things amiss , and do speak , all officers and others shall assist and protect them , to see the laws carefully executed : and every one that affronts or abuses these in words or deeds , shall suffer punishment according to the sentence of the judg.  

And all these shall be general assistances and encouragers of all officers in the doing the work of their places . 

And the reason of all is this , that many eyes being watchful , the laws May be obeyed , for to preserve peace . 

But if any of these elders should vent their passion , or express envy against any one , and set up his own will above the law , and do things contrary to law , upon complaint , the senators at the judges court shall examine the matter , if he be faulty the judge shall reprove him the first time , but the second time he does so the judge shall pronounce , that he shall lose his authority and never bear office nor general oversight more while he lives , only he shall have respect as a man of age . 

What is the office of a soldier ? 

A soldier is a magistrate as well as any other officer , and indeed all state officers are soldiers for they represent power , and if there were not power in the hand of officers , the spirit of rudeness would not be obedient to any law or government , but their own wills . 

Therefore every year shall be chosen a soldier , like unto a marshal of a city , and being the chief he shall have divers soldiers under him at his command , to assist in case of need . 

The work of a soldier in times of peace , is , to fetch in offenders , and to bring them before either officer or courts , and to be a protection to the officers against all disturbances . 

The soldier is not to do any thing without order from the officers ; but when he hath an order than he is to act accordingly ; and he is to receive orders from the judges court , or from the peacemakers court , or from overseers as need shall require . 

If a soldier hath brought an offender before a peacemaker , and if the offender will not be subject to the law by his persuasion , and the peacemaker send him to the judges court , if the offence be under matters of death , the offender shall not be imprisoned in the mean time ; but the peacemaker shall command him to appear before the judges court at the time appointed , and the offender shall promise to obey : and this shall be for two reasons . 

First to prevent cruelty of prisons . Secondly , in the time of his binding over he May remember himself , and amend his ways , and by testimony of his own actions and neighbours reports , his sentence May be mitigated by the judge ; for it is amendment not destruction that commonwealth's law requires . 

And if this offender run away from that country to another , and so both disobey the peacemakers command , and break his own promise of appearance ; then shall the soldiers be sent forth into all places to search for him , and if they catch him , they should bring him before the judge , who shall pronounce sentence of death upon him without mercy . 

And if any protect him or shelter him , after hue and cry is made after him , all such protectors shall suffer the loss of freedom for twelve month's time , as is showed hereafter what that is . 

But if the offence should be matter of death , than the peacemaker shall take no promise from him for his appearance , but let the soldier carry him to prison , till the next judges court sits where he shall have his trial . 

The work of a taskmaster . 

The work or office of a taskmaster is to take those into his oversight as are sentenced by the judge to lose their freedom , and to appoint them their work and to see they do it . 

If they do their tasks , he is to allow them sufficient victuals and clothing to preserve the health of their bodies . 

But if they prove desperate , wanton , or idle , and will not quietly submit to the law , the taskmaster is to feed them with short diet , and to whip them , for a rod is prepared for the fools back , till such time as their proud hearts do bend to the law . 

And when he finds them subject , he shall then carry a favourable hand towards them , as to offending brethren , and allow them sufficient diet and clothes in hopes of their amendment , but withal see they do their work , till by the sentence of the law he be set free again . 

The taskmaster shall appoint them any kind of work or labour as he pleases that is to be done by man . 

And if any of these offenders run away , there shall be hue and cry sent after him , and he shall die by the sentence of the judge when taken again . 

The work of an executioner . 

If any have so highly broke the laws , as they come within the compass of whipping , imprisoning and death , the executioner shall cut off the head , hang , or shoot to death , or whip the offender according to the sentence of law . Thus you May see what the work of every officer in a town or city is . 

What is the work of a judge ? 

The law itself is the judge of all men's actions , yet he who is chosen to pronounce the law is called judge , because he is the mouth of the law , for no single man ought to judge or interpret the law . 

Because the law itself , as it is 〈◊〉 us in the letter , is the mind and determination of the parliament and of the persons of the land , to be their rule to walk by and to be the touch stone of all actions . 

And that man who takes upon him to interpret the law , doth either darken the sense of the law , and so makes it confused and hard to he understood , or else puts another meaning upon it , and so lists up himself above the parliament , above the law , and above all persons in the land . 

Therefore the work of that man who is called judge , is to hear any matter that is brought before him ; and in all cases of difference between man and man , he shall see the parties on both sides before him , and shall hear each man speak for himself without a fee lawyer ; likewise he is to examine any witness who is to prove a matter in trial before him . 

And then he is to pronounce the bare letter of the law concerning such a thing , for he hath his name judge , not because his will and mind is to judge the actions of offenders before him but because he is the mouth to pronounce the law , who indeed is the true judge ; therefore to this law and to this testimony let every one have a regard who intends to live in peace in the commonwealth . 

But from hence hath arose much misery in the nations under kindly government , in that the man called the 〈◊〉 hath been suffered to interpret the law ; and when the mind of the law , the judgement of the parliament , and the government of the land , is resolved into the breast of the judges , this hath occasioned much complaining of injustice , in judges , in courts of justice , in lawyers , and in the course of the law itself , as if it were an evil rule . 

Because the law , which was a certain rule , was varied , according to the will of a covetous , envious , or proud judge , therefore no marvel though the kingly laws be so intricate , and though few know which way the course of the law goes , because the sentence lies many times in the breast of a judge , and not in the letter of the law . 

And so the good laws made by an industrious parliament , are like good eggs laid by a silly goose , and as soon as she hath laid them , she goes her way , and lets others take them , and never looks after them more , so that if you lay a stone in her nest , she will sit upon it , as if it were an egg.  

And so though the laws be good , yet if they be left to the will of a judge to interpret , the execution hath many times proved bad . 

And truly as the laws and persons of nations have been abused by suffering men judges to alter the sense by their interpretation : 

So likewise hath the scriptures of Moses , the prophets , Christ , and his apostles , been darkened and confounded by suffering ministers to put their inferences and interpretations upon them . 

And surely both the judges for the law , and the ministers for God's word , have been both unfaithful servants to man and to God , by taking upon them to expound and interpret that rule which they are bound to yield obedience to , without adding to , or diminishing from . 

What is the judges court ? 

In a county or shire there is to be chosen A judg.  
The peacemakers of every town within that circuit . 
The overseers , and 
A band of soldiers attending thereupon . 


And this is called the judges court , or the county senate : this court shall sit four times in the year , or oftener if need be , in the country , and four times in the year in great cities : in the first quarter of the year they shall sit in the East part of the county , and the second quarter of the year in the West , in the third in the South , and in the fourth in the North . 

And this court is to oversee and examine any officer within their county or limits ; for their work is to see , that every one be faithful in his place ; and if any officer hath done wrong to any , this court is to pass sentence of punishment upon the offendor , according to his offence against the law . 

If any grievance lie upon any man , wherein inferior officers cannot ease him , this court shall quietly hear his complaint , and ease him ; for where a law is wanting , they May prepare a way of ease for the 〈◊〉 till the parliament sit , who May either establish that conclusion for a law , if they approve of it , or frame another law to that effect ; for it is possible that many things May fall out hereafter , which the lawmakers for the present May not foresee . 

If any disorder break in among the persons , this court shall set things to rights : if any be bound over to appear at this court , the judge shall hear the matter , and pronounce the letter of the law , according to the nature of the offence . 

So that the alone work of the judge is to pronounce the sentence and mind of the law : and all this is but to see the laws executed , that the peace of the commonwealth May be preserved . 

What is the work of a commonwealths parliament in general ? 

A parliament is the highest court of equity in a land , and it is to be chosen every year ; and out of every city , town , and certain limits of a country through the land , two , three , or more men are to be chosen to make up this court . 

This court is to oversee all other courts , officers , persons and actions , and to have a full power , being the representative of the whole land , to remove all grievances , and to ease the persons that are oppressed . 

A parliament hath his rise from the lowest office in a commonwealth , viz. from the father in a family : for as a father's tender care is to remove all grievances from the oppressed children , not respecting one before another ; so a parliament are to remove all burdens from the persons of the land , and are not to respect persons who are great before them who are weak ; but their eye and care must be principally to relieve the oppressed ones , who groan under the tyrant's laws and power : ` the strong , or such as have the tyrant power to uphold them , need no help . 

But though a parliament be the father of a land , yet by the covetousness and 〈◊〉 of kingly government the heart of this father hath been alienated from the children of the land , or else so overawed by the frowns of a kingly tyrant , that they could not or durst not act for the weakest children's ease . 

For hath not parliaments sat , and rose again , and made laws to strengthen the tyrant in his throne , and to strengthen the rich and the strong by those laws , and left oppression upon the backs of the oppressed still ? 

But I 'll not reap up former weaknesses , but rather rejoice in hope of amendment , seeing our present parliament hath declared England to be a free commonwealth , and to cast out kingly power ; and upon this ground i rejoice in hope , that succeeding parliaments will be tender-hearted fathers to the oppressed children of the land . 

And not only dandle us upon the knee with good words and promises till particular men's turns be served , but will fill our bellies , and clothe our backs with good actions of freedom , and give to the oppressed children's children their birthright portion , which is freedom in the commonwealths land , which the kingly law and power , our cruel step-fathers and stepmothers , have kept from us and our fathers for many years past . 

The particular work of a parliament is fourfold . 

First , as a tender father , a parliament is to empower officers , and give out orders for the free planting and reaping of the commonwealths land , that all who have been oppressed , and kept from the 〈◊〉 use thereof by Conquerots' , Kings , and their tyrant laws , May now be set at liberty to plant in freedom for food and raiment , and are to be a protection to them who labour the Barth , and a punisher of them who are idle . But some May say , what is that i call commonwealths land ? 

I answer , all that land which hath been withheld from the inhabitants by the Conquerot , or tyrant Kings , and is now recovered out of the hands of that oppression by the joint assistance of the persons and purses of the commoners of the land ; for this land is the price of their blood ; it is their birthright to them and their posterity , and ought not to be converted into particular hands again by the laws of a free commonwealth . 

And in particular , this land is all abbey lands , formerly recovered out of the hands of the Pope's power by the blood of the commoners of England , though the Kings withheld their rights herein from them . 

So likewise all crown lands , Bishops lands , with all parks , forests , chases , now of late recovered out of the hands of the kingly tyrants , who have set Lords of manors and taskmasters over the commoners , to withhold the free use of the land from them . 

So likewise all the Commons and waste lands , which are called Commons , because the poor was to have part therein ; but this is withheld from the commoners , either by Lords of manors , requiring quit rents , and overseeing the poor so narrowly , that none dares build him a house upon this common land , or plant thereupon , without his leave , but must pay him rent , fines , and heriots , and homage , as unto a conqueror ; or else the benefit of this common land is taken away from the younger brethren by rich landlords and freeholders , who overstock the Commons with sheep and cattle , so that the poor in many places are not able to keep a cow , unless they steal grass for her . 

And this is the bondage the poor complain of , that they are kept poor by their brethren in a land where there is so much plenty for every one , if covetousness and pride did not tule as King in one brother over another , and kingly government occasions all this . 

Now it is the work of a parliament to break the tyrant's bands , to abolish all their oppressing laws , and to give orders , encouragements and directions unto the poor oppressed persons of the land , that they forthwith plant and manure this their own land , for the free and comfortable livelihood of themselves and posterities . 

And to declare to them , it is their own creation rights , faithfully and courageously recovered by their diligence , purses and blood from under the kingly tyrants and oppressor's power . 

The work of a parliament , secondly , 

Is to abolish all old laws and customs , which have been the strength of the oppressor , and to prepare , and then to enact new laws for the ease and freedom of the persons , but yet not without the people's knowledge . 

For the work of a parliament herein is threefold . 

First , when old laws and customs of the Kings do burden the persons , and the persons desire the remove of them , and the establishment of more easy laws . 

It is now the work of a parliament to search into reason and equity , how relief May be found out for the persons in such a case , and to preserve a common peace ; and when they have found out a way by debate of council among themselves , whereby the persons May be relieved , they are not presently to establish their conclusions for a law . 

But in the next place , they are to make a public declaration thereof to the persons of the land who choose them for their approbation ; and if no objection come in from the persons within one month , they May then take the people's silence as a consent thereto . 

And then in the third place , they are to enact it for a law , to be a binding rule to the whole land : for as the remove of the old laws and customs are by the people's consent , which is proved by their frequent 〈◊〉 and requests of such a thing ; so the enacting of new laws must be by the people's consent and knowledge likewise . 

And here they are to require the consent , not of men interessed in the old oppressing laws and customs , as Kings used to do , but of them who have been oppressed . And the reason is this : 

Because the persons must be all subject to the law , under pain of punishment ; therefore it is all reason they should know it before it be enacted , that if there be any thing of the council of oppression in it , it May be discovered and amended . 

But you will say . If it must be so , then will men so differ in their judgments , that we shall never agree . I answer : 

There is but bondage and freedom , particular interest , or common interest ; and he who pleads to bring in particular interest into a free commonwealth , will presently be seen and cast out , as one bringing in kingly slavery again . 

And men in place and office , where greatness and honour is coming in , May sooner be corrupted to bring in particular interest , than a whole land can be , who must either suffer sorrow under a burdensome law , or rejoice under a law of freedom . 

And 〈◊〉 those men , who are not willing to enslave the persons , will not be unwilling to consent hereunto . 

The work of a parliament thirdly , 

Is to see all those burdens removed actually , which have hindered , or do hinder , the oppressed persons from the enjoyment of their birth-rights . 

If their common lands be under the oppression of Lords of manors , they are to see the land freed from that slavery . 

If the commonwealths land be sold by the hasty council of subtle , covetous , and ignorant officers , who act for their own particular interest : and so hath entangled the commoners land again , under colour of being bought and sold . 

A parliament is to examine what authority any had to sell or buy the commonwealth land , without a general consent of the persons ; for it is not any ones , but every ones birth right : and if some through covetousness and self interest gave 〈◊〉 privately , yet a parliament , who is the father of a land , ought not to give consent to buy and sell that land , which is all the children's birthright , and the price of their labors , monies , and blood . 

They are to declare likewise , that the birgain is unrighteous , and that the buyers and sellers are enemies to the peace and freedom of the commonwealth : for indeed the necessity of the persons chose a parliament to help them in their weakness ; and where they see a danger like to impoverish or enslave one part of the persons to another , they are to give warning , and so prevent that danger ; for they are the eyes of the land : and surely those are blind eyes that lead the persons into bogs , to be entangled in mud again , after they are once pulled out . 

And when the land is once freed from the oppressor's power and laws , a parliament is to keep it so , and not suffer it by their consent to have it bought or sold , and so entangled in bondage upon a new account . 

And for their faithfulness herein to the persons , the persons are engaged by love and faithfulness to cleave close to them , in defence and protection . But when a parliament have no care herein , the hearts of the persons run away from them like sheep who have no shepherd . 

All grievances are occasioned either by the covetous wills of state-officers , who neglect their obedience to the good laws , and then prefer their own ease , honour , and riches before the ease and freedom of the oppressed persons . And here a parliament is to cashier and punish those officers , and place others who are men of public spirits in their rooms . 

Or else the people's grievances arise from the practice and power that the King's laws have given to Lords of manors , covetous landlords , tythe-takers , or unbounded lawyers , being all strengthened in their oppressions over the persons by that kingly law . And when the persons are burdened herewith , and groan , waiting for deliverance , as the oppressed persons of England do at this day ; it is then the work of a parliament to see the persons delivered , and that they enjoy their creation-freedoms in the earth : they are not to dally with them , but as a father is ready to help his children out of misery , when they either see them in misery , or when the children cry for help ; so should they do for the oppressed persons . 

And surely for this end , and no other , is a parliament chosen , as is cleared before : for the necessity of common preservation and peace is the fundamental law both to officers and persons . 

The work of a parliament fourthly , is this . 

If there be occasion to raise an army to wage war , either against an invasion of a foreign enemy , or against an insurrection at home ; it is the work of a parliament to manage that business for to preserve common peace . And here their work is threefold : 

First , to acquaint the persons plainly with the cause of the war , and to show them the danger of such an invasion or insurrection ; and so from that cause require their assistance in person , for the preservation of the laws , liberties , and peace of the commonwealth , according to their engagement when they were chosen , which was this : do you maintain our laws and liberties , and we will protect and assist you . 

Secondly , a parliament is to make choice of understanding , able , and public spirited men to be leaders of an army in this case , and to give them commissions and power in the name of the commonwealth , to manage the work of an army . 

Thirdly , a parliaments work in this case is either to send ambassadors to another nation which hath invaded our land , or that intends to invade ; to agree upon terms of peace , or to proclaim war ; or else to receive and hear ambassadors from other lands for the same business , or about any other business concerning the peace and honour of the land . 

For a parliament is the head of a commonwealths power , or as it May be said , it is the great council of an army , from whom originally all orders do issue forth to any officer or soldier . 

For if so be a parliament had not an army to protect them , the rudeness of the persons would not obey their proceedings : and if a parliament were not the representative of the persons , who indeed is the body of all power , the army would not obey their orders . 

So then , a parliament is the head of power in a commonwealth , and it is their work to manage public affairs in times of war , and in times of peace ; not to promote the interest of particular men , but for the peace and freedom of the whole body of the land , viz. of every particular man , that none be deprived of his creation rights , unless he hath lost his freedom by transgression , as by the laws is expressed . 

The work of a commonwealths ministry , and why one day in seven May be a day of rest from labour . 

If there were good laws , and the persons be ignorant of them , it would be as bad for the commonwealth as if there were no laws at all . 

Therefore according to one of the laws of Israel's commonwealth made by Moses , who was the ruler of the persons at that time : 

It is very rational and good , that one day in seven be still set apart for three reasons . 

First , that the persons in such a parish May generally meet together to see one another's faces , and beget or preserve fellowship in friendly love . 

Secondly , to be a day of rest , or cessation from labour ; so that they May have some bodily rest for themselves and cattle . 

Thirdly , that he who is chosen minister ( For that year ) in that parish May read to the persons three things . 

First the affairs of the whole land , as it is brought in by the postmaster , as it is related in his office , hereafter following . 

Secondly , to read the law of the commonwealth : not only to strengthen the memory of the ancients , but that the young persons also , who are not grown up to ripeness of experience , May be instructed , to know when they do well , and when they do ill ; for the laws of a land hath the power of freedom and bondage , life and death in its hand , therefore the necessary knowledge to be known , and he is the best prophet that acquaints men therewith . That as men grow up in 〈◊〉 , they May be able to defend the laws and government of the land . But these laws shall not be expounded by the reader , for to expound a plain law , as if a man would put a better meaning , than the letter itself , produces two evils . 

Fast the pure law and the minds of persons , will be thereby consounded , for multitude of words darken knowledge . 

Secondly the reader will be puffed up in pride , to contemn the lawmakers , and in time that will prove the father and nurse of tyranny , as at this day is 〈◊〉 by our ministry . 

And thirdly , because the minds of persons , generally love discourses , therefore that the wits of men both young and old May be exercised , there May be speeches made in a threefold nature . 

First to declare the acts and passages of former ages and governments , setting forth the benefit of freedom , by well ordered governments , as in Israel's common wealth , and the troubles and bondage , which hath always attended oppression and oppressors ; as the state of Pharaoh , and other tyrant Kings , who said the earth and persons were theirs , and only at their dispose . 

Secondly speeches May be made , of all arts and sciences , some one day , some another ; as in physic , 〈◊〉 , astrology , astronomy , navigation , husbandry , and such like . And in these speeches May be unfolded the nature of all herbs and plants from the hyssop to the cedar , as Solomon writ of . 

Likewise men May come to see into the nature of the fixed and wand'ring stars , those great powers of God in the heavens above ; and hereby men will come to know the secrets of nature and creation , within which all true knowledge is wrapped up , and the light in man must arise to search it out , 

Thirdly , speeches May be made , sometimes of the nature of mankind , of his darkness and of his light , of his weakness and of his strength , of his love and of his envy , of his sorrow and of his joy , of his inward and outward bondages , and of his inward and outward freedoms , &c.  And this is that which the ministry of churches generally aim , but only that they confound their knowledge by imaginary study , when any one takes upon him to speak without experience . 

Now this is the way 

To attain to the true knowledge of God ( Who is the spirit of the whole creation , ) as he hath spread himself forth in every form , and more eminently in man ; as Paul writ , the creation in all the several bodies and forms are but the mansions or fullness of him who hath filled all things with himself . 

And if the earth were set free from kingly bondage , so that every one were sure to have a free livelihood , and if this liberty were granted , than many secrets of God , and his works in nature , would be made public , which men now adays keep secret to get a living by ; so that this kingly bondage is the cause of the spreading of ignorance in the earth : but when commonwealths freedom is established , and pharisaical or kingly slavery cast out , then will knowledge cover the earth , as the waters cover the seas , and not till then . 

He who is the chosen minister for that year to read , shall not be the only man to make sermons or speeches : but every one who hath any experience , and is able to speak of any art or language , or of the nature of the heavens above , or of the earth below , shall have free liberty to speak when they offer themselves , and in a civil manner desire an audience , and appoint his day : yet he who is the reader May have his liberty to speak too , but not to assume all the power to himself , as the proud and ignorant clergy have done , who have bewitched all the world by their subtle covetousness and pride . 

And every one who speaks of any herb , plant , art , or nature of mankind , is required to speak nothing by imagination , but what he hath found out by his own industry and observation in trial . 

And because other nations are of several languages , therefore these speeches May be made sometimes in other languages , and sometimes in our mother tongue , that so the men of our English commonwealth May attain to all knowledges , arts and languages , and that every one May be encouraged in his industry , and purchase the countenance and love of their neighbourhood , for their wisdom , and experimental knowledge in the things which are . 

And thus to speak , or thus to read the law of nature ( Or God ) as he hath written his name in every , is to speak a pure language , and this is to speak the truth as Jesus Christ spoke it , giving to every thing it 's own weight and measure . 

By this means , in time men shall attain to the practical knowledge of God truly ; that they May serve him in spirit and truth ; and this knowledge will not deceive a man . 

Ay , but saith the zealous , but ignorant professor , 

This is a low and carnal ministry indeed , this 〈◊〉 men to know nothing , but the knowledge of the earth , and the secrets of nature , but we are to look after spiritual and beavenly things . i answer . 

To know the secrets of nature , is to know the works of God ; and to know the works of God within the creation , is to know God himself , for God dwells in every visible work or body . 

And indeed if you would know spiritual things , it is to know how the spirit or power of wisdom and life , causing motion , or growth , dwells within , and governs both the several bodies of the stars and planets in the heavens above ; and the several bodies of the earth below ; as grass , plants , fishes , beasts , birds , and mankind ; for to reach God beyond the creation , or to know what he will be to a man , after the man is dead , if any otherwise , then to scatter him into his essences of fire , water , earth and air , of which he is compounded , is a knowledge beyond the line , or capacity of man to attain to while he lives in his compounded body . 

And if a man should go to imagine , what God is beyond the creation , or what he will be in a spiritual demonstration after a man is dead , he doth as the proverb saith , build castles in the air , or tells us of a world beyond the moon , and beyond the sun , merely to blind the reason of man . 

I 'll appeal to yourself in this question , what other knowledge have you of God , but what you have within the circle of the creation ? 

For if the creation in all its dimensions be the fullness of him , that fills all with himself , and if you yourself be part of this creation , where can you find God but in that line or station wherein you stand ? 

God manifests himself in actual knowledge , not in imagination ; he is still in motion , either in bodies upon earth , or in the bodies in the heavens , or in both ; in the night and in the day , in winter , in summer , in cold , in heat , in growth , or not in growth . 

But when a studying imagination comes into man , which is the devil , for it is the cause of all evil , and sorrows in the world ; that is he who puts out the eyes of man's knowledge , and tells him , he must believe what others have writ or spoke , and must not trust to his own experience : and when this bewitching fancy sits in the chair of government , there is nothing but saying and unsaying , frowardness , covetousness , fears , confused thoughts , and unsatisfied doubtings , all the days of that man's reign in the heart . 

Or secondly , examine yourself , and look likewise into the ways of all professors , and you shall find , that the enjoyment of the earth below , which you call a low and a carnal knowledge , is that , which you and all professors ( As well as the men of the world , as you call them ) strive and seek after . 

Wherefore are you so covetous after the world , in buying and selling ? Counting yourself a happy man , if you be rich , and a miserable man if you be poor . And though you say , heaven after death is a place of glory , where you shall enjoy God face to face , yet you are loathe to leave the earth to go thither . 

Do not your ministers preach for to enjoy the earth ? Do not professing lawyers , as well as others , buy and sell the conqueror's justice , that they May enjoy the earth ? Do not professing soldiers fight for the earth , and seat themselves in that land , which is the birthright of others , as well as theirs , shutting others out ? Do not all professors strive to get earth , that they May live in plenty by other men's labors ? 

Do you not make the earth your very rest ? Doth not the enjoying of the earth please the spirit in you ? and than you say , God is pleased with your ways , and blesseth you . If you want earth , and become poor , do you not say , God is angry with you , and crosseth you ? 

Why do you heap up riches ? why do you eat and drink , and wear clothes ? why do you take a woman , and lie with her to beget children ? Are not all these carnal and low things of the earth ? and do you not live in them , and covet them as much as any ? nay more than many which you call men of the world ? 

And it being thus with you , what other spiritual or heavenly things do you seek after more than others ? And what is in you more than in others ? If you say , there is ; then surely you ought to let these earthly things alone to the men of the world , as you call them , whose portions these are , and keep you within the compass of your own sphere , that others seeing you live a life above the world in peace and freedom , neither working yourself , nor deceiving , nor compelling others to work for you , they May be drawn to embrace the same spiritual life by your single-hearted conversation . we 'll , i have done here . 

Let us now examine your divinity . 

Which you call heavenly , and spiritual things , for herein speeches are made not to advance knowledge , but to destroy the true knowledge of God ; for divinity does not speak the truth , as it is hide in every , but it leaves the motional knowledge of a thing as it is . And imagines , studies , or thinks what May be , and so runs the hazard true or false : and this divinity is always speaking words to deceive the simple , that he May make them work for him , and maintain him , but he never comes to action himself to do as he would be done by ; for he is a monster who is all tongue and no hand . 

This divining doctrine , which you call spiritual and heavenly things , is the thief and the robber he comes to spoil the vineyard of a man's peace , and does not enter in at the door , but he climbs up another way : and this doctrine is two fold . 

First he takes upon him to tell you the meaning of other men's words , and writing by his studying or imagining what another man's knowledge Might be , and by thus doing darkens knowledge , and wrongs the spirit of the authors who did write and speak those things which he takes upon him to interpret . 

Secondly he takes upon him , to foretell what shall befall a man after he is dead , and what that world is beyond the sun , and beyond the moon , &c.  And if any man tell him there is no reason for what you say , he answers you must not judge of heavenly and spiritual things by reason , but you must believe what is told you , whether it be reason or no : there is a threefold discovery of falsehood in this doctrine . 

For first it is a doctrine of a sickly and weak spirit , who hath lost his understanding in the knowledge of the creation , and of the temper of his own heart and nature , and so runs into fancies , either of joy or sorrow . 

And if the passion of joy predominate , than he fancies to himself a personal God , personal angels , and a local place of glory which he saith , he , and all who believes what he hath , shall go to , after they are dead . 

And if sorrow predominate , than he fancies to himself a personal devil , and a local place of torment , that he shall go to after he is dead , and this he speaks with great confidence . 

Or secondly , this is the doctrine of a subtle running spirit , to make an ungrounded wise man mad . That he Might be called the more excellent man 〈◊〉 knowledge ; for many times when a wise understanding heart is assaulted with this doctrine of a God , a devil , a heaven , and a hell , salvation and damnation after a man is dead , his spirit being not strongly grounded in the knowledge of the creation , nor in the temper of his own heart . 

He strives and stretches his brains to find out the depth of that doctrine and cannot attain to it ; for indeed it is not knowledge , but imagination : and so by poring and puzzling himself in it , loses that wisdom he had , and becomes distracted and mad : and if the passion of joy predominate , than he is merty , and sings , and laughs , and is ripe in the expressions of his words , and will speak strange things ; but all by imagination . But if the passion of sorrow predominate , than he is heavy and sad , crying out , he is damned , God hath for him , and he must go to hell when he dies , he cannot make his calling and election sure : and in that distemper many times a man doth hang , kill or drown himself : so that this divining doctrine , which you call spiritual and heavenly things , 〈◊〉 persons always when they are weak , sickly , and under any distemper ; therefore it cannot be the doctrine of Christ the saviour . 

For my own part , my spirit hath waded deep to find the bottom of this divining spiritual doctrine : and the more i searched , the more i was at a loss ; and i never came to quiet rest , and to know God in my spirit , till i came to the knowledge of the things in this book : and let me tell you , they who preach this divining doctrine are the murderers of many a poor heart , who is bashful and simple , and that cannot speak for himself , but that keeps his thoughts to himself . 

or thirdly , this doctrine is made a cloak of policy by the subtle elder brother , to cheat his simple younger brother of the freedoms of the earth : for saith the elder brother , the earth is mine , and not yours , brother ; and you must not work upon it , unless you will hire it of me : and you must not take the fruits of it , unless you will buy them of me , by that which i pay you for your labour : for if you should do otherwise , God will not love you , and you shall not go to heaven when you die , but the devil will have you , and you must be damned in hell , 

if the younger reply , and say , the earth is my birthright , as well as yours , and God who made us both , is no respecter of persons : therefore there is no reason but i should enjoy the freedoms of the earth for my comfortable livelihood , as well as you , brother . 

ay , but saith the elder brother , you must not trust to your own reason and understanding , but you must 〈◊〉 what is written and what is told you ; and if you will not believe , your damnation will be the greater . 

I cannot believe , saith the younger brother , that our righteous creator should be so partial in his dispensations of the earth , seeing our bodies cannot live upon earth without the use of the earth . 

The elder brother replies , what , will you be an atheist , and a factious man , will you not believe God ? 

Yes , saith the younger brother , if i knew God said so i should believe , for i desire to serve him . 

Why , saith the elder brother , this is his word , and if you will not believe it , you must be damned ; but if you will believe it , you must go to heaven . 

Well , the younger brother being weak in spirit , and having not a grounded knowledge of the creation , nor of himself , is terrified , and let 's go his hold in the earth , and submits himself to be a slave to his brother , for fear of damnation in hell after death , and in hopes to get heaven thereby after he is dead ; and so his eyes are put out , and his reason is blinded . 

So that this divining spiritual doctrine is a cheat ; for while men are gazing up to heaven , imagining after a happiness , or fearing a hell after they are dead , their eyes are put out , that they see not what is their birthrights , and what is to be done by them here on earth while they are living : this is the filthy dreamer , and the cloud without rain . 

And indeed the subtle clergy do know , that if they can but charm the persons by this their divining doctrine , to look after riches , heaven and glory when they are dead , that then they shall easily be the inheritors of the earth , and have the deceived persons to be their servants . 

This divining doctrine , which you call spiritual and heavenly , was not the doctrine of Christ , for his words were pure knowledge , they were words of life ; for he said , he spoke what he had seen with his father , for he had the knowledge of the creation , and spoke as every thing was . 

And this divinity came in after Christ to darken his knowledge ; and it is the language of the mystery of iniquity and Antichrist , whereby the covetous , ambitious and serpentine spirit cozens the plainhearted of his portions in the earth . 

And divinity cozens a plain heart two ways : first , if a man have an estate , according to the King's laws , he is made by this charm to give it , or bazle it away to the priests , or to religious uses , in hopes to get heaven when he is dead . 

Or secondly , a man by running to hear divinity sermons , and dancing after his charming pipe , neglects his labour , and so runs into debt , and then his 〈◊〉 professors will cast him into prison , and starve him there , and there divinity will call him a hypocrite and wicked man , and become a devil to torment him in that 〈◊〉 . 

But surely light is so broke out , that it will cover the earth , so that the divinity charmers , shall say , the persons will 〈◊〉 bear the voice of our charming , charm we never so wisely : and all the priests , and clergy , and preachers of these spiritual and heavenly things , as they call them , shall take up the lamentation , which is their portion , alas , alas , that great city Babylon , that mighty city divinity , which hath filled the whole earth with her sincerity , and deceived all persons , so that the whole world wondered after this beast ; how is it fallen , and how is her judgement come upon her in one hour ? and further , as you May read , rev. 18. 10.  

The office of the postmaster . 

In every parish throughout the commonwealth shall be chosen two men ( At the time when other officers are chosen , ) and these shall be called postmasters : and whereas there are four parts of the land , East , West , North , South , there shall be chosen in the chief city two men to receive in what the postmaster of the East country brings in , and two men to receive in what the postmaster of the West brings in , and two for the North , and so two for the South . 

Now the work of the country postmaster shall be this , they shall every month bring up or send by tidings from their respective parishes to the chief city , of what accidents or passages fall out , which is either to the honour or dishonour , hurt or profit of the commonwealth ; and if nothing have fallen out in that month worth observation , than they shall write down peace or good order in such a parish . 

And when these respective postmasters have brought up their bills or certificates from all parts of the land , the receivers of those bills shall write down every thing in order from parish to parish in the nature of a weekly bill of observation . 

And those eight receivers shall cause the affairs of the four quarters of the land to be printed in one book with what speed May be , and deliver to every postmaster a book , that as they bring up the affairs of one parish in writing , they May carry down in print the affairs of the whole land . 

The benefit lies here , that if any part of the land be visited with plague , famine , invasion , or insurrection , or any casualties , the other parts of the land May have speedy knowledge , and send relief . 

And if any accident fall out through unreasonable action , or careless neglect , other parts of the land May thereby be made watchful , to prevent like danger . 

Or if any through industry or ripeness of understanding have found out any secret in nature , or new invention in any art or trade , or in the tillage of the earth , or such like , whereby the commonwealth May more flourish in peace and plenty ; for which virtues those persons received honour in the places where they dweit . 

When other parts of the land hear of it , many thereby will be encouraged to employ their reason and industry to do the like , that so in time there will not be any secret in nature , which now lies hide ( By reason of the iron age of 〈◊〉 oppressing government ) but by some or other will be brought to light , to the beauty of our commonwealth . 

The rise of a commonwealths army . 

After that the necessity of the persons in a parish , in a county , and in a land , hath moved the persons to choose officers to preserve common peace , the same necessity causeth the persons to say to their officers , 

Do you see our laws observed for our common preservation , and we will assist and protect you . 

This word assist and protect , implies the rising of the persons by force of arms , to defend their laws and officers , who rule well , against any invasion , insurrection or rebellion of selfish officers , or rude persons ; yea to beat down the turbulence of any foolish spirit that shall arise to break our common peace . 

So that the same law of necessity of common peace , which moved the persons to choose officers , and to compose a law for to be a rule of government : the same law of necessity of protection doth raise an army ; so that an army , as well as other officers in a commonwealth , spring from one and the same root , viz. from the necessity of common preservation . 

An army is twofold , viz. a ruling army , or a fighting army . 

A ruling army is called magistracy in times of peace , keeping that land and government in peace by execution of the laws , which the fighting army did purchase in the field by their blood out of the hands of oppression . 

And here all officers , from the father in a family , to the parliament in a land , are but the heads and leaders of an army ; and all persons arising to protect and assist their officers , in defence of a right ordered government , are but the body of an army . 

And this magistracy is called the rejoicing of all nations , when the foundation thereof are laws of common equity , whereby every single man May enjoy the fruit of his labour , in the free use of the earth , without being restrained or oppressed by the hands of others . 

Secondly , a fighting army , called soldiers in the field , when the necessity of preservation , by reason of a foreign invasion , or inbred oppression , do move the persons to arise in an army to cut and teer to pieces , either degenerated officers , or rude persons , who seek their own interest , and not common freedom , and through treachery do endeavour to destroy the laws of common freedom , and to enssave both the land and persons of the commonwealth to their particular wills and lusts . 

And this war is called a plague , because that cursed enmity of covetousness , pride , and vain glory , and envy in the heart of mankind did occasion the rise of it , because he will not be under the moderate observation of any free and right order , unless he himself be King and Lord over other persons and their labours . 

For now the persons do arise to defend their faithful officers , against such officers as are unfaithful , and to defend their laws and common peace . 

The use or work of a fighting army in a commonwealth 

Is to beat down all that arise to endeavour to destroy the liberties of the commonwealth : for as in the days of monarchy , an army was used to subdue all who rebelled against kingly propriety ; so in the days of a free commonwealth , an army is to be made use of to resist and destroy all who endeavour to keep up or bring in kingly bondage again . 

The work of this fighting army is twofold . 

The first is to withstand the invasion , or coming in of a foreign enemy , whose invasion is for no other end , but to take away our land and earth from us , to deny us the free use thereof , to become Kings and landlords over us , and to make us their slaves . 

As William the conqueror , when he had conquered England , he gave not only the land in parcels to his soldiers , but he gave all men , their wives and children , within such a lordship , to his Lords of manors , 〈◊〉 do with them as they pleased : and for this cause now doth an army arise to keep out an invasion of a foreigner , that by the defence of our army , who is part of ourselves , the rest of our brethren in the commonwealth May plow , sow , and reap , and enjoy the fruits of their labours , and so live in peace in their own land . 

Or secondly , if a land be conquered , and so enslaved as England was , under the Kings and conquering laws , than an army is to be raised with as much secrecy as May be , to restore the land again , and set it free , that the earth May become a common treasury to all her children , without respecting persons , as it was before kingly bondage came in , as you May read , 1 sam. 8.  

This latter is called civil wars , and this is the wars of the commoners of England against King Charles now cast out , for he and his laws were the successive power of that Norman conquest over England . 

And now the commoners of England in this age of the world are rise up in an army , and have cast out that invasion of the Duke of Normandy , and have won their land and liberties again by the sword , if they do not suffer their counsels to 〈◊〉 into slavery again upon a new account . 

Therefore you army of England's commonwealth look to it ; the enemy could not beat you in the field , but they May be too hard for you by policy in 〈◊〉 , if you do not stick close to see common freedom established . 

For if so be that kingly authority be set up in your laws again , King Charles hath conquered you and your posterity by policy , and won the field of you , though you seemingly have cut off his head . 

For the strength of a King lies not in the visible appearance of his body , but in his will , laws and authority , which is called 〈◊〉 government . 

But if you remove kingly government , and set up true and free commonwealths government , than you gain your crown , and keep it , and leave peace to your posterity , otherwise not . 

And thus doing makes a war either lawful or unlawful . 

An army May be murderers and unlawful . 

If an army be raised to cast out kingly oppression , and if the heads of that army promise a commonwealths freedom to the oppressed persons , if in case they will assist with person and purse , and if the persons do assist , and prevail over the tyrant , those officers are bound by the law of justice ( Who is God ) to make good their engagements : and if they do not set the land free from the branches of the kingly oppression , but reserve some part of the kingly power to advance their own particular interest , whereby some of their friends are left under as great slavery to them , as they were under the Kings ; those officers are not faithful commonwealths soldiers , they are worse thieves and tyrant than the Kings they cast out , and that honour they seemed to get by their victories over the commonwealths oppressor they lose again , by breaking promise and engagement to their oppressed friends who did assist them . 

For what difference is there between a professed tyrant , that declares himself a tyrant in words , laws and deeds , as all conquerors do , and him who promises to free me from the power of the tyrant if I 'll assist him ; and when i have spent my estate and blood , and the health of my body , and expect my bargain by his engagements to me , he sits himself down in the tyrant's chair , and takes the possession of the land to himself , and calls it 〈◊〉 , and none of mine , and tells me he cannot in conscience let me enjoy the freedom of the earth with him , because it is another man's 〈◊〉 ? 

And now my health and estate is decayed , and i grow in age , i must either beg or work for day wages , which i was never brought up to , for another ; when as the earth is as freely my inheritance and birthright , as his whom i must work for ; and if i cannot live by my weak labors but take where i need , as Christ sent and took the ass coìt in his need , there is no dispute , but by the Kings and laws , he will hang me for a thief . 

But hear oh thou righteous spirit of the whole creation , and judge , who is the thief . Him who takes away the freedom of the common-earth from me , which is my creation rights , and which i have helped to purchase out of the hands of the kingly oppressor by my purse and person , and which he hath taken for wages of me : 

Or i , who takes the common-earth to plant upon for my free livelihood , endeavouring to live as a free commoner , in a free commonwealth , in righteousness and peace . 

Such a soldier as this engagement breaker is neither a friend to the creation : nor to a particular commonwealth , but a self lover and a hypocrite , for he did not fight , to set the earth free from the bondage of the oppressor as he pretended by his engagements ; but to remove that power out of the others hand into his own . And this is just like the beasts who fight for mastery and keeps it , not releaving , but still lording and Kinging over the weak . These are monarchial soldiers , not commonwealths soldiers ; and such a soldier is a murderer and his warfare is unlawful . 

But soldiers of true noble spirits , will help the weak , and set the oppressed free , and delight to see the commonwealth flourish in freedom , as well as their own gardens . There is none of this true nobility in the monarchial army , for they are all self lovers ; the best is as a briar , and the most upright amongst them is as a thorn held ; speak you prophers of old if this be not true . 

A monarchial army , lists up mountains , and makes valleys , viz. advances tyrants , and treads the oppressed in the barran lanes of poverty . 

But a commonwealths army is like John Baptist , who levels the mountains to the valleys , pulls down the tyrant , and 〈◊〉 up the oppressed : and so makes way for the spirit of peace and freedom to come in to rule and 〈◊〉 the earth . 

And by this which hath been spoken , an army May see wherein they May do well , and wherein they May do hurt . 

Chap. v.  

Education of mankind , in schools and trades . 

Mankind in the days of his youth , is like a young colt , wanton and foolish , till he be broke by education and correction , and the neglect of this care , or the want of wisdom in the performance of it hath been , and is , the cause of much division and trouble in the world . 

Therefore the law of a commonwealth does require , that not only a father , but that all overseers , and officers should make it their work to educate children in good manners , and to see them brought up in some trade or other , and to suffer no children in any parish to live in idleness , and youthful pleasure , all their days , as many have been ; but that they be brought up 〈◊〉 men , and not like beasts : that so the commonwealth May be planted with laborious and wise experienced men , and not with idle fools . 

Mankind May be considered in a fourfold degree , his childhood , youth , manhood and old age ; his childhood and his youth , May be considered from his birth till forty years of age ; and within this compass of time , after he is weaned from his mother , who shall be the nurse herself , if there be no defect in nature , his parents shall teach him a civil and humble behaviour toward all men . Then send him to school , to learn to read the laws of the commonwealth , to ripen his wits from his childhood , and so to proceed in his learning , till he be acquainted with all arts and languages : and the reason is threefold . 

First , by being acquainted with the knowledge of the affairs of the world ; by this traditional knowledge they May be the better able to govern themselves like rational men . 

Secondly , they May become thereby good commonwealths men , in supporting the government thereof , by being acquainted with the nature of government . 

Thirdly , if England have occasion to send ambassadors to any other land , we May have such as are acquainted with their language ; or if any ambassador come from other lands , we May have such as can understand their speech . 

But one sort of children shall not be trained up only to book learning , and no other employment , called scholars , as they are in the government of monarchy , for then through idleness , and exercised wit therein , they spend their time to find out 〈◊〉 to advance themselves , to be Lords and Masters above their labouring brethren , as Simeon and Levi do , which occasions all the trouble in the world . 

Therefore , to prevent the dangerous events of idleness in scholars , it is reason , and 〈◊〉 for 〈◊〉 peace , that after children have been brought up at schools , to 〈◊〉 their wits , they shall then be set to such trades , arts and sciences , as their bodies and wits are capable of ; and therein continue till they come to forty years of age . 

For all the work of the earth , or in trades , is to be managed by youth , and by such as have lost their freedoms . 

Then from forty years of age till fourscore , if he live so long , which is the degree of manhood and old age ; they shall be freed from all labour and work , unless they will themselves . 

And from among this degree of mankind shall be chosen all officers and overseers , to see the laws of the commonwealth observed . 

For as all men shall be workers or waiters in storehouses till they be forty years of age , so none shall be chosen a public officer till he be full forty years of age : for by this time man hath learned experience to govern himself and others : for when young wits are set to govern , they wax wanton , &c.  

What trades should mankind be brought up in ? 

In every trade , art , and science , whereby they May find out the secrets of the creation , and that they May know how to govern the earth in right order . 

There are five fountains from whence all arts and sciences have their influences : he that is an actor in any or in all the five parts , is a profitable son of mankind : he that only contemplates and talks of what he reads and hears , and doth not employ his talon in some bodily action , for the increase of fruitfulness , freedom , and peace in the earth , is an unprofitable son . 

The first fountain is the right planting of the earth to make it fruitful , and this is called husbandry : and there are two branches of it ; 

As first , planting , digging , dunging , liming , burning , grubbing , and right ordering of land , to make it fit to receive seed , that it May bring forth a plentiful crop : and under this head all millers , maltsters , bakers , harness-makers for plows and carts , rope-makers , spinners , and weavers of linen , and such like , are all but good husbandry . 

The second branch of husbandry is gardening , how to plant , graft , and set all sort of fruit-trees , and how to order the ground for flowers , herbs and roots for pleasure food , or medicinal . And here all physicians , surgeons , distillers of all sorts of waters , gatherers of drugs , makers of wines , and oil , and preservers of fruits , and such like , May learn by observation , what is good for all bodies , both man and beasts . 

The second fountain is mineral employment , and that is to search into the earth to find out mines of gold and silver , brass , iron , tin , lead , cannel , coal , and stone of all sorts , Salt-petre , salt , and allom-springs , and such like : and here all chemists , gunpowder makers , masons , smiths , and such like , as would find out the strength and power of the earth , May learn how to order these for the use and profit of mankind . 

The third fountain is the right ordering of cattle , whether by shepherds or herds men ; and such May learn here how to breed and train up cows for the daries , bulls and horses for the saddle or yoke . And here all tanners , hatters , shoemakers , glover's , spinners of wool , clothiers , tailors , dyers , and such like , May learn how to order and look to these . 

The fourth fountain is the right ordering of woods and timber trees , for planting , dressing , selling , framing of timber for all uses , for building houses or ships . And here all carpenters , joiners , throsters , plowmakers , instrument makers for music , and all who work in wood and timber , May find out the secret of nature , to make trees more plentiful and thriving in their growth , and profitable for use . 

The fifth fountain , from whence reason is exercised to find out the secrets of nature , is observe the rising and setting of the sun , moon , and the powers of the heavens above ; and the motion of the tides , and seas , and there several effects , powers , and operations upon the bodies of man and beast . And here May be learned astrology , astronomy , and navigation , and the motions of the winds , and the causes of several appearances of the face of heaven , either in storms , or in fareness . 

And in all these five fountains here is knowledge in the practice , and it is good . 

But there is traditional knowledge , which is attained by reading , or by the instruction of others , and not practical , but leads to an idle life ; and this is not good . 

The first is a laborious knowledge , and a preserver of common peace , which we find God himself acting ; for he put forth his own wisdom in practice , when he set his strength to work to make the creation : for God is an active power , not an imaginary fancy . 

The latter is an idle , lazy contemplation the scholars would call knowledge , but it is no knowledge , but a show of knowledge , like a parrot who speaks words , but he knows not what he saith : this same show of knowledge rests in reading or contemplating , or hearing others speak , and 〈◊〉 so too , but will not set his hand to work : and from this traditional knowledge and learning life up both clergy and lawyer , who by their cunning insinuations live merely upon the labour of other men , and teach laws which they themselves will not do , and lays burdens upon others which they themselves will not touch with the least of their fingers ; and from hence arises all oppressions , wars , and troubles in the world , the one is the son of contention , the other the son of darkness , but both the supporters of bondage , which the creation groans under . 

Therefore to prevent idleness and the danger of machivilian cheats , it is profitable for the commonwealth , that children be trained up in trades and some bodily employment , as well as in learning languages , or the histories of former ages . 

And as boys are trained up in learning and in trades , so all maids shall be trained up in reading , sowing , kniting , spining of linen and woollen , music , and all other easy neat works , either for to furnish storehouses with 〈◊〉 and woollen cloth , or for the ornament of particular houses with needle work . 

And if this course were taken , there would be no idle person nor beggars in the land , and much work would be done by that now lazy generation for the enlarging of the common treasuries . 

And in the managing of any trade , let no young wit be crushed in his invention , for if any man desire to make a new trial of his skill in any trade of science , the overseers shall not hinder him , but encourage him therein ; that so the spirit of knowledge May have his full growth in man , to find out the secret in every art . 

And let every one who finds out a new invention have a deserved honour given him , and certainly when men are sure of food and raiment , their reason will be ripe , and ready to dive into the 〈◊〉 of the creation , that they May learn to see and know God ( The spirit of the whole creation ) in all his works ; for fear of want , and care to pay rent to taskmasters , hath hindered many rare inventions . 

So that kingly power hath crushed the spirit of knowledge , and would not suffer it to rise up in its beauty and 〈◊〉 , but by his club law hath preferred the spirit of imagination , which is a deceiver , before it . 

There shall be no buying and selling of the earth , nor of the fruits thereof . 

For by the government under Kings , the cheaters hereby have cozened the plain hearted of their creation birthrights , and have 〈◊〉 themselves in the earth and calls it 〈◊〉 and not the others , and so have brought in that poverty and misery which 〈◊〉 upon many men . 

And whereas the wise should help the foolish , and the strong help the weak ; the wise and the strong destroys the weak and the simple . 

And are not all children generally simple and weak and know not the things that belong to their peace till they come to ripe age , but before they come to that understanding , the cunning ones who have more strength and policy , have by this hypocritical , lying , unrighteous and cheating art of buying and selling , wrung the freedoms of the earth out of their hands , and cozened them of their birthrights . 

So that when they come to understanding , they see themselves beggars in the midst of a fruitful land , and so the proverb is true , plain dealing is a jewel , but he who uses it shall die a beggar . and why ? 

Because this buying and selling is the nursery of cheaters , it is the law of the conqueror , and the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees , which both killed Christ and hindered his resurrection , as much as darkness can to put out light . 

And these cunning cheaters commonly become the rulers of the earth , and then the city man kind mourns , for not the wise poor man , but the cunning rich man , was always made an officer and ruler , such a one as by his stolen interest in the earth would be sure to hold others in bondage of poverty and servitude to him and his party . 

And hence arise oppression and tyranny in the earth upon the backs of the weak younger brethren , who are made younger brothers indeed , as the proverb is , by their cunning elder brother ; and as Daniel said , the basest of men under kingly government were set to rule , who can command but not obey , who can take other men's labors to live at ease , but not work themselves . 

Therefore there shall be no buying and selling in a free commonwealth , neither shall any one hire his brother to work for him . 

If the commonwealth Might be governed without buying and selling here is a platform of government for it , which is the ancientest law of righteousness to mankind in the use of the earth , and which is the very height of earthly freedoms . But if the minds of the persons , through covetousness and proud ignorance , will have the earth governed by buying and selling still , this same platform , with a few things subtracted , declares an easy way of government of the earth for the quiet of people's minds , and preserving of peace in the land . 

For , as like a tradesman , i ask the highest price , 
Yet i May fall ( If you will rise ) upon a good advice . 


How must the earth be planted ? 

The eirth is to be planted , and the fruits reaped , and carried into barns and storehouses by the assistance of every family : and if any man or family want corn , or other provision , they May go to the storehouses , and fetch without money : is they want a horse to ride , go into the fields in summer , or to the common stables in winter , and receive one from the keepers , and when your journey is performed , bring him where you had him , without money . If any want food or victuals , they May either go to the butcher's shops , and receive what they want without money ; or else go to the flocks of sheep , or herds of cattle , and take and kill what meat is needful for their families , without buying and selling . And the reason why all the riches of the earth are a common stock , is this , because the earth , and the labours thereupon , are managed by common assistance of every family , without buying and selling ; as is shown how more largely , in the office of overseers for trades , and the law for storehouses . 

The laws for the right ordering thereof , and the officers to see the laws executed ; to preserve the peace of every family , and the peace of every man , and to improve and promote every trade , is showed in the work of officers , and by the laws following . 

None will be an enemy to this freedom , which indeed is to do to another as a man would have another do to him , but covetousness and pride , the spirit of the old grudging snapping Pharisees , who gives God abundance of good words , in their sermons , in their prayers , in their fasts , and in their thanksgivings , as though none should be more faithful servants to him than they : nay , they will shun the company , imprison , and kill every one that will not worship God , they are so zealous . 

Well now , God and Christ hath enacted an everlasting law , which is love ; not only one another of your own mind , but love your enemies too , such as are not of your mind : and , having food and raiment , therewith be content . 

Now here is a trial for you , whether you will be faithful to God and Christ , in obeying his laws ; or whether you will destroy the man-child of true freedom , righteousness and peace , in his resurrection . 

And now thou wilt give us either the tricks of a soldier , face about , and return to Egypt , and so declare thyself to be part of the serpent's seed , that must bruise the heel of Christ ; or else to be one of the plainhearted sons of promise , or members of Christ , who shall help to bruise the serpent's head , which is kingly oppression ; and so bring in everlasting righteousness and peace into the earth . Well , the eye is now open . 

Storehouses shall be built and appointed in all places , and be the common stock . 

There shall be storehouses in all places , both in the country and in cities , to which all the fruits of the earth , and other works made by tradesmen , shall be brought , and from thence delivered out again to particular families , and to every one as they want for their use ; or else to be transported by ship to other lands , to exchange for those things which our land will not or does not afford . 

For all the labours of husbandmen and tradesmen , within the land , or by navigation to or from other lands , shall be all upon the common stock . 

And as every one works to advance the common stock , so every one shall have a free use of any commodity in the storehouse , for his pleasure and comfortable livelihood , without buying and selling , or restraint from any . 

And having food and raiment , lodging , and the comfortable societies of his own kind ; what can a man desire more in these days of his travel ? 

Indeed , covetous , proud , and beastly-minded men , desire more , either to lie by them to look upon , or else to waste and spoil it upon their lusts ; while other brethren live in straits for want of the use thereof . 

But the laws and faithful officers of a free commonwealth , do regulate the unrational practice of such men . 

There are two sorts of storehouses ; general , and particular . 

The general storehouses are such houses as receive in all commodities in the gross ; as all barns , and places to lay corn and the fruits of the earth at the first reaping : and these May be called storehouses for corn , flax , wool ; for leather , for iron , for linen and woollen cloth , or for any commodity that comes into our hand by shipping ; from whence particular family or shopkeepers May fetch as they need , to furnish their lesser shops . 

So likewise herds of cattle in the field , flocks of sheep , and horses , are all common storehouses ; so that from the herds and flocks every family May fetch what they want for food or pleasure , without buying and selling . 

So likewise all public dairies are storehouses for butter and cheese : yet every family May have cows for their own use , about their own house . 

And these general storehouses shall be filled and preserved by the common labour and assistance of every family ; as is mentioned in the office of overseer for trades . 

And from these public houses , which are the general stock of the land , all particular tradesmen May fetch materials for their particular work as they need , or to furnish their particular dwellings with any commodities . 

Secondly , there are particular storehouses or shops ; 

To which the tradesmen shall bring their particular works ; as all instruments of iron to the iron-shops , hats to shops appointed for them ; gloves , shoes , linen , and woollen cloth in smaller parcels , to shops appointed for every one of them ; and the like . 

Even as now we have particular trade in cities , and towns , called shopkeepers , which shall remain still as they be , only altered in their receiving in , and delivering out : for whereas by the law of Kings or conquerors , they do receive in and deliver out by buying and selling , and exchanging the conquerors picture or stamp upon a piece of gold or silver , for the fruits of the earth ; now they shall ( By the laws of the commonwealth ) receive into their sops , and deliver out again freely , without buying and selling . 

They shall receive in , as into a storehouse , and deliver out again freely , as out of a common storehouse , when particular persons or familes come for any thing they need , as now they do , by buying and selling under kingly government . 

For as particular families and tradesmen do make several works more than they can make use of ; as hats , shoes , gloves , stockings , linen and Woolen cloth : and the like , and do carry their particular work to storehouses . 

So it is all reason and equity , that they should go to other storehouses , and fetch any other commodity which they want , and cannot make : for as other men partakes of their labors , it is reason they should partake of other men's . 

And all these storehouses and shops shall be orderly kept by such as shall be brought up to be waiters therein , as is mentioned in the office of overseers for trades . 

For as there are some men more ingenious to work , so other men are more ingenious in keeping of storehouses and shops , to receive in and deliver out commodities . And all this easy work , May be called waiting at such and such a storehouse . As some May wait at corn-houses , some at linen and woollen houses , some at leather , some at iron-shops ; and every general and particular commodity shall be known where they are , by their houses and shops , as it is at this day ; so that towns and cities , and every family almost are but storehouses of one commodity or other , for the uses of the commonwealth , or to transport to other lands . 

Now this same free practice , will kill covetousness , pride , and oppression : for when men have a law to buy and sell , then as i said before , the cunning cheaters get great estates by others men's labors ; and being rich thereby , become oppressing Lords over their brethren ; which occasions all our troubles and wars in all nations . 

Come hither now , all you who challenge your brethren to deny Christ , as though you were the only men that love Christ , and would be true to him . 

Here is a trial of your love : can you be as ready to obey the law of liberty which is the command of Christ , as you would have others to obey your kingly laws of bondage ? It May be you will either storm , or go away sorrowful ; does not Christ tell you , that if you have food and raiment , you should therewith be content ? and in this common freedom , here will be food and raiment , ease and pleasure plentiful , both for you and your brethren ; so that none shall beg or starve , or live in the straits of poverty ; and this fulfils that righteous law of Christ , do as you would be done by : for that law of Christ can never be performed , till you establish commonwealth's freedom . 

Therefore now let it appear seeing the child is come to the birth , whether you will receive Christ who is the spreading spirit of freedom , righteousness , and peace ; or whether you will return to monarchy , to embrace that Egyptian bondage still . Well , here is life and death set before you , take whether you will ; but know , that unless your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the kingly and lordly scribes and Pharisees , you shall never enjoy true peace in your spirit . 

Chap. vi . 

The King's old laws cannot govern a free commonwealth . 

They cannot govern in times of bondage and in times of freedom too : they have indeed served many Masters , popish and Protestant : they are like old soldiers , that will but change their name , and turn about and as they were ; and the reason is , because they are the prerogative will of those under any religion , that Count it no freedom to them , unless they be Lords over the minds , persons , and labors of their brethren . 

They are called the King's laws , because they are made by the Kings , if any say they were made by the commoners ; it is answered , they were not made by the commoners , as the commoners of a free commonwealth , are to make laws . 

For in the days of the Kings , none were to choose , nor be chosen parliament men , or law makers , but Lords of manors , and freeholders , such as held title to their enclosures of land , or charters for their liberties in trades under the King , who called the land his , as he was the conqueror , or his successor . 

All inferior persons were neither to choose , nor to be chosen ; and the reason was , because all freeholders of land , and such as held their liberties by charter , were all of the King's interest ; and the inferior persons were successively of the rank of the conquered ones , and servants and slaves from the time of the conquest . 

And further , when a parliament was chosen in that manner , yet if any parliament man in the uprightness of his heart , did endeavour to promote any freedom , contrary to the Kings will , or former customs from the conquest he was either committed to prison by the King , or by his house of Lords , who were his ancient Norman successive council of war ; or else the parliament was dissolved and broke up by the King . 

So that the old laws were made in times under kingly slavery , not under the liberty of commonwealths freedom , because parliament men must have regard to the King's prerogative interest , to hold his conquest , or else endanger themselves . 

As sometimes it is in these days : some officers , dare not speak against the minds of those men who are the chief in power , nor a private soldier against the mind of his officer , lest they be cashiered their places and livelihood . 

And so long as the promoting of the King's will and prerogative was to be in the eye of the law makers , the oppressed commoners , could never enjoy commonwealths freedom thereby . 

Yet by the wisdom , courage , faithfulness , and industry , of some parliament men , the commoners have received here a line , and there a line of freedom inserted into their laws ; as those good lines of freedom in magna charta were obtained by much hardship and industry . 

Secondly , they were the King's laws , because the Kings own creatures made the laws ; or Lords of manors , freeholders &c. were successors of the Norman soldiers from the conquest , therefore they could do no other but maintain their own , and their King's interest . 

And do we not see , that all laws were made in the days of the Kings to ease the rich landlord ? but the poor labourers were left under bondage still ; they were to have no freedom in the earth , by those pharisaical laws : for when laws were made , and parliaments broke up , the poor oppressed commoners had no relief , but the power of Lords of manors , withholding the free use of the common land from them , remained still : for none durst make use of any common land , but at the Lords leave according to the will and law of the conqueror , therefore the old laws were called the King's laws . 

And these old laws cannot govern a free commonwealth , because the land now is to be set free from the slavery of the Norman conquest ; and the power of Lords of manors , and Norman freeholders , is to be taken away , or else the commoners are but where they were , if not fallen lower into straits than they were : and the old laws cannot look with any other face than they did ; though they be washed with commonwealths water , their countenance is still withered : therefore it was not for nothing that the Kings would have all their laws written in French and Latin , and not in English , partly in honour to the Norman race , and partly to keep the common persons ignorant of their creation-freedoms , lest they should rise to redeem themselves : and if those laws should be writ in English , yet if the same kingly principles remain in them , the English language would not advantage us any thing , but rather increase our sorrow , by our knowledge of our bondage . 

What is law in general . 

Law is a rule , whereby man and other creatures are governed in their actions , for the preservation of the common peace . And this law is twofold : 

First , it is the power of life ( Called the law of nature within the creatures ) which does move both man and beast in their actions ; or that causes grass , trees , 〈◊〉 and all plants , to grow in their several seasons : and whatsoever any does , he does it as he is moved by this inward law . And this law of nature moves twofold , viz. unrationally , or rationally . 

A man by this inward law is guided to actions of generation and present content , rashly , through a greedy self-love , without any consideration , like foolish children , or like the bruit beasts : by reason whereof , much hurt many times follows the body . And this is called the law in the 〈◊〉 warring against the law of the mind . 

Or when there is an inward watchful oversight of all motions to action , considering the end and effects of those actions , that there be no excess in diet , in speech , or in action break forth , to the prejudice of a man's self or others . And this is called the light in man , the reasonable power , or the law of the mind . 

And this rises up in the heart , by an experimental observation of that peace and trouble which such and such words thoughts and actions bring the man into . And this is called the record on high ; for it is a record in a man's heart above the former unreasonable power . And it is called the witness or testimony of a 〈◊〉 own 〈◊〉 . 

And it is said to the law and to the testimony , &c. for this moderate watchfulness is still the law of nature in a higher resurrection than the former 〈◊〉 it hath many terms which for 〈◊〉 sake i let pass . 

And this twofold work of the law within man , strives to bring 〈◊〉 themselves in writing to 〈◊〉 numbers of bodies on their fides . And that power that begets the biggest number , always rules as King and Lord in the creature , and in the creation , till the other part overtop him , even as light and darkness , strive in 〈◊〉 and 〈◊〉 to succeed each other ; or as it is said , the strong man armed , keeps the heart of man , till a stronger than he came , and cast him out . 

And this written law , proceeding either from reason or unreasonableness , is called the letter ; whereby the creation of mankind , beasts , and earth is governed according to the will of that power which rules . And it is called by his opposite , the letter that kills , and by those of the same nature with it , it is called the word of life . 

As for example , if the experienced , wise , and strong man bears rule , than he writes down his mind to curb the unreasonable law of covetousness and pride in unexperienced men , to preserve peace in the commonwealth . And this is called the historical or traditional law , because it is conveyed from one generation to another by writing ; as the laws of Israel's commonwealth were writ in a book by Moses , and so conveyed to poposterity . 

And this outward law is a bridle to unreasonableness , or as Solomon writ , it is a whip for the fools back , for whom only it was added . 

Secondly , since Moses time , the power of unreasonable covetousness and pride hath sometimes rise up , and corrupted that traditional law . 

For since the power of the sword rise up , in nations to conquer , the written law hath not been to advance common freedom and to beat down the unreasonable self-will in mankind , but it hath been framed to uphold that self-will of the conqueror , right or wrong ; not respecting the freedom of the commonwealth , but the freedom of the conqueror and his friends only . By reason whereof , much slavery hath been laid upon the backs of the plain dealing man ; and men of public spirits , as Moses was , have been crushed , and their spirits damped thereby ; which hath bred , first discontents , and then more wars in the nations . 

And those who have been favorites about the conqueror , have by hypocrisy and flattery pleased their King , that they Might get what they can of the earth into their possession ; and thereby have increased the bondage of the painful labourer , if they could but catch him to act contrary to the conquerors will , called law . And now the city mourns : and do we not see , that the laws of Kings have been always made against such actions as the common-people were most inclinable to , on purpose to 〈◊〉 them into their sessions and courts , that the lawyers and clergy , who were the King's supporters , Might get money thereby , and live in fullness , by other men's labors ? 

But hereby the true nature of a well-governed commonwealth hath been ruined , and the will of Kings set up for a law , and the law of righteousness , law of liberty trod under foot and killed . 

This traditional law of Kings , is that letter at this day which kills true freedom , and it is the 〈◊〉 of wars and persecution . 

This is the soldier , who cut Christ's garment into pieces , which was to have remained uncut and without seam ; this law moves the persons to fight one against another for those pieces viz. for the several enclosures of the earth , who shall possess the earth , and who shall be ruler over others . 

But the true ancient law of God , is a covenant of peace to whole mankind ; this sets the earth free to all ; this unites both Jew and gentile into one brotherhood , and rejects none : this makes Christ's garment whole again , and makes the kingdoms of the world to become commonwealths again . It is the inward power of right understanding , which is the true law that teaches persons in action , as well as in words , to do as they would be done unto . 

But thus much in general , what law is : hereafter follows what those particular laws May be , whereby a commonwealth May be governed in peace , and all burdens removed ; which is a breaking forth of that law of liberty , which will be the joy of all nations , when he arises up , and is established in his brightness . 

Short and pithy laws are best to govern a commonwealth . 

The laws of Israel's commonwealth were few , short and pithy ; and the government thereof was established in peace so long as officers and persons were obedient thereunto . 

But those many laws in the days of the Kings of England , which were made some in times of popery , and some in times of Protestantism , and the proceedings of the law being in French and Latin , hath produced two great evils in England , 

First , it hath occasioned much ignorance among the persons , and much contention ; and the persons have mightily erred through want of knowledge , and thereby they have run into great expense of money by suits of law , or else many have been imprisoned , whipped , banished , lost their estates and lives by that law which they were ignorant of , till the scourge thereof was upon their backs ; this is a sore evil among the persons . 

Secondly , the people's ignorance of the laws , hath bread many sons of contention : for when any difference false out between man and man , they neither of them know which offends the other ; therefore both of them thinking their cause is good , they delight to make use of the law ; and then they go and give a lawyer money to tell them , which of them was the offender . The lawyer being glad to maintain their own trade , sets them together by the ears , till all their monies be near spent ; and then bids them refer the business to their neighbours , to make them friends ; which Might have been done at the first . 

So that the course of the law and lawyers hath been a 〈◊〉 snare to entrap the persons , and to pull their estates from them by 〈◊〉 ; for the lawyers do uphold the conqueror's interest , and the people's slavery : so that the King seeing that , did put all the affairs of judicature into their hands : and all this must be called justice , but it is a 〈◊〉 evil . 

But now if the laws were few and short , and often read , it would prevent those evils ; 〈◊〉 every one , knowing when they did well , and when ill , would be very cautious of their words and actions ; and this would escape the lawyer's craft . 

As Moses laws in Israel's commonwealth : the persons did talk of them when they lay down , and when they rose up , and as they walked by the way ; and bound them as bracelets upon their hands : so that they were an understanding persons in the laws wherein their peace did depend . 

But it is a sign that England is a blinded and a snared generation ; their leaders through pride and covetousness have caused them to err , yea and perish too , for want of the knowledge of the laws , which hath the power of life and death , freedom and bondage , in its hand . But i hope better things hereafter . 

What May be those particular laws , or such a method of laws , whereby a commonwealth May be governed . 

1.  The bare letter of the law established by act of parliament shall be the rule for officer and persons , and the chief judge of all actions . 

2.  He or they who add or diminish from the law , excepting in the court of parliament , shall be cashiered his office , and never bear office more . 

3.  No man shall administer the law for money or reward ; he that doth shall die as a traitor to the commonwealth : for when money must buy and sell justice , and bear all the sway , there is nothing but oppression to be expected . 

4.  The laws shall be read by the minster to the persons four times in the year , viz. every quarter , that every one May know whereunto they are to yield obedience ; then none May die for want of knowledge . 

5.  No accusation shall be taken against any man , unless it be proved by two or three witnesses , or his own confession . 

6.  No man shall suffer any punishment , but for matter of fact , or reviling words : but no man shall be troubled for his judgement or practice in the things of his God , so he live quiet in the land . 

7.  The accuser and accused shall always appear face to face before any officer , that both sides May be heard , and no wrong to either party . 〈◊〉 

8.  If any judge or officer execute his own will contrary to the law , or which there is no law to warrant him in , he shall be cashiered , and never bear office more . 

9  He who raises an accusation against any man , and cannot prove it , shall suffer the same punishment the other should , if proved . An accusation is when one man complains of another to an officer , all other accusations the law takes no notice of . 

10.  He who strikes his neighbour , shall be struck himself by the executioner blow for blow , and shall lose eye for eye , tooth for 〈◊〉 , limb for limb , life for life : and the reason is , that men May be tender of one another's bodies , doing as they would be done by . 

11.  If any man strike an officer , he shall be made a servant under the taskmaster for a whole year . 

12.  He who endevo s to stir up contention among neighbours , by tale-bearing or false reports , shall the first time be reproved openly by the overseers among all the persons : the second time shall be whipped : the third time shall be a servant under the taskmaster for three months : and if he continues , he shall be a servant for ever , and lose his freedom in the commonwealth . 

13.  If any give reviling and provoking words , whereby his neighbour's spirit is burdened , if complaint be made to the overseers , they shall admonish the offender privately to forbear : if he continues to offend his neighbour , the next time he shall be openly reproved and admonished before the congregation , when met together : if he continue , the third time he shall be whipped ; the fourth time , if proof be made by witnesses , he shall be a servant under the taskmaster for twelve months . 

14.  He who will rule as a Lord over his brother , unless he be an officer commanding obedience to the law , he shall be admonished as aforesaid , and receive like punishment , if he continue . 

Laws for the planting of the earth , &c.  

15.  Every household shall keep all instruments and tools fit for the 〈◊〉 of the earth , either for planting , reaping or threshing . Some households , which have many men in them , shall keep plows , carts , harrows , and such like : other households shall keep spades , pickaxes , axes , pruning hooks , and such like , according as every family is furnished with men to work therewith . 

And if any Master or father of a family be negligent herein , the overseer for that circuit shall admonish him between them two ; if he continue negligent , the overseers shall reprove him before all the persons : and if he utterly refuse , than the ordering of that family shall be given to another , and he shall be a servant under the taskmaster till he conform . 

16.  Every family shall come into the field , with sufficient assistance , at seed time to plow , dig , and plant , and at harvest time to reap the fruits of the earth , and 〈◊〉 them into the storehouses , as the overseers order the work , and the number of workmen . And if any refuse to assist in this work , the overseers shall ask the reason , and if it be sickness , or any distemper that hinders them , they are freed from such service ; if mere idleness keep them back , they are to suffer punishment , according to the laws against 〈◊〉 . 

Laws against idleness . 

17.  If any refuse to learn a trade , or refuse to work in seedtime , or harvest , or refuse to be a waiter in storehouses , and yet will feed and clothe himself with other men's labors ; the overseers shall first admonish him privately ; if he continue idle , he shall be reproved openly before all the persons by the overseers ; and shall be forbore with a month after this reproof : if he still continues idle , he shall then be whipped , and be let go at liberty for a month longer ; if still he continue idle , he shall be delivered into the taskmasters hand , who shall set him to work for twelve months , or till he submit to right order : and the reason why every young man shall be trained up in some work or other , is to prevent pride and contention ; it is for the health of their bodies , it is a pleasure to the mind , to be free in labors one with another ; and it provides plenty of food and all necessaries for the commonwealth . 

Laws for storehouses . 

18.  In every town and city , shall be appointed storehouses for flax , wool , leather , cloth , and for all such commodities , as come from beyond seas , and these shall be called general storehouses , from whence every particular family May fetch such commodities as they want , either for their use in their house , or for to work in their trades ; or to carry into the country storehouses . 

19  Every particular house and shop in a town or city , shall be 〈◊〉 storehouse or shop , as now they be ; and these shops shall either be furnished by the particular labour of that family according to the trade that family is of , or by the labour of other lesser families of the same trade , as all shops in every town are now furnished . 

20.  The waiters in storehouses , shall deliver the goods under their charge , without receiving any money , as they shall receive in their goods without paying any money . 

21.  If any waiter in a storehouse neglect his office , upon a just complaint the overseers shall acquaint the judges court therewith , and from thence he shall receive his sentence to be discharged that house and office ; and to be appointed some other labouring work under the taskmaster ; and another shall have his place : for he who May live in freedom and will not , is to taste of servitude . 

Laws for overseers . 

22.  The only work of every overseer , is to see the laws executed ; for the law is the true magistracy of the land . 

23.  If any overseer , favour any in their idleness , and neglect the execution of the laws , he shall be reproved the first time by the judges court ; the second time cashiered his office , and shall never bear office more , but fall back into the rank of young persons and servants to be a worker . 

24.  New overseers , shall at their first entrance into their office , look back upon the actions of the old overseers of the last year , to see if they have been faithful in their places , and consented to no breach of law , whereby kingly bondage should any ways be brought in . 

25.  The overseers for trades , shall see every family to lend assistance to plant and reap the fruits of the earth ; to work in their trades , and to furnish the storehouses ; and to see that the waiters in storehouses be diligent to receive in , and deliver out any goods , without buying and selling , to any man whatsoever . 

26.  While any overseer is in the performance of his place , every one shall assist him , upon pain of open reproof ( Or cashiered if he be another officer ) or forfeiture of freedom , according to the nature of the business in hand , in which he refused his assistance . 

Laws against buying and selling . 

27.  If any man entice another to buy and sell , and he who is enticed doth not yield , but makes it known to the overseer ; the enticer shall lose his freedom for twelve months , & the overseer shall give words commendation of him that refused the enticement , before all the congregation , for his faithfulness to the commonwealth's peace . 

28.  If any do buy and sell the earth or fruits thereof , unless it be to , or with 〈◊〉 of another nation , according to the law of navigation , they shall be both put to death as traitors to the peace of the commonwealth ; because it brings in kingly bondage again : and is the occasion of all quarrels and oppressions . 

29.  He or she who calls the earth his , and not his brothers , shall be set upon a stool , with those words written in his forehead , before all the congregation ; and afterwards be made a servant for twelve months under the taskmaster : if he quarrel , or seek by secret persuasion , or open rising in arms , to set up such a kingly propriety , he shall be put to death . 

30.  The storehouses shall be every man's substance , and not any ones . 

31.  No man shall either give , hire , or take hire for his work ; for this brings in kingly bondage : if any freemen want help , there are young persons , or such as are common servants , to do it , by the overseers appointment : he that gives , and he that takes hire for work , shall both lose their freedom , and become servants for twelve months under the taskmaster . 

Laws for navigation . 

32.  Because other nations as yet own monarchy , and will buy and sell ; therefore it is convenient , for the peace of our commonwealth , that our ships do transport our English goods , and exchange for theirs , and conform to the customs of other nations in buying and selling : always provided , that what goods our ships carry out , they shall be the commonwealths goods ; and all their trading with other nations shall be upon the common stock , to enrich the storehouses . 

Laws for silver and gold . 

33.  As silver and gold is either found out in mines in our own land , or brought by shipping from beyond sea , it shall not be coined with a conqueror's stamp upon it , to set up buying and selling under his name , or by his leave ; for there shall be no other use of it in the commonwealth , then to make dishes and other necessaries for the ornament of houses , as now there is use made of brass , pewter , and iron , or any other metal in their use . 

But if in case other nations , whose commodities we want , will not exchange with us , unless we give them money , than pieces of silver and gold May be stamped with the commonwealths arms upon it , for the same use , and no otherwise . 

For where money bears all the sway , there is no regard of that golden rule , do as you would be done by : justice is bought and sold : nay , injustice is sometimes bought and sold for money : and it is the cause of all wars and oppressions . And certainly the righteous spirit of the whole creation did never enact such a law , that unless his weak and simple men did go from England to the East Indies , and fetch silver and gold to bring in their hands to their brethren , and give it them for their goodwill to let them plant the earth , and live and enjoy their livelihood therein . 

Laws to choose officers . 

34.  All overseers and state-officers shall be chosen new every year , to prevent the rise of ambition and covetousness ; for the nations have smarted sufficiently by suffering officers to continue long in an office , or to remain in an office by hereditary succession . 

35.  A man that is of a turbulent spirit , given to quarrelling , and provoking words to his neighbour , shall not be chosen any officer while he so continues . 

36.  All men from twenty years of age upwards shall have freedom of voyee to choose officers , unless they be such as lie under the sentence of the law . 

37.  Such shall be chosen officers , as are rational men of moderate conversation , and who have experience in the laws of the commonwealth . 

38.  All men from forty years of age upwards shall be capable to be chosen state officers , and none younger , unless any one by his industry and moderate conversation doth move the persons to choose him . 

39  If any man make suit to move the persons to choose him an officer , that man shall not be chose at all that time : if another man persuade the persons to choose him who makes suit for himself , they shall both lose their freedom at that time , viz , they shall neither have a voice to choose another , nor be chosen themselves . 

Laws against treachery . 

40.  He who professes the service of a righteous God by preaching and prayer , and makes a trade to get the possessions of the earth , shall be put to death for a witch and a cheater . 

41.  He who pretends one thing in words , and his actions declare his intent was another thing , shall never bear office in the commonwealth . 

What is freedom ? 

Every freeman shall have a freedom in the earth , to plant or build , to fetch from the storehouses any thing he wants , and shall enjoy the fruits of his labours without restraint from any ; he shall not pay rent to any landlord , and he shall be capable to be chosen any officer , so he be above forty years of age , and he shall have a voice to choose officers though he be under forty years of age : if he want any young men to be assistance to him in his trade or household employment , the overseers shall appoint him young men or maids to be his servants in his family . 

Laws for such as have lost their freedom . 

42.  All those who have lost their freedom , shall be clothed in white woollen cloth , that they May be distinguished from others . 

43.  They shall be under the government of a taskmaster , who shall appoint them to be porters or labourers , to do any work that any freeman wants to be done . 

44.  They shall do all kind of labour without exception , but their constant work shall be carriers or carters , to carry corn , or other provision , from storehouse to storehouse , from country to cities , and from thence to countries , &c.  

45.  If any of these refuse to do such work , the taskmaster shall see them whipped , and shall feed them with coarse diet : and what hardship is this ? For freemen work the easiest work , and these shall work the hardest work : and to what end is this , but to kill their pride and unreasonableness , that they May become useful men in the commonwealth ? 

46.  The wife or children of such as have lost their freedom , shall not be as slaves till they have lost their freedom , as their parents and husbands have done . 

47.  He who breaks any laws shall be the first time reproved in words in private or in public , as is showed before ; the next time whipped , the third time lose his freedom , either for a time or for ever , and not to be any officer . 

48.  He who hath lost his freedom shall be a common servant to any freeman , who comes to the taskmasters , and requires one to do any work for him ; always provided , that after one freeman hath by the consent of the taskmasters appointed him his work , another freeman shall not call him thence till that work be done . 

49.  If any of these offenders revile the laws by words , they shall be soundly whipped , and fed with coarse diet ; if they raise weapons against the laws , they shall die as traitors . 

Laws to restore slaves to freedom . 

50.  When any slaves give open testimony of their humility and diligence , and their care to observe the laws of the commonwealth , they are then capable to be restored to their freedom , when the time of servitude is expired , according to the judges sentence ; but if they remain opposite to the laws , they shall continue slaves still another term of time . 

51.  None shall be restored to freedom till they have been a twelve month labouring servants to the commonwealth , for they shall winter and summer in that condition . 

52.  When any is restored to freedom , the judge at the senator's court shall pronounce his freedom , and give liberty to him , to be clothed in what other coloured cloth he will . 

53.  If any persons be sick or wounded , the surgeons , who are trained up in the knowledge of herbs and minerals , and know how to apply plasters or physic , shall go when they are sent for to any who need their help , but require no reward , because the common stock is the public pay for every man's labour . 

54.  When a dead person is to be buried , the officers of the parish and neighbours shall go along with the corpse to the grave , and see it laid therein , in a civil manner ; but the public minister nor any other shall have any hand in reading or exhortation . 

55.  When a man hath learned his trade , and the time of his seven years' apprenticeship is expired , he shall have his freedom to become Master of a family , and the overseers shall appoint him such young persons to be his servants as they think fit , whether he marry , or live a single life . 

Laws for marriage . 

56.  Every man and woman shall have the free liberty to marry whom they love , if they can obtain the love and liking of that party whom they would marry , and neither birth nor portion shall hinder the match , for we are all of one blood , mankind ; and for portion , the common storehouses are every man and maids portion , as free to one as to another . 

57  If any man lie with a maid , and beget a child , he shall marry her . 

58.  If a man lie with a woman forcibly , and she cry out , and give no consent ; if this be proved by two witnesses , or the man's confession , he shall be put to death , and the woman let go free ; it is robbery of a woman bodily freedom . 

59  If any man by violence endeavour to take away another man's wife , the first time of such violent offer he shall be reproved before the congregation by the peacemaker , the second time he shall be made a servant under the taskmaster for twelve months ; and if he forcibly lie with another man's wife , and she cry out , as in the case when a maid is forced , the man shall be put to death . 

60.  When any man or woman are consented to live together in marriage , they shall acquaint all the overseers in their circuit therewith , and some other neighbours ; and being all met together , the man shall declare by his own mouth before them all , that he takes that woman to be his wife , and the woman shall say the same , and desire the overseers to be witnesses . 

61.  No Master of a family shall suffer more meat to be dressed at a dinner or supper , then what will be spent and eaten by his household , or company present , or within such a time after , before it be spoilt . If there be any spoil constantly made in a family of the food of man , the overseer shall reprove the Master for it privately ; if that abuse be continue in his family , through his neglect of family government , he shall be openly reproved by the peacemaker before all the persons , and ashamed for his folly ; the third time he shall be made a servant for twelve months under the taskmaster , that he May know what it is to get food , and another shall have the oversight of his house for the time . 

62.  No man shall be suffered to keep house , and have servants under him , till he hath served seven years under command to a Master himself ; the reason is , that a man May be of age , and of rational carriage , before he be a governor of a family , that the peace of the commonwealth May be preserved . 

Here is the righteous law , man , wilt thou it maintain ? 
It May be , is , as hath still , in the world been slain . 
Truth appears in light , falsehood rules in power ; 
To see these things to be , is cause of grief each hour . 
Knowledge , why didst thou come , to wound , and not to cure ? 
I sent not for thee , thou didst me inlure . 
Where knowledge does increase , there sorrows multiply , 
To see the great deceit which in the Worlddoth lie . 
Man saying one thing now , unsaying it anon , 
Breaking all 's engagements , when deeds for him are done . 
Oh power where art thou , that must mend things amiss ? 
Come change the heart of man , and make him truth to kiss : 
Oh death where art thou ? wilt thou not tidings send ? 
I fear thee not , thou art my loving friend . 
Come take this body , and scatter it in the four , 
That i May dwell in one , and rest in peace once more . 
The contents of the order and work of every commonwealth's officer . 

Chap. i.  that true commonwealths freedom lies in the free enjoyment of the earth . Pag , 17 , 18 , &c.  
the glory of Israel's commonwealth was this , they had no beggar among them . 21 , 22 
a short declaration to take off prejudice . 23. 24 

Chap. ii  what is government in general . 25 
what is kingly government , or monarchy . 26 , 27 , &c.  
what is commonwealths government . 29 , 30 , &c.  

Chap. iii  where began the first original of government in the earth among mankind . 32 
there be two roots from whence laws do spring . 33 
all officers in true magistracy of a commonwealth are to be chosen officers . 34 , 35 
all officers in a commonwealth are to be chosen every year . 36 
who are fit to choose , and who fit to be chosen officers in a commonwealth . 37 , 38 

Chap. iv.  what are the officers names in a free commonwealth . 39 , 40 
the work of a father or Master in a family . 40 
the work of a peacemaker . 40 , 41 
the work of an overseer to preserve peace . 41 , 42 
the work of an overseer for trades . 43 , 44 
the work of an overseer , to see particular tradesmen bring their works to shops and storehouses . Pag. 45.  
all ancient men above sixty years of age are general overseers . 46.  
what is the office of a soldier . 47.  
what is the office of a taskmaster . 47 , 48.  
what is the office of an executioner . 48.  
what is the work of a judg.  Ibid.  
what is the judges court , or county senate . 49 
what is the work of a parliament in general . 50 
the first work of a commonwealths parliament . 51 
the second work of a parliament . 52 
the third work of a parliament . 53 
the fourth work of a parliament . 54 
the work of a commonwealths ministry . 55 
the office of the postmaster . 63 
the rise of a commonwealths army . 64 
an army is twofold , viz. a ruling army . Ibid.  
secondly , a fighting army , and the use thereof . Ibid.  
how an army May be murderers and unlawful . 66 

Chap. v.  education of mankind to schools and trades . 68  
what trades should mankind be brought up in . 69.  
there shall be no buying and selling of the earth , nor of the fruits thereof . 71.  
how the earth is to be planted . 72.  
storehouses shall be built and appointed in all places , and be the common stock . 74.  

Chap. vi . the King's old laws cannot govern a free commonwealth . 76.  
what is law in general . 78.  
short and pithy laws are best to govern a commonwealth . 80.  
what are those particular laws whereby a commonwealth is governed in a right order . 81 , 82 , &c.  

These books following , written by Jerrard Winstanley , are to be sold by Giles Calvert at the black spread-eagle at the West end of Paul's . 

I. the breaking of the day of God , or prophecies fulfilled . 
Ii the mystery of God concerning the whole creation , mankind . 
Iii the saints paradise , set forth for the comfort of such as are under spiritual burning . 
Iv. truth lifting up its head above scandals . 
V. the new law of righteousness . 
Finis . 



































