 present engagement in defence of his country's liberties , &c.  

•ir , 

I think myself , and the gentlemen and others you know to be now engaged with me , have no hopes by new troubles to better our present condition ; with thankfulness we May say it , God hath made our lot larger than our desires in that kind ; and we suppose by that blessing , put an obligation upon us , as we are considerable members of our country , to have more sober and courageous thoughts in time of extremity than other men have : and though the indifference that lies upon other men's spirits Might flat ours , yet we tannot think , but if it were represented to them , how the present power doth oblige us to put out our right eyes , when they require us to acknowledge them as a parliament , and lay upon us such heavy and grievous burdens , and such deceitful ones , as a years tax in three months , besides the many other impositions of excise , &c.  and by raising among us a militia , they cut off our right hand , by subjecting us under the meanest and most fanatic spirits of the nation , under pretence of protection ; their spirits would be warmed into the same zeal and indignation that ours are kindled with . Now consider what it is we ask , and consider whether it be not the same thing we have asserted with our lives and fortunes ? a free parliament : and what a slavery it is to our understandings , that these men that now call themselves a parliament , should declare it an act of illegality and violence in the late aspiring general Cromwell , to dissolve their body in 1653. and not make it the like in the garbling the whole body of the parliament from 400 to 40 , in 1648.  What is this , but to act what they condemn in others ? Why do they associate themselves to the present army , or indeed to the present commanders in chief , and keep out their numerous and fellow-members , if committing violence on a parliament be so notorious a crime ? And how do they teach the soldiers boldly to do that , which themselves practise , and make them instruments of ? What is this , but under another shape to act the condemned acts of usurpation and tyranny in their old general ? What is this , but to necessitate men to complain ? and upon complaints , to be invaded by their power , so to raise ( If the English spirits be not dissolved into baseness and aptitude for slavery ) a civil war , and to endeavour to water their own root with the blood of many thousands of their countrymen ; or to gape after those confiscations , which by a victory , upon presumption of the unity of their army , they hope to gain over all those that dare with danger assert their liberties , ( Which presumption yet May fail them ; for the soldier hath , and May declare himself , no mercenary but an English freeman ; which indeed , thought it be now contrary to his actions , May return into his thoughts again : ) and what will be the issue of all this ? A mean and schismatical party must depress the nobility and understanding Commons ; the land must waste itself , and foreigners , or others , must take the advantage of all . I dare say , i profess for myself , and the greatest part with me , we have no aspect but this singly , that we be not possessed , as waste ground is , only by the title of occupancy , or that the next that gets into the saddle ride us . Let the nation freely choose their representatives , and they as freely sit without awe or force of soldiery ; and whatever in such an assembly is determined , shall be by us freely and cheerfully submitted unto . If this satisfy you , i am glad of it , for you are my noble friend . I use it not as an artifice either to engage you , or to make other counties follow our example . Which if they do not , let their posterity judge their action and ours : for we were born for our country ; and our country , our religion and laws are in danger , and we will not be unconcerned : but we are faithful and peaceful in the land , and if they in authority will decline hostility , and agree of a means to admit the old members of both houses , or to call a new free parliament , let him be ( And he only is truly ) a traitor , that resolves not his judgement and obedience into their determinations . I am 

( Sir ) Chester aug. 2. 1659.  Your humble servant George Booth . 








