The antipodes , or reformation with the heels upward . Being a compendious narrative or discovery , of the great hypocrisy of of our pretending reformers , the treacherous enslaving practices of a traitorous party in the house of Commons , contrary to their solemn protestations , frequent declarations , declared duties , and the known laws of the land , etc , whereby both the commonalty and soldiery May plainly discover , that what was formerly by them adjudged tyranny and oppression in others ; is now practised and maintained to be justice and equity in themselves ; and that notwithstanding they pretended liberty , they intended slavery , both to the King , his posterity , and persons . 

Isaiah 59.7 , 8.  

Their feet run to evil , and they make haste to shed innocent blood : their thought are thoughts of iniquity ; wasting and destruction is in their paths . The way of peace they know not , and there is no judgement in their goings : they have made them crooked paths , whosoever goeth therein , shall not know peace . 



Oxford printed and published for the information of the oppressed Commons of England . 1647.  

The antipodes , or reformation with the heels upward . 

It cannot be forgotten , that at the first coming together of this parliament , there were many burdens , and multitudes of oppressions and injustices done by persons in trust and authority ; to the great dishonour of the King , and damage of the kingdom ; all which were in the parliaments remonstrance largely explained , and laid down in divers heads or branches , viz.  1.  That projects and monopolies were granted , and a general burden brought upon the kingdom , for the enriching of particular persons . 
2.  That persons were protected from due process at law , by the power of great ones , the guilty acquitted , and innocent condemned . 
3.  That the law was not the security , but the ruin of the persons 
4.  That illegal and unnecessary taxes , as ship-money , and others , ( Contrary to law and the subject's liberty ) were imposed . 
5.  That several free men were illegally disenfranchised of their liberties , and imprisoned , without any indictment , or testimony of fact committed . 
6.  That many others were stigmatised , fined , and banished , for endeavouring the maintenance of the laws and liberties of the kingdom . 
7.  That many were forced to swear to answer to interrogatories against themselves , &c.  


These and many other great grievous oppressions lay upon the poor persons of England , until such time as this parliament ( In the infancy and innocency thereof ) did both declare against them , and endeavour to bring the authors to condign punishment , for the performance whereof they entered into a solemn covenant , wherein they engaged the whole kingdom with them . 

In pursuance of which engagement , the Lords and Commons by several declarations and ordinances improved their interest in the persons often declaring unto them the urgent necessity of assisting them ; and often calling the great God of heaven and earth to witness that what they then aimed at was only the removing the King from his evil counsellors , and bringing delinquents to trial , & securing the peace and liberty of the subject ; and that if after all their reproaches from their enemies , and slightfull discouragements from friends , they could but obtain the desired end before mentioned , they should rejoice in their sufferings , and think that to be a sufficient reward of all their labours . 

And further , that they Might the better work upon the affection of the persons , they in a declaration jan. 30. 1643. declared as followeth . We place not our confidence in our own strength , but in God almighty , the Lord of hosis , who will not leave nor forsake his persons : it is his own truth and cause we maintain the exaltation of the kingdom of his son , and the preservation of his church , and of this whole island from utter ruin , is our aim , and the end we have before our eyes . 

Upon these and the like grounds , we resolve with courage and constancy unto the end to do our parts ; and the Lord who hath •i•red up out spirits , displayed his banner , and given the alarm , do that which seemeth him good . 

And this declaration we make not from any presumption in the strength of our armies ; but from the sense of that duty which is required , and expected from the high places and relations wherein we stand , &c.  Having after long and grave consultations resolved and decreed , never to lay down arms , till truth and peace by the blessing of God be settled in this kingdom upon a firm foundation , for the present and future generations ▪ which shall be esteemed of us a sufficient , yea abundant reward of all that we can do or suffer in this cause . 

Oh that too many members of the houses of parliament had not forgot themselves ! Or that they would remember , that the all-seeing God , ( Who knew their hearts , and hates hypocrisy ) will surely require the due performance of their solemn engagements at their hands ; and that they cannot now expect the continuance of his blessing upon them , since they have neglected to pay their vows unto God ▪ perform their declared duty to the kingdom , whereunto they engaged themselves , and called him as a witness , as if their iniquity were not sufficient , unless proclaimed in the face of Jehovah . Hear oh heavens , and tremble oh earth ; oh England stand amazed ! many of your trustees have conceived wickedness , they promised liberty , but behold slavery ; they pretended justice , but behold oppression ; they pretended reformation , but behold deformation ; they pleaded law , but have lost conscience ; they pretended purity , but behold hypocrisy ; justice is turned backward , treason is countenanced , and truth discouraged , your oppressors honoured , your friends despised ; your seeming safety , is become your certain sickness , and what will you do in the end thereof ? Believe it countrymen and fellow soldiers , our condition is much worse than at the beginning , for than we knew our sickness , and remedy , but now such are our distempers , that we May more easily know them then cure them ▪ 't is their privilege is our bondage , their power our pestilence , their rights our poverty , their wills our law , their smiles our safety their frowns our ruin ; and though by the free Commons chosen servants , yet by their usurpations become Masters , neigh Kings ; commanding both King and persons without control ; because they cannot make a law they 'll keep none . 

Consider all your former sufferings , being compared ye will find that these Egyptian taskmasters do much exceed in cruelty ; remember the vast expense of blood and treasure you have laid out for them to keep them quiet , see the improvement of it , see what oppressions they have eased you off , neigh rather have not doubled : 

1.  If all projectors be proclaimed enemies , what makes Sir Henry Vane senior in the house of Commons ? 

2.  If it be a crime destructive to the law and liberty of the persons for persons to be examined from the due course of law and justice , as the parliament have often declared , against the King , how comes it to pass that Manchester , Clotworthy , Waller , Hollis , and Barwis , and many other accused of treason and other misdemeanours against the state , are protected by virtue of a never before heard of privilege , and their accusers imprisoned , to the ruin of themselves and families ; oh England , England , what will become of thee , when thy fellow subjects exercise sovereignty , and thou like a silly sheep delights to have it so ? 

3.  If the working the law like a nose of wax , and making it speak what the designed would have it , be a practice destructive to the law and liberty of the persons what are ▪ and have been the votes orders , and practices of their committees , who derive a power from the parliament , & they from the law , for all their extraiudiciall practices and illegal proceedings in the examinations censures and sentences passed upon their fellow commoners , answering all pleas with their power ; and silencing all disputes , with this one affirmative , we that are the makers of a law , are best able to judge of the sense and and meaning of the law ; and so if they say stealing is but borrowing , drunkenness is but good fellowship , whoring a trick of youth : treason or breach of trust , but a mistake , or misunderstanding ; we are bound to believe it because they say so ; let ignorance be the mother of devotion , and then oh brave laws , a brave parliament ; such as is the tree , such will be the fruit , and then farewell to liberty , and welcome slavery : stoop , stoop poor England to the yoke of subjection ; be a servant to thy servant , and let it be reported in future ages , that thou brokest the bonds of thy sovereign , and became a slave to thy equals . 

4.  If the imposing illegal taxes in the parliament sense , be destructive to the law and liberty of the persons , pray how comes it to pass that so many ordinances for tithes of all other , that Anti-christian and soul murdering edict , with many other subject devouring votes ; hath within these few years passed for currant coin and good law amongst us . 

4.  If it be a destructive practice to imprison free men without indictment or testimony of fact , committed by three witnesses , which the law of the kingdom requires . How comes it to pass that so many faithful servants of God and the kingdom , have been so long imprisoned , some a year , some two , some more ; merely for discharge of their duties to God and the kingdom ; in discovering the treasons and deceitful practices of such as endeavoured the kingdom's ruin ; what makes Lilburne , Overton , Musgrave , Booth , and many more in the tower , fleet , Newgate , gatehouse , White-lyon , every prison having some sufferers for the kingdom's cause in it , who are high unto famishing ; oh England England , if thou suffer thyself thus to be enslaved by thy servants , thou wilt prove a bye-word to all nations , and not deserve the pity of any : rouse up thyself , and rush upon thy adversaries ; let them know that though thou hast been long patient , yet thou both darest and knowest how to call them to account for all their actions , let them know that thou art sensible of those vast sums or thy treasure they have received , and shared amongst them , and make them fear and tremble ; look back upon their declarations , have they not covenanted , and caused you to covenant , and lift up your hands to the most high God , to preserve the privileges of the parliament , and the liberties of the persons ? ( Not by their privileges to destroy your liberties ) to preserve and defend the King in his person and authority , and not to usurp his power , and imprison his person , to discover and discountenance evil doers , not to protect and defend them , to bring them to alegall trial as malefactors , not to empower them as judges of their accusers ; have they not declared that this was the ground of their undertaking , and that the reformation of the church , and preservation of the law , ( Viz , ) mercy and truth , justice and judgement , was the only thing they aimed at ; having resolved never to lay down arms till this was effected , with many heavy imprecations , desiring the Lord no longer to continue his blessing upon them , than they designed his glory and the good of this poor kingdom ; now countrymen and fellow soldiers see whether the Lord hath not justly weighed them in his balance ; see if he hath not met with them in their secret iniquity ; they trusted in their wisdom , and it turned to foolishness ; they boasted in their strength and confederacy ; but the horses of Egypt are flesh and not spirit ; their confidence shall prove a snare , and the pit they digged for others they will fall into themselves ; they have ceased to do what was pleasing to the Lord ; they sought themselves and forgot the holy one of Israel . 

In the time of their necessity they promised fair , but having obtained their ends as they vainly imagine the case is altered : see the forementioned declaration . 

Although every man is to hope for the principal reward of his service from God , who rewards every one according to his works , yet we find ourselves bound in conscience and equity to declare , that besides those who have the public faith engaged to them for their security , such as since the beginning have done valiantly , and dealt faithfully in the cause , and such as have chosen rather to suffer the spoiling of their goods , then to assist the enemy , or to take arms against their religion and country , and shall continue constant in the same cause of doing or suffering unto the end , shall be according to their merits taken into public notice and consideration , their losses so far as May be repaired , and themselves honoured and rewarded by such means and ways as we trust God in his providence shall afford , so that no man that hath been eminent in action , or hath suffered any notable loss for the public , shall be neglected or slighted , but one way or other shall be thankfully remembered to his own honour , and the good of his posterity . 

Here is a plentiful seed time , but a slender harvest ; large promises but few performances ; they confess themselves bound in conscience and equity to promise ; but not to perform ; fellow soldiers this belongs particularly to you , that you have been both faithful and valiant , if they should say the contrary , the kingdom , your enemies , nay their own consciences would give them the lie ; but where 's your reward ? They are not at leisure yet , they will when you are disbanded , they cannot do it altogether ; no , one after another , as fast as they can get power ; you shall have it May be clean straw and a stone-wall , a stigmatised name of rogue , Anabaptist , Brownist , &c. alack alack , they have been so liberal to their fellow members ( Who lost i confess great losses ) some towns through treachery , others cities through covardice , others stole one day , and was robbed the next ▪ 't is fit they should have thousands for their faithful service , and 't is pity such Masters should have better servants , but as for you , alas alas , you are sectaries , schismatickes , you made too much haste , you bring the King to soon , to call them to account , they must reign a little longer , and rather than they will want work , they 'll begin with you , what care they what the King , kingdom , or persons suffer , provided they be secured ; therefore gentlemen and fellow soldiers , now while you have power improve it , remember the end of your taking up arms was to defend the King's majesty , and to bring offenders to trial , let them be of which side they will , without limitation , and accordingly let them know that you expect and will have every member whether of the Lords or Commons , who stands charged with any crime , to be delivered up to the ttyell of the law to be acpuitted or condemned ; and that his majesty be invested in his just power , and that the great taxes and burdens be removed , the soldiers of all armies , that be or hath been under command of this present parliament , in point of arrears be satisfied , a general act of oblivion passed for both parties , so far as law and justice will allow ; mitigated it being a most unmerciful act for the father's crime to ruin whole families . That there be an account given of all monies received upon the several ordinances of parliament , and of the disposal thereof ; that the public debts be paid by a general tax , equally laid upon all sorts and degrees of persons according to their estate , ( If there be not enough found in bank in the lands of parliament men , committee men and the like . ) 

That the militia be put into faithful hands ; and not continue in the disposal of your and the kingdoms enemies — 

That corruptions in courts of justice be examined , reform , and reduced to the premitive institution . 

That the illegal and extraiudiciall fees of judges , lawyers , and jailers May be regulated . 

That a declaration be published to the kingdom with speed by all the faithful knights and burgesses in the house of Commons , against the illegal proceedings of that traitorous party , and that they protest against them ; to the end the kingdom May be informed who are their enemies , lest the good and bad ( Being unknown ) perish together . 

That the just privileges of the parliament May be by declaration made manifest to the kingdom , and the kingdom not enslaved by an unknown and unlimited privilege . 

That the house of Commons be hence forward , not like a close committee , but a free court of judicature , always open to receive the petitions of the respective counties and corporations , by whom they are trusted , and to execute justice and judgement without delay or partiality ; and that it be also declared ( As formerly ) to be the liberty of the persons to petition ; and the duty of parliaments to receive and relieve them . 

That every member of that house , against whom any charge hath been or shall be brought , be forthwith suspended the house , and secured , as hath been the practice of former parliaments , and not protected and abetted . 

That all ways that hath been used by any member of parliament , or any other agents for them , either in Scotland or elsewhere for the raising of forces against the army , be speedily declared against by both houses , and the kingdom enabled by their militia to oppose all such forces , whether from abroad or at home . 

That sufficient care be taken for the liberty and protection of those which cannot submit unto the external worship of the nation ; though otherwise conformable to the civil power and authority thereof . 

This is that which must be the foundation of your peace if it be lasting , and if you disband before this be obtained , you May say farewell , liberty , peace , and all that outward comfort which you May justly challenge as your birthright , both by the law of God , and fundamental institution of this kingdom . 

And you poor Commons of England , unless you seriously and suddenly lay your condition to heart , and as one man rise up for the vindicating of yourselves against those which have abused and daily endeavour to enslave you , and if you do not now take this opportunity injoining with and assisting of this army , who hath been faithful in delivering you from one enemy , and have now again undertaken to stand in the gap , and to be your protectors and restorers , i say if you shall now dissent them , know assuredly , that you do hammer out a yoke for your own necks , which will pierce the lives , liberties , and estates , of yourselves and posterities , and when your sufferings bring you sorrow , you May not happily find deliverers . 

You see they confess , in case the body representative deceive their trust , the body politic hath power to preserve itself , book decl. pag. 207.  Here is warrant sufficient , up therefore and be doing , and the Lord who is wisdom and strength make you both wise and valiant . Farewell . 

This is the counsel of him that will not only prescribe , but endeavour the obtaining the same with the hazard of his life and fortunes . I. h.  

Finis . 











