England's outcry , for the sad distractions now lying upon the church and state . Wherein she humbly implores mercy from God , pity from her sovereign , and justice on her enemies . Laying down , both the primary , and secondary causes , of her fresh bleeding calamities . 

so that judicious , simple , all May see , 
the first promoter of this misery . 
Read diligently , consider carefully , and make what thou hast read , a case of conscience . Written by j. Harris . 

This is licenced , and entered , according to order 

London , printed by t. Forcet , July 24. 1644.  

England's outcry : for the distracted divisions of church and state . 

't is a sad sign , when mercy proves the forerunner of misery , when temporal enjoyments for a minute , ushers on an age of scarlet calamities ; when gentle entreaties work not the desired effect , than smarting corrections must enforce by power what love could not bring to pass by courtesy . Such is the case of England , po••e , miserable , distracted , almost destroyed England . i who was termed the virgin island , the Southern Arcadia , the land flowing with milk and honey , where plenty of all good , and delightful pleasure had its residence , where peace brought honour to the Prince , and riches to the persons , where the sovereign's sole delight and study was to preserve the subject , and the subjects care ( Guided by conscience ) to observe the just commands of the sovereign , where the Prince hated tyranny the preachers popery , and the subject feared no slavery , but every degree lived in the fear of God , in the favour of the Prince , enjoying the fruits of their own vine . Ay , even i , am now become as a widow mourning for the loss of her espoused love : instead of singing joyful anthems . I am enforced to take up a great lamentation , and cry out with the prophet , oh that my head were waters , and my eyes a fountain of tears , that i Might weep day and night 〈◊〉 the slain of the daughters of my persons . but alas poor England , what will 〈◊〉 veil thee to lament , now when the acceptable time is past , how happy hadst thou been hadst thou known in this thy day what had belonged to thy peace , but the day is gone , the night is come and darkness covers the face of the whole earth , mercies could not prevail , threatening must subdue , threatenings could not subdue , judgments must destroy , plagues could not forwarn us ( Though brought upon us year after year ) therefore the sword must now destroy us . In this great strait , to whom shall poor England complain , if to God , he cannot but appear a just avenger , a displeased judge , an incensed father , for the slaughter of his beloved son , whom England hath cruelly crucified it May be justly expected that in stead of finding favors a storm of fiery indignation will be showered upon me . If i complain to neighbour nations , in stead of redress , i shall find derision , rejociing at my misery , glorying in my downfall , i that was the height of their envy and admiration , am now become the subject of their wish , a desolation , if i complain to my own , none will hear me , i have often ( With prayers and tears ) said oh King ! Hear me , and have mercy on me , but alas , flatterers stood so thick between him and me , that all i said was to no purpose , when i came with a petition for peace , he was so busy with a council of war , that my labour was lost , and in all my religious endeavours , to prevent this lasting misery , i found so many crosses , that being altogether disheartened , i sat me down to consider what the cause Might be , that so many Papists were turned Protestant's , so many courtiers turned soldiers so many prelates made peers , so many Ladies made councillors , so many knaves put in authority and the sequel of all i have found to be , that England having abounded in sin of all kinds abused mercies , slighted threatenings ; surfeited with manna , was grown sick of a pleurisy and these were appointed ( By a divine decree ) to be the horseleeches that should suck away the corrupted and putrified blood , bred from the evil court humours and thence diffused through the body of the whole kingdom• and in this they very well agree for they have showed them•••ves insatiate bloodsuckers not satisfied till by their abounding ••ey have burst themselves , and almost ruined what they were •rdained to preserve , the cure proving much more desperate ••en the disease , so much by the way , sin i found to be the pri•ary and chief ground of my sufferings , to look back only to ••e days of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory , had england••en been humbled for the bloodshed in the Antichristian per••cution of Queen Mary , ( Whose memory bringeth timely ••rrow to my heart ) the enemy had never obtained such an ad•antage and encouragement as he had to work and plot so ma•• ways and stratagems to destroy our then ( Faiths defendor ) ••th the Protestant profession ; for sin gives the devil an advantage and when a man lies open unguarded , 't is a happy advan•age for an enemy to take to kill him , penitent sorrow prevents ••nne ; had England made a progression in a religious re•ormation in the days of King James , and not sat down in a wilderness , as being content to be only freed from that •gyptian slavery , not regarding to make a further progress into the land of Canaan Rome had not found such an opportunity to corrupt our clergy and to bring us back again to make bricks to , subject ourselves to Peter's chair ▪ and to endeavour the advancement of the Antichristian kingdom , Rome's antagonist ( Prince Henry ) had not been destroyed ▪ nor so many famous and deserving peers had their lives shortened but only to make way for the advancement of Rome's empire and the destruction of poor England , to what end was so many parliaments dissolved , and parliaments so long discontinued , but to subvert religion and destroy the law : to what end was the Spanish faction so much favoured but to show that they had declared themselves ready to protect England , ( With a Spanish fleet , a powder conspiracy an •rish rebellion , an English invasion ) to the total destruction of its religion and liberty , can any man be so sottish as not to see the Bishops , de•nes and doctors going in procession to Rome ▪ just when they began to persecute purita••• with one •••d , and entertain •esuitss , friars  plucking them to high 〈◊〉 with both •and ▪ can it seem reasonable that a Papist should love a Protestant or Spain love England , where there is no antipathy , but in principles of policy : can it be a matter reasonable to think that they that now declare themselves ( The law's defenders , ) against the kingdom , will maintain them for the King , could he be won to put them in execution against them , or May it not appear as great a principle in the Papists of Spain and France to endeavour the promotion of their Antichristian cause , against England , as it is in England to maintain ours against them , certainly it cannot be denied , yet such is England's misery , her offspring prove abortives and viperlike , endeavour to eat up their native mother's bowels : they endeavour to destroy what nature enjoins them to preserve , this division hath sin brought upon me , father against son , son against father : what the sword leaves ; the fire destroys , blood touches blood , and fear and anguish upon every soul . the anger of the Lord hath divided us . what earthly power hath ability to join what God hath divided , we have seen many experiences . How long hath the sole endeavours of the high court of parliament been employed to settle these different distractions and to promote the peace of England , and what hath hindered ( Sin ) that hath divided God and England , and God he hath divided England , in itself , and assuredly know till England make a division between sin and it , there will never cease to be a division in it , oh then for England's sake ! speedily set about this work , if there must be a division let it be between sin and us . Hear oh King and give ear to England's petition , let not flattery pervert judgement , but let law and justice support the crown . Hear oh Queen England's petition , let not idolatry lead you captive but embrace the truth , so shall your soul live . Hear oh nobles England's petition , let not ambition enthrall virtue , but really endeavour the advancement of God's glory , with the good of the King and kingdom . Hear oh clergy England's petition . unto you is given to be known the mysteries of the kingdom of God . oh then endeavour to use convincing and converting arguments , arm yourselves with the power of the Lord and in a religious warfare endeavour the pulling down of Babel and the setting up the throne of Christ . hear oh persons and give care to England's petition , how long shall wisdom cry in the streets and be rejected : how long will you continue in your sins and wage ▪ Warrè against the great God of heaven and earth , oh repent repent and turn from your wicked ways , why will ye die oh ye church of England . be persuaded to hate swearing profaneness , Sabath breaking , gospel contemning , mercy abusing , judgement slighting : heart hardening , self securing think not that you shall fare better than your brethren in Ireland and England that hath been devoured by the sword for know of a truth except you repent you shall all likewise perish leave judging others and judge yourselves , leave justifying yourselves and justify others . Oh King , Queen , Prince peers , preachers , and persons . Hear England's petition , be persuaded to set upon this work with speed , now while 't is called to day , for who knows what a day May bring forth , who knows whether the Lord May hear us and have mercy on us , and heal our iniquities , and give a close to our differences , uniting in a bond of peace the heart of the King , parliament and persons , and make England once more a garden of pleasure , which now appears a terrene Golgotha , a bloody field of slaughter . 

The first answer to England's petition . 

Poor England know 't is my desire , 
That peace should expiate this fire , 
But 't is in vain , for England's doom : 
Is hither sent from fatal Rome . 
I with poor England's foes do jar , 
I seek for peace , but meet with war . 
Then seek to God , to him complain : 
't is he must bring thy peace again . 
England . 

Oh poor distressed England ! who shall bring 
Relief unto thee , since thou now dost stand , 
without all hope of comfort from thy King , 
Being made a prey unto another land : 
Whose papal monarch tyranny so boasts , 
As to wage war against the Lord of hosts . 
And if 'gainst heaven he dares to advance his sword ▪ 
What shall poor England do ? Help , help , oh Lord . 
The second answer to England's petition . 

England rebellious , know it is my will , 
To force obedience , make thee bow thy knee , 
In true subjection to Rome's empery . 
't is not your zealous errors , which you still , 
Maintain against our sacred profession , 
Shall get your peace out of our sweet possession : 
But of our fury you shall drink your fill . 
Nor will we cease , till we through blood and fire 
Obtain Rom's peace , the thing we most desire . 
England . 

Hark England's sons and daughters ? Quickly hear ▪ 
Your three years sufferings past , produce new fear . 
Destruction's threatened by a fatal power , 
Joined with a will , which will not fail to shower , 
Her vengeance on you , room will you annoy ▪ 
And by her power , both you and me destroy . 
Join then with England's friends , and help to save , 
The fame of England from a loathed grave . 
Assist her worthies , let not Rome encroach , 
Loose not your lives to purchase a reproach 
Upon your names , and what will be much worse , 
Even from your children's children fetch a curse . 
Let not effeminate smiles enforce you bring 
To pass the ruin of your royal King . 
Least when the work is done , ( Too late ) you prove , 
Newcastl's guerdon , must reward your love . 
Be wise , be valiant , now 's the time of hope , 
To save the King and kingdom , from the Pope ▪ 
Published according to order . 

Finis . 







































