An antidote for the Newcastle priests , to expel their poison of envy , which they vented in a letter to the l. general Cromwell : and in their articles which they exhibited against capt. Everard . 

With an answer to their scandalous exclamations , to their shame : the clearing of himself , and satisfaction of his friends . 

Read me all , or censure not at all : for , by the law none ought to be condemned before they are heard . 

by Robert Everard . 

Printed for the author , and are to be sold by w. l. at the Black-moore near Fleet-bridge . 1652.  

To the impartial reader . 

Reader , 

The ensuing discourse is intended as a check to a malicious and unquiet spirit , savouring of perfection ; which hath ever been incident to a sort of persons , who assume to themselves the honourable title of the ministers of the gospel ( Though very improperly appropriated to them ) whose constant practice throughout all ages and nations , hath a tendancy to advance their own power and domination , though in the destruction , blood , and ruin of whole kingdoms and commonwealths . Whatever opposeth them in the design of their own glory , must be accursed with anathema Maranatha . the forementioned evil spirit , hath ( Upon what account , or for what cause i know not , excepting difference of judgement in matters of religion ) according to its accustomed manner , virulently calumniated the author in his name and reputation ; having so far prevailed upon the minds of seven gentlemen in and about Newcastle , ( Who pretend to be ministers of Jesus Christ ) as to engage them in the promotion and prosecution of that unworthy design and undertaking , complained of , and detected in the subsequent treatise . But how disproportionable such proceedings are to the meekness , love , and tenderness of our saviour ; as also to that universal rule of the gospel , do unto all men as you would they should do unto you : and how unlike to the gracious and prudent carriage of the faithful followers of the Lord Jesus , let all sober minded men judge . 

It is the saying of the holy ghost , oppression makes a wise man mad : and i observe some men are so mad to oppress and persecute the saints and persons of God ; that ( Like Paul before conversion , acts 26. 11. they think as himself confesseth v.  9 ) they May do things contrary to the way of Jesus Christ . But for my part , i take it as my duty ( In order to the command of my God ) to plead the cause of the oppressed , and vindicate the innocent . 

Therefore being sensible how much the traduced author captain Everard hath been impaired in reputation , i could do no less in point of common justice , then manifest my knowledge of him , whose faithful and constant service to the commonwealth , and sufferings for the things of Christ for some years past his integrity of life and sobriety in declaring his judgement during the time of his abode at Newcastle , of which experience hath informed me , was sufficient to have exempted him from the scandal of the pens and tongues of his enemies . And although the author suffereth in his reputation , by the misapprehension of divers , who take him to be that Everard that is reported to be deeply affected with the ranting principle ; yet all that are acquainted with his person , judgement , and practise , know him to dissent as much , and to be as great a discountenancer of that way and opinion , which the other Everard professeth and practiseth as any , of those who asperse him in writings , or otherwise . 

As touching myself , though i am wrongfully blamed for countenancing captain Everard in that which i apprehend to be just ; yet i am the less careful in my own vindication , considering i am responsible for my actions to their superiors , in whose eyes i hope i shall app•ar more innocent than my accusers . 

As to the ensuing treatise , i shall say no more , but desire thee ( Good reader ) duly to weigh the charge , seriously consider the answer and measure both by the rule of Christian charity , and judge of the equity of the case betwixt the accusers and the accused . If thou perceivest in the answer any thing capable of thy exception , deal with the author as thyself wouldst be dealt withal in the like case . 

My soul desireth to see an end of these un-christ and un-saint-like carriages among the persons that profess to own the son of God . I hope the time is near at hand , wherein the Lord whom we serve , will give us one heart , one mind , and one lip in the things that concern his glory and kingdom , and the mutual good and prosperity of all his saints , which shall be the incessant prayer of him that is the author's friend and thine in all Christian service , 

L. col. John Mason . 

The author to the reader . 

Seeing my good name burning in the furnace of envy , and the flames mounting so high , that they scorched the reputation of my dearest friends , things being whispered in the ears of those that had not the right understanding of them , which occasioned many to have hard thoughts of me . And for preventing of its proceeding , the providence of almighty God so ordered it , that i came to the view of the incendiaries information made to the Lord general ( And other gentlemen having copies from Newcastle ) put me into a capacity to make known to the world that i am not ashamed to let the world know the truth ; for which purpose i have printed their copies ; so that any well-affected persons May impartially judge by my answer , which ( I hope ) will prevent their race of fury , and evil conspiracies from taking place or centring in their desired haven , which is in the esteem of the auditors , and so by that means many May be undeceived whom they have captivated by many untruths , which they have forged and dispersed ; and in this my reply , i desire that truth ( Which shall be the judge of the secrets of all men's hearts ) May take place , that God May be glorified , and the spirit of malice revealed , to the open shame of all self-interessed persons . And though i was no member of the army at the time of their charging me , yet they trouble the Lord general with matters of opinions or differing judgement ; and if his excellency should be troubled with all such cases , how uncomfortable ( After his long and faithful labours ) would his life be , let wise men judge . There are two doctrines that i delivered , which they cried out against as dangerous errors ( viz. ) the freeing of nature from aspersions generally charged on it , and denying infants baptism , which they have omitted ; why May not i think that they are convinced or ashamed that ever they opposed me therein ? and that they May be so , is and shall be the desires of him , who desires the peace and welfare of the commonwealth of Israel , and of this nation . 

R. e.  

To his excellency the Lord general Cromwell 

May it please your excellency , 

There is not one thing our blessed saviour and his holy apostles in their sacred writings do so severely rebuke , and straitly premonish us of , as corrupt teachers ; calling them , sowers of tares , false prophets , deceivers , seducing spirits , men of corrupt minds , vain talkers , serpents , generations of vipers , lying spirits , ravening wolves ; and their corrupt doctrine they call leaven , fables , profane babblings , strong delusions , lies , bewitching gangrenes , cankers , damnable heresies , and doctrines of devils ; neither do they speak any better of the effects of such doctrine ; terming it ( No less than ) subversion of the faith , soul shipwreck , swift damnation . 

Yet notwithstanding , we sadly see these soul deceivers , openly , and with great height of spirit , more freely now •hen ever venting themselves without any restraint , which makes us more pathetical : one Robert Everard , a captain lately reduced since Worcester fight , crept into newcastlle amongst our flocks , endeavouring by all means and ways , in public and in private , to seduce them as well as the garrison by his perilous errors ; a catalogue of whose opinions and carriages are here enclosed . And though the man himself be active enough to delude poor ignorant souls , yet being set on , born up , and encouraged by lieut.  Col. Mason ( Who commands this garrison in chief , now in col. Fairfax absence ) and by capt. Pym , is more enabled to act be part by authority ; the town's persons are induced , and the soldiers warned by beat of drum , frequently to attend his delusions . Corrupt doctrine ( My Lord ) is of a leavening nature , that takes sooner , runs faster , and proceeds further than the truth can do ( One drachm of deadly poison , kills more than all the best medicines can cure ) especially such errors as this man vents , that are so pleasing to the flesh . Truly ( My Lord ) the deep sense hereof , makes our hearts to bleed , to see the precious scriptures so abused , fundamentals destroyed , and our poor people's souls , whom we have long laboured to principle in the truth , so much endangered : we humbly conceive , that as popery was heretofore , so Arminianism and Socinianism now , doubtless are like to be the plagues of this poor nation ; even that cursed doctrine , that so much pulls down God , and sets up man , comes upon us like a flood . 

Wherefore ( Most noble Sir ▪ ) our humble desires are to your godly wisdom , that as God hath made your excellency a most happy conqueror of our enemies , and deliverer of three nations from tyranny and slavery ; for which our souls shall daily bless him : so our most humble suits are to God and your excellency , that you May be a destroyer of our errors , a restorer of truth , and a restrainer ( Not only of this corrupter , but ) of all such like false teachers , crept into the army to deceive the poor soldiery ▪ and poison the country , and if God shall enlarge your excellency to endeavour further , eve• to improve your interest in that honourable and high court , to prevent further mischief in this kind ; your excellency shall act one of the most glorious works for Christ , that ever yet you have done ; which will add much to your account in the day of Christ . Let the uprightness of our hearts , and the love of truth ( Most honoured Sir ) plead our excuse for this our great boldness : the Lord hath set your excellency on high , and yet higher in the hearts of the saints ; who knows but for such a thing as this ? So shall our souls , and all god's persons with us , still bless God for you , and bind us ever to remain 

Newcastle , March the 8th , 1651.  My Lord , your excellency's most humble servants and orators at the throne of grace , Rob. Jenison . 
Thom. Weld . 
Thom. Wolfall ▪ 
Sam. Hamond . 
Rich. Prideaux . 
Cuth . Sydenham . 
Will. Durant . 


Articles exhibited against captain Robert Everard . 

1.  He maintains and divulges many gross and destructive opinions , as the page following shows ; which are the constant , and ( In a manner ) the only matter of his preaching ; the manner thereof being in a jeering and flouting way . 

2.  He glorieth that he hath gathered many churches ( As he calls them ) of his own opinion up and down the land ; which if his eyes were opened , would be his sorrow and shame . 

3.  He is a notorious vain boaster , frequently and boldly biding defiance to all the priests ( As he calls them ) in England to dispute with him , when ( Sorry man ) he wants skill to frame an argument : he brags he will dispute in Latin , Greek , and Hebrew ; and yet when he was put upon it , he could not read one word in Greek or Hebrew . 

4.  it 's his frequent practice both in public and private , to scorn and cast an odium upon all the ministers ; calling them priests , deluders of the persons , false priests , saying ( When he was advised to more sobriety ) he will preach against them as false priests ; and this he speaks against all the ministers in England without the least exception ; and for all the ministers in Newcastle he saith in the pulpit , they are •ool toys , and that when they will not dispute with him themselves , they send their dogs to bark at him : he told also m. Durant to his face divers times , that he lied , and was a false priest . 

By which scurrilous and uncivil dealings of his , some of his followers have learned to be so audacious , that one of them called doctor Jenison a minister of the devil : another sent this message to m. wells , go tell him that i say he is a devil , and that the ministers of Newcastle are a company of silly ignorant fellows , not able to answer any question , good for nothing but to baptise babes , and teach men to sing Hopkins jigs , and that they preach only for lucre , and will turn any way , and preach the devil for money . 

5.  He so interrupted m. Sydenham betwixt the administrations of the ordinances , that it occasioned a tumult in the congregation ; at which time he so stank of drink , that many suspected he had taken too much . 

6.  After he had preached sundry times in the hearing of many hundred against any original sin in man , yet after Master Hamond in Everard's own hearing had preached the contrary doctrine , and vindicated those scriptures abused by him , he came to m. Hamond ( And to amazement to see such impudence ) said , that he had never preached against original sin , and that they abused him that told him so , but that he was just of his judgement in that point , and would preach the same things that very afternoon that he had in the forenoon ; and yet after this , went and preached against what m. Hamond had done , and since that also , in public disputes maintains the contrary : so that by these and such other like contradictions , we plainly see , that he will say and unsay any thing , to advance his errors , and further his design . 

7.  it 's usual for him when some of our ministers preach the truth in the forenoon , to step into the same pulpit , take up the same text in the afternoon , and abuse both the text , truth , and minister too ; and tell the persons the preacher in the morning had deluded them . 

8.  Such is his hatred to orthodox preachers , that he said in a sermon in public , that he had rather side with the Papists , then with the ministers of Newcastle . 

To conclude , such have been his own and his followers insolent provocations , that had not the fear of God possessed the spirits of his persons in this town , there had certainly been raised sad combustions : but blessed be God they bare all patiently , choosing rather humbly to wait upon God , and those in authority to rectify such disorders . 

As long as the noble col. Fairfax abode in this garrison , he ( Through his pious care and prudence ) kept all in quiet and peace ; but after his departure , lieut.  Col. Mason ( Commanding in chief ) hath not only permitted this deluder to act his part , but hath by all means and ways authorised and encouraged him to do what he hath done . 

A catalogue of such points as capt. Everard holds forth . 

That election from eternity , hath no ground from scripture . Contrary to eph. 1. 4 , 5.  Rom. 8. 29 , 30.  

That such as say most part of the world go to ruin , make the justice of God a great monster . Contrary to mat. 7. 13 , 14.  & 22. 14.  

That Adam's posterity were not guilty of Adam's sin . Contrary to rom. 5. 12.  

That infants draw no natural corruption from Adam . contrary to rom. 5. 12.  Psal. 51. 5.  Isa. 48. 8.  

That Adam had no spiritual light . Contrary to gen. 1. 27.  col. 3. 10.  

That sin neither in Adam nor any other creature , doth procure death . Contrary to rom. 5. 12 , 21.  Rom. 6. 23.  

That no man sins except it be against his light . Contrary to psal. 19 21.  

And sacrifices for sins of ignorance , lev. 5. 15.  

That such as teach men to sing psalms ; teach men to tell lies , contrary to col. 3. 10.  Eph. 5. 19  Psal. 100  

That Christ died for every man . Contrary to John 10. 15.  

That men under the gospel have fallen from true faith . Contrary to 1 pet. 1. 4.  John 10. 27 , 28 , 29.  

That God doth afford every man sufficient means , or grace to believe , and be saved , if they will improve them : and that eternal llfe doth only depend upon the improvement of them . Contrary to acts 16. 6 , 7.  Rom. 9 16.  Eph. 2. 8.  

That infants belong unto the kingdom of heaven , and they need no repentance , regeneration , and conversion , till they do actually sin . Contrary to Job 15. 4.  John 3. 6 , 7.  

That none are condemned but for sin against the new covenant . Contrary to rom. 2. 12.  

Everard's answer to an envious letter , sent to the Lord general Cromwell , by seven men , who would be accounted ministers of the Gopel ; living in and near Newcastle upon Tyne : whose naems are hereunder written . 

In the first twelve lines they speak such truth , that no man acknowledging the scriptures to be the word of God can deny ; viz. that there is not any thing more discovered and reproved then false teachers ; with suitable titles , as deceivers , bringers in of damnable heresy , &c.  such an authority of discovering and reproving had the apostles , and did improve it ; though oftentimes by the potency of ill affected governors and persons , they were many times trampled under feet by those proud malicious spirits , that is to say , persecutors . 

Doubtless the apostles would have been thankful to God to enjoy those privileges without molestation ; but you have this privilege , to call them which you judge to be deceivers , men of corrupt minds , sowers of tares , •educing spirits , &c. and what would you have more ? Because you desire my Lord general to improve his interest in the high court , you say , to restrain such men as i am ; but what restraint you would have to please you i know not : would you have me silenced , whipped , gagged , my ears slit , banished or hanged ? 

Oh! would you invite our noble senators to tyranny , by exercising their human authority to fulfil your corrupt lusts ? would you have a human power exercised in divine things , to punish men for differing in exposition of scripture texts ? then must you acknowledge them to have infallibility of spirit , to judge of error in doctrine , and punishment in relation to quality , quantity , time and place : May not i say to you , as the Lord our righteousness once did , you know not what spirit you are of : yet you May be known by your actions . 

2.  Again , you cry out against me as a soul-deceiver , and i frequently preach that all that God gave his son for , or his son died for , are elected , and cannot be deceived by any man : if so none of them can be deceived , than i am sure none of those that had no probability to be saved could be deceived , unless to bring them to eternal life was a deceit , which ( By your saying ) Robert Everard nor any other man can do . 

3.  Again you say , i crept into Newcastle among your flocks . 

answ. i rid into your town called Newcastle , and abode there about four months , preaching the word of God ( As it is written in the scripture ) three or four times a week , paying every man for all such things as i had use for , as Mr. Rybbon and Mrs. Johnson can speak , where i lodged and dieted . 

Those persons were so far of my judgement , that they love to speak the truth , and not envious to any ; such a creeper into Newcastle was I.  

I did not demand 100 l. 200. l. or 300. l. a year of them : such a creeper was not i.  

4.  You say , that lieutenant-colonel mason and capt. Pym were upholders of me to seduce the persons and garrison of Newcastle , and ( As you allege ) to act my part by authority , which is answered in the epistle to the reader . So that you May be ashamed for slandering such civil , just and faithful men . 

5.  Again , you tell the l. general , that corrupt doctrines take sooner , run faster , and proceed farther than the truth can do . 

answ. who told you so ? it was God's saying to Adam , what , did you eat of the forbidden fruit ? I tell you what doctrine runs swift and far , and takes quick , namely baptising of infants , which comes by the proclamation of man ; and the doctrine of tithes as a forced maintenance , which has spread itself all Christendom over . If you mean these doctrines , or the like , i confess they are corrupt ; but that they go farther than the truth can do , that i deny ▪ for they are beleaguered round about with truth , and the persons ( Like valiant soldiers ) are ready to spring their mines . 

4.  And whereas you say , i vent errors pleasing to the flesh , which foresaid doctrines have for a long time satisfied your fleshly minds . 

5.  Also you say , one dram of deadly poison kills more than the best medicines can cure : and you say it is corrupt doctrine , consisting of such errors as i hold . Something is the matter that you do not use the best medicines ; it seems it is your judgments they will do no good , and therefore you make use of the worst ; having no experience of drawing persons from the errors of their ways . 

6.  Again you say you humbly conceive , that as popery was heretofore , so Arminianism and Socinianism are like to be the plagues of this poor nation , even that cursed doctrine which so much plucks down God and sets up man . 

In answer , if there be any doctrine that plucks down God and sets up man in his stead , it is man's assumed authority to make laws and impose them upon the persons , which is not to be found in the records of God ; and two of these strings you have to your bow , which if once they were broken , man would be more thrown down , and God exalted , namely forced maintenance of your bellies , which cannot be had without an arbitrary power , by which you contend to dethrone God and his appearance in his persons , as it appears by your appealations to human authority , to set up yourselves more than the kingly power of Christ . 

The second string you have played upon for a long time , hath been the popish institution of sprinkling infants , persuading the persons that they are made Christians by their parent's faith , though they live in covetousness , pride and envy as well as yourselves . And for further answer i refer you to a book entitled , old popery in a new dress of presbytery , sold in Popes-head alley at Lodowick Lloyd his shop . 

7.  Again , you desire the Lord general to be a destroyer of your errors . If you conceive yourselves to be in errors as well as myself , than you should desire no more to be done unto me then to yourselves : but you are not true to your principles ; for you concluded the best medicines could not cure an error : and what would you make of my Lord general , the best medicine put to a vain use ? 

8.  Again , you say the Lord general hath been a happy conqueror of your enemies in the three nations : but upon what account you style them enemies is best known to yourselves , and in part to me . I Count them enemies , because they stood for a kingly interest , inconsistent with the freedom , peace and safety of the nations ; who would set up the wills of men by unlawful courts and counsels , to Lord it over the estates , persons and consciences of men , whereby they censured men by unreasonable fines and banishment , without legal trials by juries , which is indeed the fundamental constitution of this nation . Now if they were your enemies upon this account , why then go you about to make the Lord general your solicitor against me to the high court to restrain me from my native liberties ? What , would you have me a prisoner at the will and pleasure of any person , being not proceeded against in a legal way ? Doth not the law lie open ? If not , how are your enemies conquered ? But i more than suppose you did not look upon the Scots as enemies upon the foresaid considerations , being well assured , that when the Lord general with the commonwealths army were in greatest straits , than the priests of this nation for the most part preached with their faces to the North ; yea and lifted up their rebellious hands to heaven with strong cries and tears , praying to God ( Who neither heard nor answered them ) that he would be pleased to help his persons the Scots , and prosper his cause in their hands , and in the hands of that young man lately converted by taking the covenant : whereas it is eminently known in the counties of Leicester and Rutland , that myself and capt. John Freeman opposed them at their running lectures for preaching against the army : and when it pleased God to give victory to our armies , than they preached sermons full of lamentation , making the persons groan like the priests of Scotland ; at which time they of your calling were so far from creeping into the army , that in time of service they crept out of the army ; witness Dundee and elsewhere . 

9  Again , you say , the three nations are delivered from tyranny and slavery , that God hath given great and many glorious victories to our forces under the conduct of the l. general Cromwell , is very apparent , for which you say you bless God ; and i am sure we have all cause to praise him that loves peace ; but that we are freed from tyranny and slavery in the three nations i deny , because there remains some of that Norman tyranny still for the parliament of the commonwealth of England to remove , without which we cannot be happy , nor rejoice , or make our boast that we are delivered from tyranny and slavery , as long as we hear that a poor man's cause cannot be heard for want of money . Again , do not we see many a man impoverished by reason of delays in courts ? and do not we see many a poor man travel to London with great expense of money and time , and loss at home , to agree with their adversaries , which May be done in their own neighbourhood ? Is not this slavery and oppression , as well as triple damages for tithes , which makes the persons groan for want of just proceedings in law ? 

But happily you will say , these are your grievances in truth ; then we May expect better fruits then to be of a persecuting spirit , which is generally incident to men of your profession : and , i believe , so long as a hireling minister remains in this nation , it will not be absolutely free from tyranny and slavery . 

Everard's answer to the articles exhibited . 

1.  You say i maintain many destructive opinions , and that my manner of preaching is in a jeering and flouting way . 

As for the destructiveness of those things which i hold forth , i confess them to be destructive to many of your opinions . I shall instance one amongst twenty ; as the baptising of those that do make confession of their sin , or profession of the faith , which opposeth childish baptism as a devised fable : and at one time more especially i preached upon that point in Newcastle , to undeceive the persons who were by you captivated ; and i took the prophet Elias method , 1 Kings 18. from vers. 22. to 27. to see if i could end the difference , pleading that the persons were very willing to see their prophets tried ; so as it was agreed , that that God which answered by fire from heaven should be the only God to be worshipped . So i made this proposal , calling the scriptures the true fire from heaven , laying down the doctrine of John , being the baptism of water , which came from thence , desiring the persons to lay down in their thoughts the sprinkling of infants at a distance ; and i called to God for fire , and it came from heaven , and kindled the doctrine of John in the sight of all the persons , and many wondered when they saw the light shining so clear . Then i desired the prophets to call aloud for fire in the presence of the persons . And i confess i further said , that the god of that opinion , viz. the sprinkling of infants , was gone some far journey , or fallen asleep , and indeed i think the author of it is dead long since : and at other times men having preached that God blinded the eyes of some men , and hardened the hearts of others that never was in a capacity of seeing or having soft hearts . 

I said that no act of power or wisdom of God could be seen in such a doctrine , viz. to make a man blind that never was in a possibility to see , and harden hearts that never were soft . These and such like expressions usually Might fall from me , which happily Might have been spared , say you ; and therefore you call it jeering . When i am minded to please you I 'll forbear , but in the mean time know i cannot serve two Masters . 

2.  You say that i gloried much that i have gathered many churches of my own opinions . I have desired all that know me to forbear to call the truth of God my opinion , because the Lord thereby is dishonoured ; which ( You say ) if my eyes were opened , would be my sorrow and shame , which intimateth that you judge that i sin not against known light , and would i could judge so of you . 

3.  You say , i am a notorious vain boaster , boldly bidding defiance to all the priests in England to dispute with me . 

ans. i did not bid defiance to dispute with any priest , but instead thereof offered so to do for the edification of the persons , that so by a loving conference differences Might be ended in love , which was both the practice and privilege of the saints in all ages . 

4.  You say i want skill to frame an argument : if i am so , i am like to be so still ; for i could get none of you to confer with me : so than reader observe who is the proud vain boaster . 

5.  You say i offered to dispute in Latin , Greek and Hebrew ; and when i was put to it could not read one word . 

answ. that when i heard they denied dispute , because they judged me ignorant , i offered to confer or dispute upon four several tongues , viz. English , Latin , Greek and Hebrew , but it was with these cautions : 1.  That the dispute Might be in English in the publikest place convenient in the country or town for the edifying of the persons in love . 2.  That for the other tongues , it should be private , because very few understand them , amongst themselves , and little conducing to the edification of the persons in piety . 

Again you say , when i was put upon it i could not read one word of Greek or Hebrew . 

answ. all the ground you have to say i cannot read the foresaid tongues , is because i refused once to answer to Mr.  durants digression as from the point in hand : and when i saw he would not be satisfied , being extreme passionate , i spoke in Greek as followeth , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; being 1 cor. 14. chap. 8. vers. and Mr. Durant desired me to speak the words over again , which accordingly i did ; he answered i did not keep right stops , but i was not so much beholden to him as to show wherein i failed , as major Merytan and captain Rogers and others can and will evidence . That bearward has ill bears that will not come to the stake for his profit , sooner than you to a dispute to edification . 

Again you say i have spoken against all the ministers in England without the least exception , calling them false priests . 

answ. that is an untruth ; for there be many ministers in England that i love and judge faithful . 

Again you say i call all the ministers in Newcastle 300. l. toys . 

answ. that is as true as the former ; i can safely say i never heard the phrase until i saw it under your own hands . 

Again , you say i call those men your barking dogs that came to dispute with me , set on by you . 

answ. the devil was a liar from the beginning , whose works you do when you device these things , as i told Mr. Durant to his face : and you will all appear so to the world , unless you make these articles good by proof . 

Again , you say , some of my followers ( As you call them ) called dr. jenison a minister of the devil , and also Mr.  Wells , with the rest of the ministers of Newcastle , they were so ignorant that they could not answer a man any question . 

answ. who you call my followers i know not ; and if any of them that heard me called them devils , they learned no such doctrine from me : if i knew who they were , i would advise them to forbear . 

Again , as for their saying you are not able to answer to any question , i think they do you wrong , for i am sure when the question was propounded to forsake small livings for greater , you have answered them . 

Again , you say my followers report you are good for nothing but to baptize babes , and teach men to sing Hopkins jigs , and that you preach only for lucre , and will turn any way , and preach the devil for money . 

answ. i say you are not good for that but evil for so doing : what have i to do to make answer for other men , being as ignorant of the truth of your allegations against them , as i am certain of the falsity of your accusations against me . Surely should i incense authority against you for what your hearers have said and done in things that i could prove , you would not be willing to have articles exhibited against you : if so , than you do not as you would be done unto , but that is no news . 

Again you say i interrupted Mr. Sidenham betwixt the administrations of the ordinances . 

answ. then it appears you will be my witnesses , that i interrupted him not during the time of the administration of ordinances . 

Again you say i interrupted him . 

an. he desired to see the face of that man , and hear him speak , that would or could deny infant's baptism : thereupon i offered him to tender the ground of my dissent , he promising me to dispute the point before all the persons : and i waited his time , and for all this was disappointed , and you say it occasioned a tumult in the congregation . 

answ. if such a behaviour of mine caused a tumult , the persons were not so well taught as the disciple of Christ were . If they had , they would not have laid violent hands upon me , by bringing of my life in danger . Again , if i was guilty of making a tumult , why then did not the mayor and aldermen put just authority in execution upon me , i desiring them so to do at the very same time , saying to them , if i have disturbed the peace of the commonwealth this day , wherein you are all eye-witnesses of my behaviour , make me sensible of it , by executing justice upon me , that i May for time to come learn not to offend : but if they would not , i should look upon it as no offence : and yet for all this , you would incense authority , that at that time i stank of drink , that many suspected i had taken too much . And such was the zeal of lieutenant-colonel Mason ( With some officers ) to the glory of God and the peace of the nation , and punishing of vice , that they went to the civil magistrate next morning , to desire that condign punishment Might be inflicted impartially upon evil doers , saying , if any that did belong to the regiment that had offended , he would make them exemplary . And the mayor said , if capt. Robert Everard would apply himself to him , he would do him all the right he could . at the same time ( 't is well known ) i was plucked down and abused by some rude persons , together with capt. Pym , laying violent hands upon him , calling of him rascal , &c. all which was patiently born on our parts . 

Again you say , that i preached against any original sin in man . 

answ. i did preach that Adam was the first of mankind that did transgress , and by God's appointment death seized upon all mankind for his offence , and that his death was unavoidable , and further say , that i hold all the original sin that the scripture makes mention of : and i heard Mr. Hamon preach the insufficiency of nature's attainments unto spiritual things , crying out against those that set up nature instead of grace , saying , that no man could receive the things of God , unless they were given him from above . Then i went to him and gave him thanks for that , telling him that i judged he was misinformed , for i knew none that held out power in nature as in in itself to attain to spiritual enjoyments ; and i desired him to tell me , if ever he read of any that held forth the same ; he said not much to that , and to satisfy him that i held not the point so falsely fathered upon me ; and that i would in the afternoon preach of nature's inability to spiritual things ; he replied , he was glad of that , and so we parted , and accordingly i did . And whereas you say i preached against Mr. Hamon , you do me much injury , as you have done in all your false allegations . And whereas you say i say i told Mr. Hamon that i never preached against original sin , 

answ. he and i had never a word about it , and you further assert that I 'll say and unsay any thing . 

answ. you must unsay many of those things which you have accused me of , otherwise your conscience will bear testimony against you both here and hereafter as a just judgement of God . 

Again you say i stepped into the pulpit in the afternoon , and took the same text the minister did in the morning , abusing text and minister . 

ans. i confess i preached in the afternoon in the same place , and upon the same text , and whatsoever truth they delivered , as much as in me lay , showed my approbation to it : and where i judged they were mistaken , i showed the persons the reasons of my dissenting ; but i did not say the minister had deluded them , though it 's probable he did ; for i cannot conclude that every one which heareth false doctrine is deluded , which if i should , i must have been deluded myself by hearing you , for i heard you , although you judge me by hearsay . Oh most unrighteous judgement ! 

Again , you say such is my hatred against orthodox preachers , that in public i preached , that i had rather side with Papists , then with the ministers of Newcastle . 

answ. you appropriate the title of orthodox preachers to yourselves : that you have such a propriety i deny : i Might rather have said your actions deny it ; witness your covetousness , ambition , envy and false accusations ; all which is inconsistent with the pure doctrine of love and self-denial , which were the injunctions and ractice of our blessed saviour . 

Again you say i declared that i had rather side with Papists then the priests of Newcastle . 

an. what is good in them or you I 'll embrace , and that which is evil in both i will abandon . And as for the article which you call your conclusion , wherein you reflect against the honour and reputation of l. col. Mason , is answered sufficiently in the epistle , to discover unworthiness . 

Again , you say i hold that election from eternity hath no ground from scriptures . 

ans. i never asserted that , nor no point equivalent to it ; and whereas you say my judgement is contrary to ephes. 1. 4 , 5.  Rom. 8. 29 , 30. you ought to unsay it , for i own it as the true manifestation of God . 

Again , you declare that i should say , those that hold the most part of the world goes to ruin , make the justice of God a great monster , which is another gross mistake in you : and whereas you say i hold points contrary to mat. 7. 13 , 14.  Mat. 22. 14. is like the rest of your abuses towards me . 

Again , you say , i hold that Adam's posterity are not guilty of Adam's sin , i say , they were not so guilty as that they did commit the same sin , for the children before they are born did neither good nor evil , but none was born when that sin was committed , and the apostle says , rom. 5. 14. that death reigned over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression , but if they had committed the same sin , than had it been like his , but it was not ; ergo , so i do not hold any thing contrary , rom. 5. 12. though you are pleased to say so . 

Again , you say , i hold that Adam had no spiritual light . 

answ. if by spiritual light you mean the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ , he had no such light before the fall , and you in gen. 1. 7.  Col. 8. 10. would make persons believe that i contradict those texts in holding the foresaid point ; but there is not a word there , nor any place else , that Adam had at that time any such light . 

Again , you say , i hold that neither sin in Adam , nor any other creature , doth procure death . 

answ. i hold that sin in any man doth not procure death as the efficient cause , for that is God , who was the only contriver of it , both for quality , quantity , time , and place . 

Neither was it the material cause , formal nor final , as i have made evident in my book called , the first Adam reviewed wherein i have answered many objections , and have not contradicted , rom. 5. 12. 21.  Rom. 6. 23.  

Again , you say , no man sins , except it be against his light . 

answ. i hold no man's sins , but against the Lord , which is light ; you say this is contrary to lev. 5. 15.  

Again , you say , i hold that such as teach men to sing psalms , teach men to tell lies . 

answ. i deny that ever any man in the world heard me speak those words , or any words like unto them , but instead thereof , said , that those which set the persons a singing such things as they call psalms , being not taught , having no qualification suitable , did provoke them to sing lies , as for instance , oh Lord i am not puffed in mind , &c. and i have behaved myself as the child that weaned is , &c. and we have not ceased to preach thy law's day and night , &c.  

I was so far from denying teaching of persons to sing psalms , that i pleaded for a necessity of teaching , preceding singing of psalms , in order thereunto , took as much pains to teach the persons singing of psalms , as i did in any other point i delivered in Newcastle : so it seems you care not what you speak against me , as if you intended not to give an account in this world , nor in the world to come . 

Again , you say , i hold that Christ died for all . 

answ. i hold that the scripture says , he died for all men , and for every man , and not for saints only , but for the sins of the whole world , and for all that live therein , and the dead also , as 1 tim.   . 6.  Heb. 2. 9 first epistle John 2. 2. 2 cor. 5. 15.  Rom. 14. 9 and i hold it forth by these arguments . 

1.  If the gospel is to be preached to all , then there is a death of Christ for all : but there is a gospel to be preached to all , therefore a death of Christ for all . 

2.  If Christ died for false teachers , which fell to destruction , which were , and are the worst of all men , than Christ died for all men : but Christ died for false teachers which fell to destruction , which were , and are the worst of men , therefore Christ died for all men . So i have not excluded his death for you . 

Again , you say , i hold that infants have no need of conversion , repentance , or regeneration , until they actually sin . 

answ. i hold so , and these were my arguments ; 1.  If infants have neither sins of omission , nor commission ; then they have no need of conversion , repentance , or regeneration . But infants have neither sins of omission or commission ; therefore , 

2.  That our Lord Jesus Christ never commanded his disciple to come into such a condition that had need of conversion , repentance , or regeneration ; but our Lord Jesus Christ commanded his disciple to come into the condition of infants ; therefore they have no need of conversion , repentance , nor regeneration . 

Again , you say , i hold that no man shall be condemned , but for sinning against the new covenant . 

answ. that is another of your mistakes , for i do hold , that by the offence of one condemnation came upon all men , according to rom. 5. 18. and that in Adam all die , 1 cor. 15. 22. and that from there scriptures this condemnation shall universally be taken off at the resurrection of the just and unjust ; and after that , the judge of the world shall not condemn any , but for sins committed against the gospel , which i call the new-covenant . 

Finis . 





witness the late treasonable design of m. Love , and his adherents . 

in the second line of the first epistle ( written by l. col. Mason ) instead of perfection , read persecution . 


























