The general complaint of the most oppressed , distressed Commons of England . Complaining to , and crying out upon the tyranny of the perpetual parliament at Westminster . 

written by one that loves , serves , and honours the King , and also holds the dignity of a parliament , in due honourable regard and reverence . Jo . Ta.  It is needless to demand , from what shire , county , city , corporation , town , Burrough , village , hundred , Hamlet , house , family , persons or person this complaint comes , for it were a rare search , and would trouble the brains of all the cunning men , and wisest mathemagicians , with all the judicial astrologers , and fortune-telling figure-flingers , to tell us truly where this complaint is not . It is so universal epidemically general , that whosoever hath not a grievous sense or remorseful feeling of it , hath a soul stupefied , and a conscience benumed mortally with a dead palsy . 

We the most miserable amongst men , do make humble suit to you , who ( Next to our sins and selves ) are the cause and causers of our miseries , you do best know the nature and condition of our griefs , you had the power , will and skill to wound us , and you have the art and knowledge to make us whole ; you have the secret virtue which is feigned to have been in Achilles his lance , to hurt and cure . We are sure that the King most graciously eased and removed all our greivances , ( Or as many as we complained on ) there was not a monopoly , a tax , toll or tribute left , that was grievous or justly offensive , but they were all either made void , or mitigated , neither did his majesty deny you any thing that you did demand , nor you ever grant him any thing that he requested ; and to our griefs we speak it , it had been better he had been more sparing of his royal grants , except you had more . Loyally and gratefully dealt with him , and acknowledged them . We need not tell you , that the Protestant religion is almost cast out of the kingdom by you . It is impertinent to give you notice how you have used the King , so that the meanest of yourselves would be loath to be so dealt withal ; how we have been beggared and ruined by you , we know ▪ how you have enriched yourselves by undoing us , you know , and when you will endeavour to seek peace , and cease those mischiefs which we suffer , God knows . 

self do , self have , is an old English proverb . It is only our own doings that hath undone us , it was our tongues that extolled you , it was our voices that was your advancement , it was our noises that elected you to that power , which you have turned into intolerable tyranny , it was we that did rend our throats for a Kimbolton , a Hampden , a Pym , a Martin , a haslerigge , a Hollis , and a great many more than a good many . It was we that made you knights and burgesses for the shires , counties , cities , towns , boroughs , corporations ; and for us , it was our follies to do all this for you , for which it is too too manifest what you have done for us . Thus by our means you were raised , and by our ruins you are enriched . The premises considered , we humbly beseech you to take these few following lines into your serious considerations , and at your pleasure or leisure , confute them if you can . 

It is a main point of Romish doctrine , that the Pope cannot err in matters of faith , ( Which error of theirs is far from our opinions ) but this we are too sure of , that you have all erred in matters of trust . we the freeholders and Commons of England do lamentably know and feel it ; folly and foolishness , are the only opposites to wisdom , and knowledge hath no enemy but ignorance , this being confessed , we pray you to remember , that our rash folly elected you to be the representative body of the kingdom , which we did acknowledge you to be ; and we most humbly desire you to consider , that we are the body of the kingdom represented ; now as a thing representative is but a derivative from that which is the represented , so is your power derived from us , and from us who are but men full of infirmities and errors ; though our voices had power to give you power , to be a house of Commons in parliament ; yet from those voices and folly of ours , we had not power to infuse infallible and inerrable wisdom into you . 

We ( As men ) confident of your integrity , did choose you as our proctors and attorneys , the King's majesty , with his best council , and we ( The poor Commons ) entrusted you with all we had , but we had no mistrust that you would deceive us of all we had , we trusted you to maintain our peace , and not to embroil us in an universal endless bloody war . We trusted you with our estates , and you have robbed , plundered , and undone us ; we trusted you with our freedoms , and you have loaden us with slavery and bondage , we trusted you with our lives , and by you we are slaughtered and murdered every day . We trusted you not with our souls , and yet you with a new legerdemain doctrine , a juggling kind of preaching , a pestiferous swarm of preachers , a mechanic kennel of illiterate knaves , with the threats and tyranny that you have used to us , and the execrable covenants which you have forced us to take , we Might with as much safety , and less hazard , have trusted our souls with Judas , Julian th' apostate , or the devil himself , as with you , or your doctrines . 

Many thousands of souls , ( Loaden with their sins ) are impenitently parted from the bodies of his majesty's subjects ( By your seducements and enforcements ) and ( Alas ) few of them knew the cause wherefore they fought , or wherefore they so cruelly killed one another . You will say , that you fought for the Protestant religion , ( that 's a lie ) it is known , that it was never offered to be taken from you , and that his majesty will live and die in it , and the defence and maintaining of it ; do you fight against the King , as fearing he would take from us our laws and liberties , in those points we plainly perceive , that he never intended any such wickedness ? But if he had had any such unkingly and tyrannical intention , you have prevented him , and done it yourselves . 

Do you fight against him , and murder his loving subjects , for fear that he should bring in forreigne-nations to destroy us , ( Which thought never entered into his royal heart ) but you have done the same , both against his majesty and us , you have at exceeding rates and prices ( With our monies ) bought rebellious Scots , who have sold themselves to you , and to work wickedness , no purpose to ruin the King , the kingdom , you and us , and as the devil could not overthrow man without the help of the woman , so you could never destroy this church and state without your golden temptation of those accursed hirelings , which if you were to fell them again , at half a quarter of the price they cost , it must be at a very dear market . 

It is an old saying , that the King of Spain is a King of men , because the Spaniards ( As men and loyal subjects to him ) do honour , obey , and serve him . That the French King is a King of asles , because of the insupportable heavy burdens , taxes , and slavery which they undergo and tamely bear . But ( 't is said ) the King of England is a King of devils , because of their disobedient murmurings , and often rebellion . For the nature of an English man is , not to know when things are well , which if we would have known , things had not now been so bad as they are . 

Do you fight against the King to remove some evil councillors from him ? we know that you have long fiddled upon that string , yet you could never name one of those counsellors , nor relate any particulars against them , that Might so much , as put a scratch , scar , or spot upon their integrity , either to his majesty or the public good ; all that can be said , either against the King , Queen , nobility , or any loyal royalist , is vented through your learned conduit pipe , Mercurius Britanicus , who ( By your especial favour and command ) rails and reviles , sheetly , weekly , most wickedly weakly , cum privilegio . 

Thus we perceive , that you pretend to fight for the Protestant religion , and all the world May see and say , you have made a delicate dainty directory , new religion of it . And you have fought for the King , ( And that is most certain ) you have fought and sought for the King , but it hath been to catch him , and make him no King . You have fought for our liberties , and have taken them from us , you have fought for the gospel , and have spoilt the church , you have fought for our goods , and ye have 'em , and you have fought to destroy the kingdom , and you have done it . What can you do , or what would you do more ? and still you persist in these impious courses , and there is no hope of any end of our sufferings . 

The many gulleries , that you have put upon us , would fill a large volume , if they should be written or printed ; and because you shall not think us to be fenceless , or such blockheads as you would make us , you shall know that we know somewhat . And to lay aside all old dogge-tricks , how this rebellion hath been a brewing more than 60 years , we will let you know , that we know many of your state sleights and policies within these three years , &c.  

You have extorted great sums of money from us , under the pretence of relieving of Ireland , and with the same monies , you have maintained a bloody war in England , so that whatsoever was raked from us , for the preservation of one kingdom , you have employed for the destruction of three ; for England is cheated , Ireland , defeated , and Scotland is heated in her own dissentious flames . 

You have pretended treaties for peace , when ( God knows ) peace was never in your thoughts , ( As by your impudent propositions and demands May appear ) for if the Turk had made a conquest here , he could not have devised , or would not have enjoined and tied the King , and his true liege persons to harder conditions , and then ( To salve your reputations ) you have caused your lying lecturers , and slanderous pamphlets to revile the King , and lay all the fault on him for the breaking off of the treaties , when as you had consulted , and knew before , that your unreasonable demands , neither would or could be granted . 

You have abused and mocked God , with false and forged thankesgivings , for such victories as never were , and with your sophisticated triumphs of guns , b•llss , bonfires , ballads , libels , and other imposture-like expressions , whereby we have been seduced and encouraged to give more and more contributions , and buy our own utter undoeings , for ( Like corrupted and covetous lawyers ) you would not take so much pains , or do us the courtesy to beggar us gratis , to ruin us for nothing ; and you would not by any entreaty make us miserable at a cheap rate , or except we gave you our , monies , almost to the uttermost farthing . 

Many of your faction ( Like decoy ducks ) brought in their plate and monies at the beginning of this rebellion , in large proportions to the gull-hall of London , whereby thousands of persons were gulled , by deed of gift , ( Or deeds of shift ) and new found loans , and contributions , to maintain your greatness , and feed your bottomless avarice , whilst we , and the rest of your new shorn sheep , had no other assurance , but the airy pawn of a confounding faith , called public ; and those cheating decoys , who first gave , and lent to draw poor fools on , those knaves had their plate and monies privately delivered to them again , whilst ours was accursedly employed against the true religion , a just King , and all his loyal Protestant subjects . 

You have ( To make your victories seem great ) caused many of your own tattered ensigns , cornets , or colours of foot and horse , with many arms , to be privately sent out of the city in an evening at one port , and brought in at another port in the morning in triumph , making the persons believe , that those colours and arms , were taken from the King at such and such a battle ; and this trick hath hooked us into more chargeable and rebellious contributions . 

You have caused thousand of arms to be bought and brought from foreign nations , and those arms , you have proclaimed to be taken at sea , and that either the King had bought them to make war against the parliament , or that they were sent him for that purpose , from some Catholic Prince ; and this slight of hand , hath often juggled away our monies . 

You have many times , made women believe that their slain husbands who went forth with you alive , were alive still , in such or such garrisons of yours , when you knew the same men were killed , and left dead in ditches for crow's meat , but that his majesty graciously caused the dead to be buried , and the maimed and wounded , to be relieved and cured . 

You have contrived letters in private chambers , and you have subscribed them from foreign Kings and states , or from the Queen to the King , or to some other persons of worth and eminency near his majesty , which letters have been as full of forged dangerous consequences , as your wicked brains could thrust or foist into them ; and by some miraculous way , the said letters have been either intercepted on the land ( By some vigilant great commander of yours ) or they have been said to be taken at sea by your valiant admiral ; then are those letters openly read , and copied out a thousand ways , printed ten thousand ways , dispersed a hundred thousand ways , and believed by million of persons , by the prating of your preachers and pamphlets , which tricks have cost us some million of money , with many thousand of our lives . 

You have many times taken ( Or intercepted ) letters which have been sent from some of his majesty's armies , garrisons , or some other true and loyal places or persons , or from the King or Queen , one to another ; and those letters have been publicly read and printed , but you have new moulded them , you have made your own constructions and interpretations on them , and in a word , you have not only the procreating art , to beget and engender such news , as you please to have ; but also you are fruitful in conceiving , and producing such letters as hath or May be most for your advantage ; as lately you have used in his majesty's cabinet , which you took at Naseby , and broke open at Westminster , and made the letters therein , to speak what you would have them ; but ( Maugre all your malice ) the said letters are as so many crystal mirrors , wherein his kingly care , his Christian piety , his immovable constancy , in the service of God , in the Protestant religion , in the peace of his kingdoms , and in the welfare of his subjects , all these his letters do show ( In despite of your wrested comparisons , and mingle , mangle juggling alterations ) his transcendent goodness , and most gracious inclination , and royal resolution , and withal , your mischievous intentions are plainly manifested , in that you still persist in your wicked courses against so gracious a sovereign . But there are more judicious , learned , and grave writers than any of us ( Your oppressed complainants ) whose pens have better described your playing fast and loose in this kind , to whose better informations we leave you . 

We do most heartily wish , that you were all as weary of being tyrants , as we are in bearing the insupportable burdens of your tyranny ; we do humbly beseech you to be pleased to give over beggering and killing of us , we pray you to suffer us to live and enjoy the Protestant religion , we desire you to let us feed and subsist upon that little which you have left us ( Against your wills ; ) and lastly , we entreat you not to enforce us into a desperate condition , and make us do we know not what . 

His majesty , as a true defender of the true faith , doth with truth defend that faith , and he hath most graciously often offered you peace and truth , both which you pretend , but you intend neither . Lay down your arms , that 's the nearest way to a peace , and leave lying , and you shall have truth . if you will not , we would have you know , that we must take a course , that neither our purses or persons , shall not long maintain you and your rebellious garrisons , ( Who are no other but dens of thieves ) and as our tongues did lift you up , and made you able to abuse the King , the religion , church , and kingdom , so our hands must help to pull , or knock you down , to recover part of that of which you have bereft us , and to keep about us to relieve us , that little which yet we have left us . 

Finis . 











