A Letter , etc.  

Gentlemen and Friends , 

WE have given you so full , and so true an Account of our Intentions , in this Expedition , in our Declaration , that as we can add nothing to it , so we are sure you can desire nothing more of us . We are come to preserve your Religion , and to restore and establish your Liberties and Properties , and therefore we cannot suffer ourselves to doubt , but that all true Englishmen will come and concur with us , in our desire to secure these Nations from POPERY and SLAVERY . You must all plainly see , that you are only made use of as Instruments to enslave the Nation , and ruin the Protestant Religion , and when that is done , you may judge what ye yourselves ought to expect , both from the cashiering of all the Protestant and English Officers and Soldiers in Ireland , and by the Irish Soldiers being brought over to be put in your places ; and of which you have seen so fresh an instance , that we need not put you in mind of it . You know how many of your Fellow Officers have been used , for their standing firm to the Protestant Religion , and to the Laws of England , and you cannot flatter yourselves so far as to expect to be better used , if those who have broke their word so often , should by your means be brought out of those straits to which they are reduced at present . We hope likewise , that you will not suffer yourselves to be abused by a false notion of Honour , but that you will in the first place consider , what you owe to Almighty God and your Religion , to your Country , to yourselves , and to your Posterity , which you , as Men of Honour , aught to prefer , to all private Considerations and Engagements whatsoever . We do therefore expect , that you will consider the Honour that is now set before you , of being the Instruments of serving your Country , and securing your Religion , and we will ever remember the Service you shall do us upon this Occasion , and will promise to you , that we shall place such particular marks of our favour on every one of you , as your Behaviour , at this time , shall deserve of us , and the Nation ; in which , we will make a great distinction , of those that shall come seasonably , to join their Arms with Ours , and you shall find us to be 

Your Well wishing , and Assured Friend , W. H. P. O.  

