A new engagement , or , manifesto : wherein is declared the sense and resolution of many thousands of well-affected persons in and about London , and some adjacent counties ( Viz. Kent . Hartford , Buckingham , and berks , &c. ) who seeing all present authorities to be perverted from their natural end , the people's safety , are necessitated to invite all faithful Englishmen to put themselves into a posture of defending their own and country's liberties , and to labour for a speedy establishment of a just and equal government . 

Published at the desire of some honest and eminent persons , for the satisfaction of all that seek not the advancement of parties and factions , but desire the peace and prosperity of the nation . 

The freedom we were born to , is so justly due to every English man , that whosoever shall remember the vehemency wherewith the persons did thirst after a parliament before they had this ; the zeal wherewith they contributed to the late war , for defence of this freedom , and the success wherewith it hath pleased God to bless those endeavours , will soon be satisfied , that there is no better cause in the world to engage upon . And therefore , 

The cause we undertake at present , ( For which we carry our lives in our hands ) being the very same , will certainly need no ap•logy for itself ; the only thing that May seem strange in these our actings being the irregular manner of prosecuting our undoubted rights . 

Herein we desire it May be considered , that all ordinary means , and some extraordinary have been already attempted , and after much patience proved altogether fruitless . That the parliament hath made no other use of those many signal opportunities put into their hands , then to continue their sitting at Westminster , and dividing the public treasure among themselves . That the chief officers of the army , though pretending to keep up the forces under them , to see the same for the people's good , accomplished in a short time ; have yet made no other use of their power , then to continue and enlarge their own commands . That besides our being disappointed of the fruit so long expected , and being made more slaves every day then other , to committees , and sundry other like arbitrary courses , even in the most legal proceedings we find so much corruption , tediousness , chargeableness and obscurity , practised and abetted by officers of all sorts , that the law itself is become no protection to us in our properties or liberties . 

We find that barbarous course still maintained of imprisoning men for debt , thereby , hindering them from the use of their lawful callings , though they have nothing else wherewith to satisfy their creditors , or to preserve themselves and their families from starving . 

We find , that the restraining men's persons at pleasure , without cause rendered , and during pleasure , was never more frequent . 

We find , that tithes , whose beginning was superstitious , and is found by experience to oppress the poor husbandmen , to be vexations to all manner of persons , and prejudicial to the commonwealth , were never so rigorously and cruelly exacted as at this present . 

We find taxes to be so multiplied without number or hopes of end , and excise so cruelly exacted , that no man knows what is , or what shall be his own : and although many million of monies have been levied and paid , both voluntarily and by compulsion , yet no account is given how they have been expended ; but the public debts are daily increased , instead of being satisfied , and such vast sums of money paid daily out of the public treasury for interest , unto some rich usurers , as is almost incredible . 

We find the trade of the nation ( Which the parlia. at first promised to advance ) to be so generally decayed , that without speedy remedy the nation cannot long subsist . 

We find the poor to be wholly disregarded , and most oppressed , and thousands of families suffered to beg their bread , and many to perish with hunger . 

But herein our condition hath been rendered most desperate ; that we have not been suffered to represent our miseries to the parliament , and petition for redress , but persons have been imprisoned for petitioning , and orders issued out from parliament to suppress petitions . 

Considering therefore this deplorable estate of the commonwealth , and the apparent danger of being embroiled again each in others blood , unless a speedy settlement prevent it and considering not only that we have attempted all regular ways , to procure relief for our long oppressed country , but also that we cannot with safety any longer offer our grievances , and desires to the parliament in petitions ; and likewise considering , that our slavery under arbitrary powers , is occasioned by the want of a settlement of a just and equal government , which , if it were established , would speedily ease us of all our common burdens ; we cannot bethink ourselves of a more probable remedy then to put ourselves , and invite our countrymen to join with us in a posture of defence , whereby we May be secure from danger , and from being prevented of our good intentions by the opposition of such as have designed our slavery , while we propound to all our dear countrymen ( Who are sure to be concerned as much as though they were in office ) some certain grounds of common right and freedom , wherein they and we Might see reason to agree among ourselves , and thereupon to establish a firm and present peace . The particulars we offer are as followeth : 

1.  That a period of time be set wherein this present parliament shall certainly end . 

2.  That the persons be equally proportioned for the choice of their deputies in all future parliaments , and that they do of course meet upon a certain day once at least in two years for that end . 

3.  That a contract be drawn and sealed between the persons and their several deputies respectively , upon the day of their election , wherein the bounds , limits and extent of their trust shall be clearly expressed . As that they be empowered with sufficient authority for enacting , altering and repealing of laws ; for erecting and abolishing judicatories ; for appointing , removing and calling to account of magistrates and officers of all degrees ; for making war and peace , and treating with foreign states . And that their power do not extend to the binding of any man in matters of religion , or in the way of God's worship ; not to compel the person of any innocent man to serve against his will either by sea or land ; nor to the making of any law that shall be either evidently pernicious to the persons , or not equally obligatory to all persons , without exception . 

4.  That for the security of all parties , which have acted on any side in the late public differences since the year 1640. and for preventing all contentions amongst them , the persons May agree amongst themselves , that no future parliaments shall question or molest any person , for any thing said or done in reference to those public differences . 

5.  That the great officers of the kingdom as well civil as military , be often removed , and others put in their rooms , either every year or every second year at the farthest , to the end that the persons employed May discharge their places with the greater care when they know themselves liable to a speedy account , and that other men May be encouraged to deserve preferment , when they see the present incumbents not affixed to their offices as to freeholds . 

6.  That all determinating committees ( Except such as are necessary to be kept up for the managing of forces by sea or land ) the chancery with all other arbitrary courts , be forthwith dissolved , or at least all power taken from them , which they have hitherto exercised over men's persons or estates , and that henceforward as well ordinances as acts of parliament be executed in the ancient way of trials by juries . 

7.  That the huge volumes of statute-laws and ordinances with the penalties therein imposed , as well corporal as pecuniary , be well revised , and such only left in force as shall be found fit for the commonwealth , especially , that men's lives be more precious then formerly , and that lesser punishments than death , and more useful to the public be found out for small offences . That all laws , writs , commissions , pleadings and records be in the English tongue , and that proceedings be reduced to a more certain cheap and expeditious way then formerly . That no fees at all be exacted of the persons in courts of justice , but that the public ministers of state be wholly maintained out of the public treasury . 

8.  That estates of all kinds real and personal be made liable to debts , but no imprisonment at all by way of punishment , nor in order to making that satisfaction , which possibly can never be made , but only by way of security in order to a trial for some criminal fact , to be determined within some short and certain space of time , and that this power of restraining men's persons be very cauciously allowed , to which end the benefit of habeas corpuses to be in no case denied by those whom it concerns to grant them . 

9  That tithes be wholly taken away , the parishoner , from whence they are due , paying in lieu thereof to the state where they are not appropriate , and to the owner where they are , a moderate and certain rent charge out of his land . The ministers to be maintained either by the voluntary contribution of such as desire to hear them , or else by some settled pensions out of the public treasure . 

10.  That as speedy and as perfect an account as May be , be given and published for the satisfaction of the persons , how those vast sums of money have been disposed of that have been disbursed voluntarily and otherwise , since the beginning of these troubles . 

11.  That so soon as public occasions will possibly permit , the imposition of excise and all other taxes upon the persons be wholly taken away ; and that in the mean time all care and diligence be used , in taking away those occasions , and in the husbandly managing of the public purse , and to that end that a balance be made and declared of all public revenues and expenses ; and •hat a course be taken for paying all public debts and damages so far as May be ; that the debts upon interest be discharged by sale of such lands and goods as are either properly belonging or any ways accrued to the state , and that they be sold to the best advantage . 

12.  That there be no less care taken for the growing wealth of the nation , consisting principally in trade , which being our strength and glory , aught by mitigating of the customs , and by all other good means , to be cherished and encouraged . 

13.  That ( Though restoring peace and commerce be the surest way of providing for the poor ) yet some more effectual course May be found out then hitherto hath been for setting those to work who are able , for bringing up of children to profitable employments , and for relieving such as are past their labour , especially such as became so in the service of their country , during the late war . 

14.  That the affairs of Ireland be taken into a more serious consideration then heretofore , and that a peaceable way of reducing that nation May be once endeavoured , and in case that succeed not , the war be prosecuted with that vigour and unanimity , as by God's blessing , we May promise to ourselves a speedy end of those troubles , a timely relief to many famishing families there , and better intend the affairs of England . 

15.  That all monopolies and restraint of trade , under colour of any companies , fraternities , or otherwise be forthwith abolished . 

16.  That the ancient and almost antiquated badge of slavery , viz. all base tenors by copies , oaths of fealty , homage , fines , at the will of the Lord , &c. ( Being the conquerors marks upon the persons ) May be taken away ; and to that end that a certain valuable rate be set , at which all possessors of lands so holden , May purchase themselves freeholders , and in case any shall not be willing or able , that there be a prefixed period of time after which all services , fines , customs , &c. shall be changed into , and become a certain rent , that so person is disaffected to the freedom and welfare of the nation , May not have that advantage upon the persons , to draw them into a war against themselves upon any occasion , by virtue of an awe upon them in such dependent tenors . 

Now considering that the settlement of the nations peace and freedom hath been constantly declared by the parliament to be their only end in engaging in the late war , and considering their many promises , solemn vows , and oaths made by them to the persons to confirm them in the belief of their sincere intentions therein , we should hope to find no opposition from them in these our desires ; but however we cannot but be confident that the soldiery of the army ( Who solemnly engaged at Newmarket , in June last , to procure the same things in effect for the persons which are here propounded ) will so remember that solemn engagement , as to show their ready concurrence with us ; and we hope it will be clear to them , that there is no other possible way to provide that sufficient indemnity ( The want whereof first occasioned their refusal to disband ) than what is here propounded ; neither that there is any other probable way to secure the arrears of the supernumeraries , who are disbanded , contrary to the solemn engagement , or of those continuing in arms ; and at least we cannot but promise ourselves the assistance of all the Commons who are not either blinded by some self-interest , or engaged to continue the present consuming distractions by virtue of some office or employment depending thereon . 

But however we intending wrong to no man , nor any private advantage to ourselves , and the cause for which we appear being so clearly just , and of common concernment to all parties and honest interests , we repose our confidence in the most high God to protect us from the malice and rage both of all self-seeking ambitious men , who affect lordliness and tyranny , and have designed the people's slavery , and a perpetuation of their own rule ; and of all such m•rcenary vassals as they shall hire to destroy us , and keep the yokes of slavery upon the people's necks ; and we do hereby promise and engage to all our countrymen , that whensoever the settlement of the peace and freedom herein propounded shall be effected ( All delays wherein we shall to our utmost possibilities prevent ) we shall gladly and cheerfully return to our private habitations and callings , enjoying only our equal share of freedom with all others in the nation . 

Printed in the year . Mdcxlviii . 








