A LAW AGAINST CUCKOLDOM : OR , THE TRIAL OF ADULTERY . 

LONDON : Printed in the Year 1700.  

THE PREFACE . 

CUCKOLDOM , that bugbear Misfortune , ( in former Days , as terrible to a Courtier as his Prince's Frowns , and more dreadful to an old Citizen than Popery and Slavery ) is now advanced to such Dignity , that it 's crept into great men's Families ; and often becomes the serious Consideration of our grave Senate : and is so far from being thought Scandalous in this Age , that it 's grown the most useful Liberty imaginable in a Married State , and serves , upon Occasion , to dissolve that Gordion-knot , which the Priest so craftily ties , to the Misfortune of many thousands , who have unwarily fallen under the fatal Conjunction . 

Were it not in a Woman's power to recompense the Slavery of her servile Station , and revenge the Affronts , and cool Neglects , she is under a conjugal Necessity of enduring from her Husband , what charming Innocence , at Eighteen , would for the sake of Coach and Horses , or a plentiful Table , suffer an old withered Hand to crop the Flower of her Virginity , and waste her Youth and Beauty in the fruitless Embraces , and under the peevish Checks and Snubs of old Age , jealousy , and Impotence ? What can such a Compound of Infirmities , made an Eunach in his Age by the Debaucheries of his Youth , expect from a Wife , possessed of all the Charms and Perfections that can be lodged by Nature in blooming juvenility ? Which none but the powerful Nerves of a strenuous Lover is truly capable of enjoying . 

Would Parents in the Disposal of their Children , but match 'em with as much care as they do their Dogs or Horses , it would , in a great measure , mutually preserve the State of Matrimony from any Adulterous Invasion ; For what true Northern Breeder will endure an old surfeited jade , Spavined , Foundered , and Wind-gauled , to Leap his Hunting Favourite ? Or suffer his fine shaped Greyhound to Bastardise her Breed with an old mangy Mongrel ? Yet perhaps his handsome Daughter must be thrown away upon some old miserly Curmudgeon , who only Marrys to palliate his Gouty Pains , and cherish his feeble Carcase in the Winter of his Age , by her warm enlivening Touches , and sergeant Embraces . 

It is certainly an unnatural Imposition upon the fair Sex , to be thus disposed on ; and though their worldly Interest , Obedience to Parents , or Importunities of Relations , may prevail upon 'em to put Nature in Masquerade , and seem to be well-pleased with their wrinkled Fumbler ; yet , I do not question , but the poor young Bride , who labour's under these Hardships , will soon find a way to communicate her Distress to some faithful Confident , who may , without any great Injury to his Conscience , at once gratify both the reasonable Desires of Youth , and justly reward the Folly and Lasciviousness of Age who desire's to engross that Blessing , to which ( says the Law of Nature ) no Priest can give him an equitable Title ; for if the Disproportion be so great as between Fifty and Fifteen , the Church may tie their Hands , 't is true , but their Hearts are incapable of Union . I heartily pity that young Lady , who , either for want of Discretion in her Parents , or herself , has unhappily cast her Pearl before a Swine , who , knowing not how to use it , gives her just Provocation to dispose of the precious jewel to him , who will convert it to 't is natural Employment ; and to him that it 's most Useful , before it will be most Valuable . 

As to the following Poem , I shall say nothing of it in the Preface ; but only hope , The Newness of the Subject , and the Pertinency of the Matter , will be sufficient to recommend it to an ingenious Reader : So having thought fit to give you this little Hint , I shall proceed to wind up the bottom of the Frontispiece , with a Concise Character of a Cernuted Fumbler . 

A CUCKOLD 

IS an Artificial Monster , patched up between Action and Forbearance , who by his own Impotence , and his Wife's Incontinence , is soon brought to Perfection : If he be Jealous , he is always in search of that which he fears to find ; if he be not ; his Horns are generally visible to every body , but himself ; he usually lays the Egg of his own Misfortune , and his Wife hatches it ; his Fondness makes her Slighting ; his ill Usage , makes her Revengeful ; his Imprudence , makes her Cunning ; his giving Opportunity , makes her improve it ; his Negligence , makes her Mistrustful ; and his Insufficiency , makes her Insatiate . There is generally a Mist between his Eyes and his Wife's Failing ; he is either foolishly Fond , and can't see ; or else prudently patient , and won't see ; he is very forward to asperse another with the same Calumny , and will , by no means , believe himself under the like Predicament , though he knows it to be true . If he carries not his Wife to every public Entertainment , he thinks he breaks an Article of Matrimony : Thus leads her himself into the Path of Liberty , and is afterwards Angry that she takes it . He is commonly more in Love with the Cuckoldmaker , than his Wife , and dare trust his Friend any where with her , and 't is he that Cuckolds him . he 's a Man of Note among both Sexes , and talked on more in the Parish where he life's , than the Parson ; if he be a Trader , and his Wife be pretty , he 's sure to have a good Trade , for he has one Commodity that helps off with the rest . He is either a good-natured Fool , or an ill-natured Knave ; for Extremes in Fondness , or severe Usage , are the two main Causes of CUCKOLDOM . 

A LAW AGAINST CUCKOLDOM : OR , THE TRIAL OF ADULTERY . 

TOO weak are Laws , and Edicts Vain , 
The hearts of Women to Restrain ; 
For when with happy Search they find 
The Man they like , They still are kind , 
So strong , so daring is their Love , 
It does even fear of Death remove . 
For proof of This , if others fail , 
I now design to tell a Tale.  
At Prato , once upon a Time , 
Adultery was thought a Crime : 
And every kind Consenting Wife 
Was doomed by Law to lose her life ; 
So partial was this horrid Act , 
It Equally Condemned the fact , 
Whether the Cause was pure desire 
Or sordid Gain and sinful Hire , 
no sooner did this Edict pass , 
But one Rinaldo found ( alas ) 
His Wife Phillipia , Famed for Charms , 
In Lusty Lazarino's Arms : 
And with Revenge and Fury filled , 
' was Ten to One he both had killed ; 
But eager passion he restrained , 
The bold Adulteress arraigned , 
And to the Podestate Complained . 
The judge for Trial Named the day , 
And gave her time to slip away : 
But she resolved to stand it out , 
In vain her Kindred went about , 
By dire Descriptions of the Law , 
To fright and force her to withdraw . 
She minded not a Word she heard , 
One would have sworn , by what appeared , 
She thought her Fate would glorious prove , 
To suffer Martyrdom for Love.  
When solemn day of Trial came , 
In Court appeared the Guilty Dame ; 
But looked as Cheerful , Brisk and Gay , 
As those that Ogle at a Play : 
The judge was in a horrid Fright , 
( Touched to the quick by Charms so bright ) 
lest she the Matter should Confess , 
Her Case would then be past Redress . 
You must be Burned , Madam , he said , 
Your Spouse has Information made , 
That you were lately caught by him , 
Committing the forbidden Crime 
Adultery , and doubtless you 
Have heard for this what Death is Due : 
Consider what you have to say , 
And prudently your Answer weigh . 
She said , I freely own the Fact , 
He caught me in the very Act ; 
With Joy the pleasing Word I name ; 
For know , I Glory in my Flame : 
And since my Passion did begin , 
Have often tried the tempting Sin. 
For this you say I ought to Die ; 
But you know better , Sir , than I , 
That Laws for Public Justice meant , 
Should pass by General Consent ; 
And pray what Women did appear 
To Vote for this ? I never could hear 
Of one that liked it ; and 't is hard 
They should unjustly be debarred 
Their Native Right , by a Decree , 
To which They never did agree : 
On us alone , Restraint is laid ; 
Who are by bounteous Nature made 
To give Content to more than One ; 
Which never yet by Man was done . 
If Prejudice did not prevail , 
Your solid Wisdom could not fail 
For me this matter to decide , 
And to declare the Edict void . 
But , Sir , if Death must be my doom , 
Soon let the Welcome Minute come ; 
Secure , I wait the fatal Blow ; 
Yet first an easy Favour show : 
Pray ask my Husband , there he stands , 
If all his Conjugal Demands 
Have not been answered still by me , 
With an Exact Conformity . 
Rinaldo said , I must Confess , 
My Wife did still Comply in This ; 
Inclined my Wished Desires to Grant , 
And Fond to satisfy my Want.  
Observe , Sir , That , Phillipia said , 
Whatever he wanted still he had ; 
then wherefore , pray , this mighty Pother , 
If I , to Gratify another , 
Employed the useless Residue ! 
Pray , Husband , what was that to you ? 
ay , like a Charitable Fair 
Bestowing what I had to spare ; 
Believed it better to improve 
My Growing Overplus of Love , 
Than suffer Envious Marriage Bands 
To keep it Dead upon my Hands . 
Her speech so pleased the Listening Crowd , 
They Clapped their Hands , and laughed aloud . 
Rinaldo durst no longer stay ; 
But hid his Face , and sneaked away : 
And fair Phillipia , by her Art , 
Sobribed the Court to take her part , 
So to her side the judge did draw , 
She saved herself , and Damned the Law.  
FINIS . 

Here is now Published a Satyr against Marriage Price 6 d.  

