

The true Effigies of y e Alkaid , ( or Lord ) Jaurar Ben Abdella , Ambassador from y e high and mighty Mulai Mahamed Shegue , Emperourr of Morocco , King of Fess and Suss , etc.  

G : Glover fe : 

THE Arrival and Entertainments of the Ambassador , Alkaid Jaurar Ben Abdella , with his Associate , Mr. Robert Blake . From the High and Mighty Prince , Mulley Mahamed Sheque , Emperor of Morocco , King of Fez , and Suss . 

With the Ambassadors good and applauded commendations of his royal and noble entertainments in the Court and the City . Also a Description of some Rites , Customs , and Laws of those African Nations . 

Likewise Gods exceeding Mercy , and our Kings especial grace and favour manifested in the happy Redemption of three hundred and two of his Majesty's poor subjects , who had been long in miserable slavery at Salley in Barbary . 

LONDON : Printed by I Okes dwelling in little Saint Bartholomew's . 1637.  

with the commodities of another : For though every Country doth not yield every commodity , yet by the means of Merchandise and transportation , almost every Country in particular , enjoys the fruition of all things needful in general . Thirdly , it conserveses , and makes peace , love , and amity with Princes , and Potentates , though they are far remote from each other in Religions , Realms , Regions , and Territories ; yet they are conjoined in leagues and friendship together , and by the means of Negotiation , may , and do send Letters , Ambassadors , Messages , and rich gifts , Magnificent presents , Aides of Armies , and Navies , by Land and Sea , for the expression of their greatness and supportation of peace and unity one with another . Fourthly , it is the strength of Kings & Kingdoms , in the increase of Shipping and Mariners , whereby either in peace or war they are furnished upon all occasions : And what thing is there more in the World so great , or so to be esteemed , whereunto love will not stir , and animate the minds of mortal men . Lastly , it acquaints each Nation with the Language , Manners , Behaviour , Customs , and carriage of one another ; so that by these means men are made capable of understanding and knowledge ; and therefore prefer knowledge before wealth and riches , for the one soon fadeth , the other abideth for ever : for amongst all Natural and Terrestrial things , only wisdom is immortalll ; and for that main reason knowledge and understanding ought to be embraced before ignorance ; and especially for that in all other things which are odious , yet there is some profit to be found : but ignorance only is ever noisome and hurtful to the ignorant , and doth make them bore the pain of those offences which they commit , by their imbecility and want of knowledge . Therefore study for knowledge whilst thou hast time and leisure to learn , & and be diligent to give care to those that are wise and learned ; for by this means thou shalt easily obtain understanding and knowledge of that , which others have invented with great labour and difficulty . 

But to the matter in hand , concerning this Alkaid ( or Lord ) Ambassador ; for the word Alkaid , is Lord in the language of the Morocco , the Larbies' , or Barbary . I only mean to relate his arrival in England , his abode and entertainment , with his coming up from Gravesend to London , the manner of his receiving into the City , and how he was conducted to his house , his manner of riding to the Court at White-hall , where he had royal entertainment and audience ; his magnificent and rich Presents , his return from the Court , his estate and condition , and lastly a short description of the Emperor of Morocco and his Empire , with his Kingdom of Fez , or Fez , and his Kingdom of Sus , and other his Dominions , with something of old and new Salla , or Sallie , with the late proceedings there . 

The Ambassador is by birth a Portugal , a Gentleman born in a Town called Mondego , who was taken Captive in his Childhood at the age of almost eight years ; he was ( as the misery and fortune of Captives is ) bought and sold , and by command ( as the manner of those barbarous Nations is ) he distesticled , or Eunuched , and as he grew in years he by his acceptable services , was daily more and more in favour with the Emperor of Morocco , insomuch , that his Majesty was pleased to take him into his especial grace , making him his chiefest favourite , and trusty councillor of State , dignified him with the high stile or title of Alkaid , or Lord , than which , there is not a degree higher under the Emperor ; endowed with Lands and revenues fit and correspondent for so eminent a calling , gave him the two most honourable places of Lord great Chamberlain , and Lord Privy Seal , and to his prudent care and honourable mature wisdom was committed the main charge and management of the most important affairs of his whole Empire , and in suffering him to make Laws and Edicts : And he which is in an Office or place of command , and maketh Laws for other men , ought appointment , Sir John Finnet Knight , Master of the Ceremonies , was sent down to Gravesend , to conduct the Ambassadors to London . 

They had no sooner taken their Barges , and were launched , but an expression of Love and Welcome flew in thundering manner out of the mouths of the great Ordnance , from both the Blockhouses of Gravesend , and on Essex side , and the Tide being reasonable calm , they pleasantly passed to Woolwich , where they saw his Majesty's new great Ship ( the Eighth Wonder of the World ) with pleasing and much contenting Admiration . After which they passed to Greenwich , where they landed , and stayed at the Rose and Crown four Hours , because the King's Barge with the Lord Kenwell , and 12.  Gentlemen of his Majesty's Privy Chamber , and other were appointed to come to Greenwich , to bring them to the Tower-wharf in State as was fitting and honourable . 

So they took Barges at Greenwich , almost an hour before Night , with their Trumpets sounding before them all the way : And after an Hours Rowing they landed at the Tower , where they were attended by thousands , and ten thousands of Spectators , and welcomed and conveyed with his Majesty's Coach , and at the least 100  Coaches more , and the chiefest of the Citizens , and Barbary-merchants bravely mounted on Horseback , all richly apparelled , every man having a Chain of Gold about him ; with the Sheriffs and Aldermen of London in their Scarlet Gowns , with such abundance of Torches and Links , that though it were Night , yet the Streets were almost as light as Day . And in this brave and noble way the Ambassador with his Associate Mr. Blake , were accompanied from the Tower-wharf to their Lodgings in Woodstreet , at the House that was Sir Martin Lumley's , Knight , and Alderman of the City of London , and where he kept his Honourable Office of Mayoralty in the year 1623.  

The Alkaid , having reasonable , well recovered him of his Health , after he had taken rest fifteen or sixteen days , till Sunday the fifth Day of November , our King's Majesty's Physicians all this while ( by his Majesty's Command ) attending , and using their approved best skill , whose pains and industrious Knowledge took such good effect for his Health , that on the said forenamed Sunday , his Majesty was graciously pleased to give them Audience , at his Palace or Manor of White-hall , and to that intent these preparations following were ordered for the Accommodation of so Royal and Honourable a Design . 

The Orders that were observed upon Sunday , the 5. of November , 1637. by such Honourable and Worshipful persons , and others that were appointed to conduct the Ambassadors to their Audience . 

First , the Right Honourable the Earl of Shrewsbury was in the Privy Chamber at White-hall , at one of the Clock in the Afternoon , and twelve Gentlemen of his Majesty's Privy Chamber were there at the same Hour , and according as it was commanded , it was accomplished . 

Secondly , the Earies Coach ( with as many other as was held to be fitting ) waited , and were ready at the Courtgate , to carry his Lordship and the Gentlemen privately to the Ambassadors Lodging , or House in Woodstreet . 

Thirdly , the Four Horses which were sent as Presents from the Emperor of Morocco , to the King of Great Britain , did stand ready at the Ambassadors House at the Hour aforesaid , and all the Horses of those that came from the Court for the same Service , were ready at the said House the same hour . 

Fourthly , a good Guard of Officers , and other men with Halberds , Bills , and lavelins , were at Woodstreet end in Cheapside , and the like was in Woodstreet below the Ambassadors House , to keep the passage clear from the press of people . 

now it follows , that I relate somewhat of the greatness of the Emperor of Morocco that sent tham , and some Causes why they were sent , with some just and true Remembrances of the good services that Mr. Robert Blake ( Associate with the Alkaid ) hath done for his captive and distressed Countrymen , our King's Subjects , English , Scottish , Irish , and of the Isles of Garnsey , and Jarsey , and of other places of his Majesty's Dominions : besides his goodness in relieving and helping of many Christians of sundry Nations , both with his Word and Purse , when they were in miserable thraldom and slavery ; he never ceased to do his best to comfort them . 

This Mighty and Potent Prince Mulley Mahamed Sheque , is Emperor of Morocco , King of Fez , or Fez , or Sus , or Susa , with many other Dominions of large extent ; some part of his Territories butting Northward upon the Midland or Mediterranean Sea , over against part of Spain , and some large bounds of hundred of League's South and West upon the Atlantic Ocean : as also his Empire extends itself many hundred Miles upland Southward into Africa . 

The City of Morocco , ( which is the Metropolis of his Empire ) as Atlas relates in his History of Africa , hath been one of the greatest Cities in the world , being once of that huge circuit , that it had 100000. houses within it , most strong and defencibly walled , with 24 Gates to issue diverse ways out and in at , but within these 100 years past , what with foreign Wars and domestical seditions , the City is much ruined , and abated of its ancient greatness ; yet by the Majestic Valour and Prudency of this Emperor it begins to re-flourish , and may reassume the former Magnitude which once it had . 

The Kingdoms of Fez and Sus are vast in extension , and rich in diverse Commodities , as Chamelots' , Grograines , and many other Stuffs made of the hair of Camels , and other Beasts : besides , the best Gold is found there in plenty , with Oils , Sugars , and many other sorts of Merchandise , for which our Barbary Merchants do traffic into those parts , with our Iron , Tin , Led , and other commodities which are vendible there . As concerning any further Description of those Countries , I am no Geographer , and whosoever will know more of them , let them look in Pliny his Natural History , or in Mr. Purchase his Pilgrimage , or in Atlas , ( a compendious Work , well Translated lately ) or in Lithgows Travails , and there they may have more ample and satisfactory Relations ; there shall they find that in these Dominions of Mauritania , the great Battle of Alcazer was fought in the year of our Lord 1578. on the fourth Day of August , when Don Sebastian , King of Portugal , came into Barbary with a great Army , in a wrong quarrel to aid an usurping Rebel against the true Heir to the Empire of Morocco , for the which Aid the Rebel had promised to Sebastian , to give him the Kingdom of Fez : But in that fatal Battle King Sebastian seeking after the shadow , lost the substance ; and instead of obtaining Fez , he was slain that Day , and there lost both his Life , and Kingdom of Portugal ; by which means the King of Spain got it , and holds it ; and in the same Fight was slain the lawful King of Fez , and the Usurper , with our Countryman Thomas Stukley , to whom the Pope had largely promised the Kingdom of Ireland ; so that 3.  Kings fell in that one Battle . 

This Emperor now Reigning , is the Son of Xeriffe Mulley Cidan , ( deceased ) who was a valiant and victorious Prince , and his Grandfather was Xeriffe Mulley Hamet , a Prince that held good League and Amity with Queen Elizabeth , ( of blessed and most famous memory ) and this Emperor as soon as he came to the Crown , he most lovingly desired the Friendship and Royal Amity of our Gracious King Charles : He is a white man , of a goodly proportion , and a Majestical Aspect ; he is not above 18. years of age , and yet of such surpassing strength , that he hath taken a new Horse-shoe , and with both his hands hath writhed and enforced ▪ through extremity and want to retire the Army , without any design accomplished : And indeed it proved no otherwise , but still Laishi held Friendship with our General , and made many shot out of the Town of old Sally into new Sally , so that they were sore distressed in the Town , with Famine , and the battering of our great Ordnance from our Ships by Sea , which did sink and tear their Shipping , and beat their houses about their ears ; as also Laishi beat upon them on the Landside , that by Sea and Land they had lost so many men , that they began to talk of yielding . 

The Emperor hearing of the perfidious dealing of Laishi towards him , ( for Laishi still stands out , and holds Old Sally from the Emperor ) he sent his Alkaid and Mr. Robert Blake his Associate , in Commission with him , to command them of New Sally to surrender to him the Town , and deliver the Captives that were the King of Great Britain's Subjects . 

But before the Alkaid and Mr. Blake came , the Town , being unable to hold out longer against the force of our English Ships , that they were in a manner near yielded before the Ambassador came thither : so that ( under God ) our Ships were the means to reduce Sally to the obedience of the Emperor , the right Lord and owner thereof , and also to redeem all the poor Captives that were there , Christians . So on the 28. day of July the Alkaid , with Master Blake , went into the Town , and in the Emperor's name did place there their old Governor , and all the Captives were sent a board the King of England's ships : those that list to have a more ample Relation of the surrendering of this Town , with the other passages that happened there , they may read a Journal written by Master John Duntons' Direction , who was the Master of the Admirall-ship the Leopard , who , as it is thought , hath described it truly ; but he is here and there wronged by the Writer , in misplacing some things unorderly . 

were in number 302 , English , Scottish , and Irish ; amongst whom there were 11 Women : Also there were 27.  French men , which wisely ran away from their keepers ; and there were likewise set at Liberty 8.  Dutchmen , and 11.  Spaniards : all these great Mercies of God to these poor captived Christians , ought never ( by them ) to be forgotten , but with praise , Thanksgiving , and amendment of life to be had in perpetual Remembrance : and we and they are all bound to love , honour , and obey Our most Gracious King , whose piety and pity was so great , as to take the Affliction of his poor Subjects so far into his most Princely consideration , as to send his Ships under such wise and able Commanders for their Redemption . And it is a most Remarkable Note of the Almighty's Mercy , in that he stirred up and ordained Master Robert Blake to be the Agent and Instrument to move the Emperor of Morocco , to be so well affected for their enlargement . 

Their slavery ( for the time ) was worse than the Egyptian Bondage under Pharaoh ; for imagine ( Good Reader ) what misery can be more , than for a man or woman to be bought and sold like a Beast , for a Christian to be servile to an Infidel , in the most base and contemptible drudgeries ; to eat the Bread of sorrow , and drink the water of affliction ; to have the Head shaved , the body pined and beaten , to grinned in Mills , to dig and dress Vineyards , to draw Ploughs , to be labourers daily , and all their wages to be hard fare , hard blows , hard lodging , and ( more hard than those ) never to hope to be freed till Death ; but hardest and worst of all , to be urged , enforced , and enticed to forsake their Faith , and turn Miscreants ; or ( at the best ) to be ever debarred the exercise of the Freedom of their Religion and Conscience . Now the Learned do say , That all kind of Servitude is miserable , but that especially is intolerable , when a Man is enforced to serve one that is dishonest and vicious : And therefore ( as a wise man saith ) it is better to live free with a little fear , than to be in servitude with much and great abundance ; for Liberty is sweet , and worthy to be regarded . 

These , and more than these were the insupportable calamities of our poor distressed Countrymen , with 46. of other Nations , who are now by God's especial mercy and providence at liberty , some of them having endured 30. years' slavery , and some fewer ; but all too much , and too many . 

In February last , 1635 , Mr. Robert Blake being a Merchant , and trading to Morocco , by his good conversation and carriage there , the Emperor cast an eye of Regard and Favour upon him , insomuch that he caused him to leave his Merchandise and Traffic in trust to his servants and Factors , and himself to be near attendant to his Person in the Court , where his Majesty taking especial notice of his good diligence and Integrity , entertained a liking to him and his Services every day more and more , so that in short space he purchased the Office of Farmer of all his Ports and Customs , ( which place he still retains . ) There were then in the Emperor's Court 33.  English Captives , whom he and his Father had formerly bought from Argeir and Tunnis , and some of them had been in Captivity 25. years , some 20. years , some 14 , some fewer , but each of them thought that the time was too long . 

And although these men's miseries were not altogether so great , nor their Captivity so heavy in the Court at Morocco , as it was at Tunnis , Argeir , or Sally , yet was their Thraldom so irksome to them , that they had a desire to see their own Countries ; their minds ran upon their Parents , Kindred , Friends , and Acquaintance , from whom they had been long unfortunately separated : so that their best mirth was but forced , and a kind of mourning , and all their joys were too much mixed with care and sadness , which Mr. Blake ( with great grief of heart ) did note in them daily ; and his most sorrow for them was , that he supposed he could not help them , and therefore he did often see them with an eye of Christian compassion and pity , and in his mind ( like a true Englishman ) had a Sympathy or brotherly feeling of his with houses for so large a circuit : It hath three Castles , two of them to the Land-ward , and one to the Seaward , with other strong Cassamats and Platforms , well furnished with great Artillery . From Sally to Saffee is near fifty Leagues more to the Southward , and there the Ambassador took shipping , as is before-said . 

And although I have written before in this Relation , that I have no skill in Geography , or Description of Countries and Climates , yet for the satisfaction of many , such as will not , or cannot be at the charge to buy larger Relations , it is not impertinent that I write somewhat of Africa , and consequently of Barbary , Morocco , Fez , Sus , and other of those Dominions , with their Religions , manners , Rites , Laws , and Cermonies . 

For their Religion , they are strict observers of the Law of Mahomet ; they say Christ was a great Prophet , born to be a Saviour of the World , ( but not incarnate ) that he was the Breath of God , that he was born of a Virgin , and that the jews should have believed in him , but would not ; and therefore because they went about to murder and crucify him , he left them , and ascended from them into Heaven , and that then they put another man to Death instead of him , whom they tormented , and cruelly Crucified . Therefore these Mahometans do hold and esteem the Jews as the worst of men , and very slaves to all Nations of the World.  

The one and only Book of their Religion is called their Koran , devised by their false Prophet Mahomet , who was of their Nation , ( a Larbee : ) They may not use any other Book for Devotion , nor on pain of loss of life , no part of it do they dare to examine or question ; but if any be diffident , or any point or Sentence be intricate and hard to be understood by any of them , than it is lawful to ask the meaning of the Talby , which is a poor weak learned Priest : They are all Circumcised , and they use a kind of Baptism , but not in their Churches , but at home in their houses . 

Their Lent is much about the time as it is with us , which they do hold but 30. days ; and they neither eat nor drink all that time on any of those days , betwixt the dawning and the twilight , but when once the Stars do show themselves , than ( for their Day Fast ) they feed fast all Night . That Priest or Talby that cannot Read over the Book of the Koran ( or Mahomet's Law ) all over on their Good Friday at night , is held unworthy of his place and Function : they say their prayers six times every day and night , and they do wash themselves all over very often : they have no Bells to toll them to Church , but he that is the Clerk , or Sexton , hath a deep base great voice , and goes to the top of the Steeple , and there roars out a warning for the people to come to their Devotions . no man doth enter their Churches with his shoes on ; their Talbies or Priests each one of them are allowed a Wife , or Wives if they will : The Laymen may have Captive women , but they must not lie with them in the nighttime , for that belongs to the Wives by turn , and if any wife be beguiled of her turn , she may complain for satisfaction to the Magistrate : he that hath four wives must be a Rich man ; a poor man is allowed as many , but his means are too short to keep them , therefore one or two must serve his turn . The Bride and Bridegroom do never see each other before the Wedding-night that they are going to bed , where if he find her a Maid , all is well ; if otherwise , he may turn her away , and give her no part of the portion she brought him . 

As concerning their Burials , if any one doth die , they do wash the Corpse all over , and ( by reason the Country is extreme hot , they cannot keep them above ground ) with all speed they send for the Friends or Kindred of the party deceased , and carry the dead out of their Towns or Cities , to a place appointed for that use , ( for none are buried in their Churches , or Synagogues , or within their Towns ) and there the Talby says a short Prayer , and then the Corpse is interred . They have a custom to speak in praise of virtuous persons departed , to encourage and animate taken with false weights or measures , doth lose all his Ware in his house to the use of the poor , and is a defamed person , and cruelly whipped . Their Execution for life and death is , that commonly the person adjudged to die , hath his throat cut by the Executioner . And these are part of the Religion , Laws , and Manners of the people of Morocco , Fez , and Sus , and I do wish they were all inspired with Holiness from God ; for I am sure they do surpass many Christians in Righteousness and just dealing towards men . 

In Africa there are many Nations , Kingdoms , and Provinces , many parts whereof are inhabited by Christians , as Spaniards and Portugalls . Aethiopia is a great tract of Land in the South part of Africa , it hath many Kingdoms in it , over whom ( as Chief Ruler ) is Prester John : He is Emperor of Aethiopia , or of the Abassines ; he is a Christian , and so are his people , but withal they are all Circumcised : The Eunuch whom Philip the Evangelist converted , was Governor of Aethiopia , and chief Treasurer under Candaces the Queen then Reigning there , Acts 8.  

Egypt ( now under the Turk ) is another part of Africa ; in that Land the Israelites were in bondage , whom God delivered by the hand of Moses : it is bounded on the East with the red Sea , wherein Pharaoh and all his Host were drowned . Also the Kingdoms of Gaogan , Nubia , Dangaly , Doba , Gansila , Dasila , Barnagasso , Doara , Balli , Angola , Numidia , Guiney or Binney , Bizarchus , Triptoletana , Mauritaunia Cesariensis , Mauritaunia Sitiphensis , Tingitania , Congo , ( far to the South ) Carthage , near where Tunis stands , ( famous for Dido and Hannibal ) Hippon more famous for being the the Bishop's Sea of the renowned and blessed Lamp of light and Learning , Saint Augustine , and Utica , where the admired Roman Cato Uticensis did enrich them with his Venerable bones . 

And in some parts of Africa the people do use to eat three whole days together , and are in all things obedient to their Wives or Concubines : Moreover , they never suffer any of their Daughters to be married , except she or they have first slain with her own hand by Policy one of their Enemies : this they do observe from the Tartarians . 

In other parts of this Country they do honour their Women more than their men , and they take their Sur-names of their Mother , and not of their Father : and they leave their Daughters to be their Heirs and inheritors of their Lands , and not their sons . 

And in some places many have been punished , and some banished , because they have kissed their Wives in the presence of their Children or Daughters ; but at the least they have been fined to their Governor many Ducats for this offence . 

Their Law's command , that men accustomed to wickedness and viciousnesse , should be cut off , without being spared or concealed : and that they which were attainted , and convinced as guilty of any crime , should never escape without some punishment or other . 

Africa is that part of the World that doth produce most Wonders , Monsters , strange Beasts , Fowls , and Serpents . 

For Monsters , it is said that there are a people called Aramaspians , with one eye in the Forehead ; some with their Feet naturally growing backward , some with heads like Dogs , some with long tails , some with but one leg , that do hop very swift , and are called Sciopedi , who with the shadow of the foot ( as they lie on their backs ) do defend their whole bodies from the violent heat of the Sun ; some without Heads , with Eyes in their shoulders ; some Satyrs , ( half men and half Goats ) some with no Noses , but flat-faced , with holes to breath at : some with legs as limber and pliable as Lamparnes , ( without bones ) who do creep and crawl . Some with ears so great that they cover the whole body ; and that in Aethiopia there are some men that are 8.  Cubits , or 4.  Yards high ; let the Reader believe as much of this as he list : but I am persuaded , that many of these things are true , or else so many Grave and approved Authors would never have written of them , and divulged them to the World.  

Also in Africa are store of Elephants , Tigers , Lions , Buffles , Panthers , Leopards , Camels , Rhinoceros , Lynxes , Musk kats , Onces , Elkes , Porcupines , Dragons , Serpents , Crocodiles , Ichneumons , the Hyena Vipers , the Basilisk , the Chameleon , the Salamader , Tarentalaes , and Scollapendraes' , Vultures , Eagles , Ostriches , Osprayes , the Bird of Paradise , ( that is almost all tail ) with many other , too long to recite : so that those parts of the World do breed and produce more venomous Beasts and vermin , and strange Rarities of Nature , than all Europe , Asia , and America . 

And thus having briefly related the Religions , Manners , Rites , Laws , and Ceremonies of some of the Dominions of Africa , as Barbary , Morocco , Fez , and Sus , I hope it will satisfy any indifferent Reader : To name all were too tedious , and impossible ; and therefore those that will have more ample Description , let them get the credit to borrow , or the Ability to buy larger Volumes . 

Imprimatur 

Sa. Baker , Novemb. 27. 1637.  

FINIS . 

