Mr. Peter's last report of the English wars , occasioned by the importunity of a friend pressing an answer to seven quaeres . 

Viz.  

I. why he was silent at the surrender of Oxford . 
Ii what he observed at Worcester it being the last town in the King's hand . 
Iii what were best to do with the army . 
Iv. if he had any expedient for the present difference . 
V. what his thoughts were in relation to foreign states . 
Vi . How these late mercies and conquests Might be preserved and improved . 
Vii . Why his name appears in so many books not without blots , and he never wipe them off . 
Published by authority . 

London , printed by m. s. for Henry Overton , and are to be sold at his shop in Popes-head alley . 1646.  

Mr. Peter's last report of the English wars . 

Sir , 

Your importunity hath prevailed , and i could wish my answers to your quaeres might gain this with you that they are rather sent to please you then myself , whose knowledge lies rather in the hyssop on the wall than the cedars of Lebanon : i assure you i would now go home and know myself , and study it thoroughly , name miser ille qui notus nimis omnibus ignotus moritur sibi . 



First , in that you heard not from me upon the surrender of Oxford , i hear so much of it on both ears , and the distance was so little from London , that i forbore to report that to you , which you Might have been an eyewitness of at so little charge and trouble : only let me be your true informer , that you had nothing committed then by ours , that had not its rise from integrity and faithfulness to the state , accompanied with such skill , as the Lord was pleased to dispense ; and let me tell you , men upon the place ( In such case ) can better judge , than lookers on afar off , i hope you will not lose by that bargain in the end , though it seem for present an ill pennyworth . 

Secondly , for Worcester , i am sorry so little is spoken of it , where so much worth and gallantry appeared , and indeed i cannot remember where i have seen so much done in so short a time ; where , when that valiant commander of horse colonel Whaley had done his duty , and with the help of country forces had blocked up part of the town ; four regiments of foot under the command of colonel Rainborow came , and raised works within pistol shot of their royal sconce and the city , the enemy playing upon them with case-shot out of sakers all the time , wherein lieutenant colonel Pride , and lieut.  Colonel Ewers had a chief share ; whereupon the enemy accepts of those propositions you have seen : Master Richard Salwey a member of the house who was of our council in this work deserves well of his country and the kingdom for his wisdom and faithfulness many ways : and truly i wish colonel Rainborow a suitable employment by sea or land , for both which God hath especially fitted him , foreign states would be proud of such a servant : i preached at Worcester at our coming in , and afterwards , and did observe a door open to the gospel . 

I am now fully satisfied with the answer of my many many petitions that i Might live to see this day , this blessed day , and the last town of the enemies taken : i am thinking whether to go a few days more in this vale to admire what i have seen upon earth , and then die , that i May praise him as he would be praised , who hath founded mercies for his servants , and brought forth deliverance to miracle through Jesus Christ . I find our soldiers generally in the old form , rather wondering then boasting , admired by the enemy for their gallantry and conduct . 

Thirdly , your demand about the disposing the army , is not so proper for a private pen to engage in ; yet this i May say , that other nations in our condition would think , if they looked round about them and within them , the disbanding an army ( If trusty ) ought not to be a work of haste : when the seas are down in England , i think the passage unto Ireland will be easier , and if we can maintain a defensive war this winter , i trust the spring will invite many over thither : only i wish the English a good magazine of all things , and that they would attend two things in the Irish war besides , viz. not to spend time about castles and forts , but to become Master of the field : and secondly , to burn up the enemy's provisions everywhere . The wild Irish and the Indian do not much differ , and therefore would be handled alike : yet i could tell you a more excellent way ; in the mean , if these faithful commanders were in garrisons ( Without any design be it spoken ) you have always an army ready , the private soldier will still run to his honest and well-known commander ; yea , so firm they are , that if their officer should be changed , i believe those soldiers must be pressed to stay with others . 

Briefly , this i say to your question , that this army was hardly gotten , and i wish it May be as hardly disbanded ; if you have no present employment , were i persuaded that foreign threatenings were in earnest ; i wish this army Might be sent to encounter them , and teach peasants to understand liberty , and i would not doubt but to see good fruit of it soon , i would rather our men should live upon their wine , than they upon our beer : it is one of the great interests of this state to keep war at distance : fear not that army whose commanders ( Like Samuel ) can ask any county or town where they have been whose , ox or ass they have taken ? never fewer complaints , not many men of such quality , whose design is only to obey their Masters : viz. the parliament , the slighting the army is their money , triumphant chariots would have broke our necks . 

Fourthly , whereas you desire some expedient to the difference : i assure you the question in hand : and the Lord walking in the clouds towards us , it is no wonder we walk in the dark among ourselves . And truly it wounds my soul , when i think Ireland would perish , and England continue her misery through the disagreement of ten or 20. learned men : but if you will pardon and pity my folly , i will state the disease , and then we have half , won the cure . To omit the three common enemies that befool learned and unlearned , noble and ignoble , gentleman and peasant , i mean the flesh , the world , and the devil . You shall find our ; first and main mischief lies in our spirits , which are now made so keen and thorny , that they cannot be touched but by a pair of iron gloves , could we but conquer each other's spirit , we should soon befool the devil , and his instruments : to which end i could wish we that are ministers Might pray together , if that cannot be , let us speak together , eat and drink together , because if i mistake not , estrangement hath boiled us up to jealousy and hatred . 

2.  Let us much study , hold forth , and rejoice in what we agree , as please ourselves , and grieve others in what we differ , our animosities May content ourselves , but wrong the gospel . 

3.  Let us remember England , as it was never conquered but by faction , so it can never be ruled but by love ; the same last will not fit an English and a Scotish foot , they come not suddenly to what they enjoy , and therefore should give England a little breathing over what is propounded , it will be their mercy to keep what they have , and our to be growing up to what we desire . 

4.  An evil lies in this , that we unwillingly drive on our enemy's designs : Barnevelsh laid his project upon an Arminian bottom , and so made religion a stalking horse to his politic ends . 

5.  Let the present church-government go on , and walk softly and tenderly , let those that longed for it improve it , & valeat quantum valere potest : let others that are godly know it May help , at least to hew stone , and square timber for a more glorious building , to bring from one extremity to another , God useth his own media only , violence becometh not saints : in popish times the clergy had not the coercive power , but subjected the civil magistrate to do their work ; i wish the state keep a good bolt upon that door : i am confident the chief means to greater an error will be by violence and opposition , when slighted it dies . Coals blown get heat and strength , neglected grow cold . I wish every one Might be severely punished that spoke against either presbytery or independency till they could define that aright , and distinguished about them and their ways , them i believe we stole hvee altum silentium . 

Lastly , men are not in their proper work , which eccentric motions produce many things uncoucht : i need not particularize , but when i see the languishing perishing conditions of many counties , through want of preaching i must be bold to say to wrangling is none of our proper work ; i think we Might do God more service in study and pulpits , then in waiting at great men's doors , and working them up to their selvish interests . I could add that we take causam pro non causa , we put our troubles upon schismatics , and opinionists , and never attend the true cause : there May shortly be a great change in the Netherlands , but you shall find the cause not in the harmless Anabaptists , whereof there are swarms , but in some hispaniolized statesmen . 

Fifthly , your demand of my thoughts of England in order to foreign states , i answer with a wish , viz. that forthwith we Might have some choice agents sent out as two to Sweden , two to the cantons our good friends , two to the Netherlands , and so to other parts as we see cause , and these accompanied with a manifest of God's gracious dealings with this state , letting them to know we omitted this work in our misery lest our friends Might fear us for beggars , but now being upon an even foot with them , we let them know our condition , and how ready we are to own them against a common enemy : every man in this nation pretending to soldiery upon good experience . This being done , and our Navey in its true English beauty , i would not doubt but others May be as glad to know an English man , as we desire acquaintance with them . And if our backdoor were well shut at home , how Might Euphrates be dried up ; i mean the West Indies and the East too offer themselves to our devotion . Let us still remember the support of trade is the strength of this island , discountenance the merchant , and take beggary by the hand . This is the misery of England whilst others are beat into slavery , they are apt to be complemented into it . 

Other kingdoms and countries are therefore terrible to us , because we are so little terrible to them : were we not more effeminate than our predecessors in Queen Elizabeth's time , i know not why three kingdoms should do less than one ; you see we can fight if we must , i dare undertake if you can find work abroad , it will not be hard to find men : nay it were easy to find both , if we were agreed at home : what you hear of a conjunction between the Prince of Wales and his lieutenant general the Duke of Lorraine with some promises from his uncle Bavaria need not trouble you , the Danes and Saxons never Mastered this island by power , but by our homebred distempers . To prevent those fears let English men keep to their proper interests , and Scots to theirs , and i know not why we Might not March into Bavaria and Lorraine before they come unto us , and make them pay all old arrears . I must confess i am divided between Ireland and the palatinate , only i quiet myself in this that we May do both . 

Sixthly , touching the preserving and improving the conquests and mercies : i only commend unto you these few rules . 

1.  By the same means the mercy is gained it May be preserved , if men , yea good men were instrumental in the one , they must be in the other ; confide when you see reason to confide : thy friend and thy father's friend put price upon , he that loves you and your country May be trusted to conserve what is won : to which add praying , and believing , for in all these God hath appeared : i would as soon credit a garrison to a known honest godly English man , differing from me in his opinion , as all France being most Catholic trust itself to their Protestant leaders . 

2.  Walk plainly in your counsels , God needs no man's lies to carry on his work . Commonly these arcana imperii and ruina populi , let your yea be yea , and your nay nay . God preserveth the simple : do but observe the history of Europe , and you shall find those admired deep set counsels of men mingled with so much flesh , have proved but grass . 

3.  If England be now a conquered kingdom , we cannot have much to beg of a conquered enemy , and therefore i could wish all marks of slavery Might be taken off , and since God hath invested us with our almost lost liberty , let it be our care that after ages May not say we conquered ourselves into a new slavery . 

4.  Because not only ourselves , but also the wisest of our late enemies confess the influence of the city is such , that we could not have wanted it , and therefore their highest design now is to make it royal , you May remember how willing i was once to have made a match , my weakness was such that i did not study whether both parties were well agreed , and my simplicity kept me from thinking of a corrival , yet now i pray improve your interests , and let London know that if they think a parliament sits the quieter by being so near them , so 〈◊〉 think when the parliament doors are shut up 〈◊〉 Westminster , their shops will hardly stand open at London : if the clashing of swords cannot be heard , yet death clinching up their windows by the increase of the plague calls for something . 

5.  Justice will exalt and maintain a nation , i wish they Might be first sharers in it , that first adventured their estates and lives ; had the citizens remonstrated more about their debts due , and less about their wills , they Might had more thanks , and ( It May be ) by this time some Might have kept orphans from their doors , that cry for the money lent to supply the state's use , he that will ride a free horse to death , May in time be spurring a dull jade to no purpose . And for distributive justice , let it be impartial . Two things May break the axletree of any state , viz. first , opposition to known truths , or slighting that religion in the purity of it , which we own in mixtures , and innocent blood not wiped off by the hand of justice . A state May stand upon any frame of government , if fastened together with justice , charity , and industry , the only upholders of that flourishing neighbour-nation the Netherlands . 

Lastly , because England is devout , and religion of one kind or another carries most prevalency , and that this nation acts generally upon religious apprehensions , above any i know , therefore that which hath been our wound must be our cure ( Preaching and preachers i mean ) the gentry must be base , and so the parliament unsupplied of good members ; the common-people will worship any dunghill-god , the city is full of black iniquity , if preaching be neglected : how long therefore shall i entreat some three or four itinerary ministers in a county ? Evangelists went out before churches were settled , how easily Might the land be ( In some measure ) reduced to God , and their own civil interests , if provision was laid in of this kind ? but you will object we have above nine thousand parishes , and not a thousand able men : i answer , you see the need of itinerants , and secondly , why May we not follow the practice of other reform churches ? and gather up godly youths out of shops , and send them for improvement somewhere , why not a college of Oxford set apart to that use ? and if men cannot answer the narrow examen of an assembly , why Might there not be a committee to judge of some competency in some men for the present to send out , though they should fall short of arts and tongues ? John Alasco was a Baron , yet in Edward the sixt's time , you May see what church work he did : why not learned godly gentry , lawyers , that Might be spared some of them , physicians , &c. employed this way ? teaching their tenants were a better trade , than racking of rents by some of our gentry . How ripe have i found Herefordshire and Worcestershire for the gospel , and many other counties ? Help Lord ! 

To the question concerning myself ; i answer , i am at present upon a good study , ever how to want what the Lord is not willing to give : i am turning my cheek to the smiter : i have been thinking to answer six or seven pamphlets that name me either enviously or disgracefully , but yet remain doubting . The Lord rebuke Satan . I see ( With Jeremy ) though i neither borrow nor lend , &c. yet this May be my portion . This i must say , if either in doctrine or practice i have failed , the time is not yet wherein any brother in a way of God hath dealt with me : and if my different judgement offend any , my answer is , that with much expense of money and time , with diligent inquiry into reform churches , i have taken pains to satisfy myself , and remain now where i was for substance fifteen years since , resolving by that experience to keep a window open to more light and truth , though scoffed and slighted ; my care hath been to acquaint myself with the most learned and godly in the country where i travel , first i lived about six years near that famous Scotchman Mr. John Forbes , with whom i traveled into Germany , & enjoyed him in much love and sweetness constantly , from whom i never had but encouragement though we differed in the way of our churches . Learned Amesius breathed his last breath into my bosom , who left his professorship in Friezland to live with me because of my church's independency at Rotterdam , and charged me often , even to his death , so to look to it , and if there were a way of public worship in the world , that God would own it was that : he was my colleague and chosen brother to the church where i was an unworthy pastor : and i thank the Lord such a church it continues to this day ; that truly i sli••tly took up nothing in that kind , nor did i los•••• my seven years being in new England , amongst those faithful , learned , godly brethren , whose way of worship if we profess , it will not be groundless when their writings are examined . But to those printed scribles against me i May provide shortly a more satisfactory answer , where i May plainly charge home untrue and unworthy passages upon the authors ; though i know , et facere & pati fortia christianorum est . now the good Lord who hath led captivity captive for us , suodue us to himself , and grant that in these tossing , tumbling , foaming seas we depart not from our principles of reason , honour , liberty , much less religion ; which is the prayer of 

Sir , your friend sine fuco , Hugh Peter . 

Finis . 












