This emblem here , expresseth to the full 
What shall betide our city water-gull ; 
Who ( Leaving poesy , pamphlets , wine , and whores ) 
Must be trussed laureate on his proper oars , 
With his own tackling ; therefore it is meet , 
Th•sayle stand by , to be his winding-sheet ; 
I 'm sure , he must pass thus o'er Charon's ferry , 
Unless some boisterous wind overturn the wherry . 
by John Booker . 

Printed according to order for g. b. July 19 1644.  

No Mercurius aquaticus , but a cable-rope double-twisted for John Tailor the water-poet . 

I should be loath to foul my fingers with any base pamphlet that comes from Oxford , if the venom of their malicious spleens were darted only against my particular self : but when through my sides they wound the honour of the parliament , and our armies abroad , i cannot but set pen to paper , and pay them back again in their own kind . And who d'ye think i should meet abroad for a rogue in print , but one of our city water-rats , the doughty John Tailor , who according to the knavish custom , changes his name upon every new paper-design ? Sometimes he calls himself thorny Ailo , mercurius aquaticus , and now he entitles himself , no Mercurius Aulicus , i thought i had lately sent rope enough for all the parrots in Oxford : but i perceive they will be prattling still ; and therefore i must unmask the mysterious Masters of the science of railing . There are three grand paper-conspirators well known by the name of Mercurius Aulicus , George Naworth , and reverend Master John Tailor the water-tankard , by whose sprinklings in this great dearth of wit and honesty , the university is cherished and kept in credit : these three are they which pump and pimp about with their prostitute noddles in the behalf of popery . Murder and rebellion against the state ; they are liars in all elements . Aulicus for Land-l•es , tailor for water , and hungry George Naworth , for all between heaven and earth , where i doubt not but to see them all meet together , to take their farewell of the world , where the parrots will find ropes made of stronger lines than mine , and such as will nonplus the very primest wits in the university . 

And now thou Thames otter , thou malignant dive-dapper , thou Jack Tailor , thou motley , Sea-green , ditch-water villain , that hast more malignant flowings and ebbings in thy waterish brains , than the Thames hath tides ; which makes thee as subject to moon fits and lunacy , as the besotted university itself , or as George Digby , when his plots fail , or as Rupert under the influence of a plundering , or wenching constellation ; whose p•ricranium is fit for nothing but to make an appendix to the sign of the mermaid tau•rne at Carfoix : that very tavern which for want of wine , and money in the courtier's pockets , which used to damn and swe•re the drawers out of the reckonings , is now very seasonably turned into a fluent magazine of nectar , which according to the old translation , is cleped an alehouse , which is the highest title of honour that the best rend•z-vouz of good fellowship can now attain to in Oxford . in this place i understand that thou thy most aquatical self , and George of No-worth , alias Naworth , with whose dangerous Coxcombrian conceits ( To speak anagrammatically ) i am in no wrath ; and the prevaricating , calumniating Mercurius Aulicus , do meet together weekly to make ducks and drakes with your sottish brains over barley-broth ; and muster up whole regiments of lies , slanders , and ridiculous quibbles against the parliament and city , and such as myself , who are sworn friends to their King and country : and in stead of answering my rope for a parrot , thou and George Naworth have out of your drunken aleh•use humours , both combined together to be fools in print ; but i perceive that your language is as foggy and fulsome as your ale , your conceits smell too much of the malignant onions and garlic of Egypt , you have so much Irish and Spanish , that i cannot understand you with my wits ; for should they go a rambling after your far-fetched conceits , perhaps i should never recover , or call them back again . 

Thou railest against Master Pym , and rakest in the ashes of the dead , most sacrilegiously rifling his grave of the honour due unto it : but i know that malice and envy survive the funerals of worthy men , as well as their virtues ; and whereas thou talkest of receiving wages with Achitophel , and Machiavelli , i tell thee that the day of account and receipt is not come as yet , though the declination of your culminating signs and ensigns at York , is a shrewd prognostic that the time cannot be far off . If thou wilt not believe this prognostic of mine , what thinkest thou of your idolised and idolising marquess of the North ? He foresees this without astronomy , and knows not whether he had best arrive in Holland or Ireland : what thinks Count ( Saladine the sarasen , cry you mercy , i mean ) Palatine Rupert , the young man that speaks nothing but daggers and carbines , and commits nothing but outrageous cruelties against the best subjects ? What think ye of the Achitophels , the machiavels , and Sanballats at court , the Turks of Ireland , and infidels of Wales ? they shall receive their wages , i warrant you , though none of their pay . 

Thou talkest of a long-lie , a shortly , a broad-lie , and a roundly , and of cuckolds , and coxcombs : but this variety of lying is proper to none but courtiers : thus Rupert hath made many coxcombs , that have no more of gentility or nobility , but the bare outside , to be cuckolds , nay , and some of them contented ones too , very well contented to be dubbed and palatined , and this is his usual kind of lying : you have another kind of lying , which is as common as lying a-bed , the art of lying , and belying our armies , the proper gift of your rebellious faction . This is a special quality of yours too , reverend Master ( Pricklouse , cry you mercy , i forgot ) tailor ; you are skilled ( You say ) in the Syriack and Arabian tongues , yea , the very air of Oxford colleges , and schools , the authors you have read , the books you have perused , and the dictionaries you have poa•ed upon , have much illustrated , elevated , and illuminated your intellect . but you are a pagan villain , to run so far as the reign of S•nacherib for an author ( Or rather a fiction ) to confirm your roguery , a little too far for me to step , that have other business , than to give every knave an answer , and therefore i shall go no farther than Mahomet and his Alcoran , and there i find the word , thorny Ailo , the wise anagram of thy name , to be thus anatomised and skellumatized . Thorny in the Arabic , signifies a villain , and Ailo in the Syriack a rook , otherwise called in the Greek Abaddon , which being englished , is a destructive villain ; or an Antichristian prick louse , which tacks together all sorts of fustian , as im•udent lies , slanders , and far-fetched bombast ; in the behalf of popery : thou art a most expert tailor in this kind , and canst easily take measure of the university intellects , and fit their fantasies with a paper-work presently : but i will spoil your trading Sir , by being silent at any more fopperies which shall be sent abroad by thee , or thy companion Naworth ; for to write against you , is to relieve you , by giving you occasion to raise a fortune with scribbling pamphlets : but for this I 'll take a course to starve you by my silence ; i will not be so charitable , as to bestow another rope upon such parrots , nor spend my labour in vain upon rebels that are past cure . 

But Pretheo Master thorny Ailo Abaddon , or Abaddon thorny Ailo , ( Take which end thou wilt foremost , and still thou art a bad one ) thy mistakes are as gross as thy conceits : sure you and Naworth had been liquoring your brains with ale of the infusion of opium , or for want of victuals , eaten a salad of nightshade , hemlock , and poppy , with unguentum Populeon , and oil of alabaster in stead of butter , some such sleepy , drowsy repast or other , that you could not open your eyes to read right , what i said concerning the conjunction of the 31 of May , but that you must mistake Jupiter for Mars , you print it to be the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter , but i said of Saturn and Mars , and my prediction thereupon you call a bug bear fear ▪ fool prediction , and a lying prognostication ; but i leave the world to judge that : have not the authors of distraction and murder , been sufficiently punished from that time hitherto ? Were they not then driven out of Oxford , and ever since up and down the kingdom ? And have the Northern incendiaries fared ever a whit better ; their godless regiments being all dispersed , and the principal abettors forced to seek their fortunes in foreign parts . They had raised the flame to such a height , that the kingdom began to be a little too hot for them . 

But to say no more of this , seeing it is apparent , i will cut thee for the simples thoroughly before i have done : th•u sayst that Saul was sent to seek two asses , and ( not finding them ) he found a kingdom . but how did Saul play the ass , and lose his kingdom ? Was it not for saving Agag the King of the amalekites alive , whom he should have destroyed as an utter enemy to Israel ? what shall we think then will become of that King , or those counsellors , which have made peace , and spoke friendly to those which have cut the throats of 200000.  Israelites , i mean Protestant's in Ireland ? if i should prognosticate on such a business a• this , what would become of them : and if justice should suffer thee to live to see the event , thou wouldst then confess that there were some more realities in my predictions , than in the books of fortune , the shepherd's calendar , erra pater , mother Shipton's prophecies , or the long-eared Outacousticou of Albumazar . 

i could willingly prognosticate somewhat concerning thy villainous self ; and now i think on 't , it is very neatly couched in the anagram of thy name , and it is the very thing which the men of thy element do foretell of thee , and to this they say , there needs no art , for they can do it without the help either of necromancy , or hydromancy , having had experience too often of your bank side , and beare-gardes rogueries ; and they all agree with one consent , that to — John Tailor , — join halter is a most complete anagram , than which none could ever have framed a better to speak thy deservings : but thou wilt except against this anagram , as irregular , because that i place an e , where thou puttest an o , in spelling thy surname ; i will then deal critically with thee , and prove that thou are guilty of an innovation or corruption in thy name ; for all our trades , professions , callings and offices in England , do for the general , end in or , as haberdasher , Ironmonger , Draper , sculler , &c. and none of them in or ; look in Holinshend his description of England , and he tells us , that this custom was derived from the Saxon language , which nation had once possession of this island : and therefore thy name being the name of a trade , ought sure rather to follow the general , in being spelled tailor , and not tailor . 

What is the reason Sir , that you spell false ? Is it because your skellumship would not have the world to think , that your pedigree was derived from such a lousy , Snip snap original , as to have thy ancestors thought to be tailors . such an extract were too good for thee : no , thou art tailor from the tail of the dragon , which thou ranest to Oxford , to lay hold on as the surest stay : and now that the beast begins to be faint and weary , and is unable to support popery any longer in England , you are even at your wit's end : thou lookest toward London with a heavy heart , not for the offences and villainies which thou hast committed here , and since thy departure , against this famous city ; but because thou darest not come hither again to commit more , and play more pranks than thou hast done formerly . So that i suppose , thou art even ready to join halter indeed for want of necessary maintenance ; and therefore I 'll express some charity towards thee , though an enemy , and put thee into employment : and because thou s•yest , that the seven planets , and the twelve celestial signs are all offended with me , i do constitute George Naworth join-commissioner with thee , to carry them , such news , which i know will be welcome to them , and be a means to procure thee a reward . 

i prithee , in the first place , tell Jupiter , that he spends his thunder in vain , and that Vulcan knows not how to procure him any more thunderbolts , unless he return to his ancient throne , in a lawful assembly of the gods : and that whilst he was abroad managing those tempests , which the anger of Juno had raised , she stupefied him by Circean enchantments , borrowed of the great red dragon , and mingled by the grand whorish Cassiopaea in the cup of abominations . tell Ursa Major , and Ursa minor , that when Endimyon Porter hath recovered of his madness , i have appointed him to be their chief bearward , and thou thyself to be sub-bear-ward , that Mercury the Irishman May pass freely to Jupiter's court , without fear of being , bugg• beared by the way , and that he May have safe conduct in Charles his wain , through the milky way , or the purple way , no matter which , so he make haste . Petition Mars , that he would favour Jupiter's cause so far , as that the Protestant religion May be maintained , according to the desire of Juno , and no otherwise , in despite of inferior mortals . Desire Venus that she would recall her severe messenger , morbus gallicus from the royal army and court , who is like to prove the ruin of the camp and cabinet-council : especially remember to beg of Luna to withhold herself in mists and thick clouds , for since the cavallers were soundly banged near York by moonshine , they will henceforth be ready to swoon at the sight of her , or grow lunatic , as men of no hope in this world , and of less in that which is to come . Withal when thou hast dispatched this business , and art returned to thy friends at Oxford , carry them this news : that in my late return from my astronomical journey , as i passed by the twelve signs , i perceived very few of them to be malignant ; but all sworn enemies to the desperate cavalry ; Aries and Tayrus have so rammed up the way to heaven , and so guarded it , that they will gore any cavalier that shall offer to pass : gemini indeed would willingly entertain them , because they are of kin , being double every way , double-tongued , double-hearted , double-religioned , half one thing , half another , half Protestant , half Papist , or whole atheist : but neighbouring cancer will pinch and gripe them for their cruelties , and cast them into the den of Leo , where they shall be plundered and tolmented , and never be suffered to quarter in Virgo , ( Tell Rupert so , for that is his heaven , his Turkish paradise , and the only hope of his religion . ) And then Libra will weigh them all , the weight of whose plundering cannot but b•eak the scales ; and then they shall be bitten by Scorpio , shot though with darts and arrows by sagittarius , hamme-stringed by Capricorn , soused , ducked and pumped by thy kinsman Aquarius , and then their blasphemous tongues , and blood-guilty feet be bitten off , and devoured by pisces , and so at length they May chance to be cooked in the devil's frying-pan . 

And thus thou learned metropolitan of villainy , i have anatomised , and skellumatized your ridiculous , roguing , and lying pamphlet , which for this once , i have taken the pains to answer in thy own strain , being resolved to be troubled no more by thee ; for i have of late found out a medicine which will cure thee and all thy malignant companions , of their railing and malignant fits . It is very good for purging away humours in the head , and will cure the vertigo or staggers in religion , and clear the eyesight of the university , and cure them of the surfiet , which they have taken of Protestantism , and quench the praeternatural thirst after popery and slavery , and take away the obstructions of reformation . pray send the bill to her majesties own apothecary , who will very carefully compound it . 

rs. one dram of King James his cordial , that was made by Buckingham . 

Of his majesty's protestations . 
Of the cabinet-councells honesty . 
Of Harry Jermyn's honour . 
Of Rupert's religion . 
Of Digby's English heart , ana . 2. grains . 
Of Tompkins his halter , quantum suffocat . 
One of her majesty's good intentions to the kingdom . 
Two arguments at law , of justice Heath's own making . 
Two ounces of the Irish commission , and an ounce and an half of the wax that seared it , and three pen-fulls of the ink that wrote it . 
I. case of conscience of doctor Ferne , in the behalf of tyrani• . 
I. headful of mischiefs of Bristol and Cottington . 
I. heartful of fears of the junto , and one pound of their slavery . 
Half a dram of university divinity , and one scruple of chopped-logic , and Hebrew roots , ana : 
5.  Gallons of holy-water , of the vice-chancellors own consecrating . 
Boyle all these the length of a masque at White-hall , or rather of Cartwright's prophetical play , called the royal slave : then stop it close with Surplesses , copes and hoods : so let it simper , like a madam in her night-clothes , in the ashes of the next town , which shall be fired for the liberty of the subject : then strain it , and in stead of syrup , sweeten it with a bucket or two of Irish Protestant blood , that it May please the palate , drink three ounces of this cursing and swearing , and if it help not thee and thy friends to breathe out all your malignant humours , which have so intoxicated your noddles with vile conundrums : i must sit still admiring , and leave you to the gallows , the proper cure for such rebels as thyself , that are past cure . 

Finis . 






































